CITY OF COLUMBIANA, OHIO
CODE OF ORDINANCES
2019 Replacement Pages contains:
Local legislation current through Ord. 19-O-2996, passed 2-19-2019
State legislation current through December 31, 2018
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing Corporation
One West Fourth Street, Third Floor
Cincinnati, Ohio  45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Fax: (513) 763-3562
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com
CITY OFFICIALS
 
MAYOR                                    Bryan Blakeman
COUNCIL MEMBERS                          Richard McBane, Council President
                                         Ted Souder
                                         Dan Bekar
                                         Richard Liston
                                         Richard Noel
                                         Crystal Siembida-Boggs
CLERK OF COUNCIL                         Deann L. Davis
CITY MANAGER                             Lance Willard
DIRECTOR OF FINANCE                      Michael Harold
CHIEF OF POLICE                          Tim Gladis
FIRE CHIEF                               Richard Garrity
EMS SUPERVISOR                           Thomas Farley
MUNICIPAL ATTORNEY                       Mark Hutson
                                         Richard Sell
CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION MEMBERS         April Brinker
                                         Nicole Ice
                                         Bryan Blakeman, Mayor
                                         Rick Noel
PLANNING COMMISSION MEMBERS              Donna Bekar
                                         Tucker Cope, Jr.
                                         Scott Jones
                                         Peggy Oberholtzer
                                         Mary Ann Pollock
BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS MEMBERS          Terry Kelley
                                         Jack Sutherin
                                         Richard Barto
                                         Ron Detwiler, President
                                         Greg Gustafson
PARK RECREATION & CEMETERY BOARD MEMBERS Nancy Tirpak
                                         Larry Baughman
                                         Rick Pennell
                                         Randy Guy
 
CHARTER OF THE CITY OF COLUMBIANA, OHIO
EDITOR’S NOTE: The Charter of the Village of Columbiana, Ohio, was approved by
the voters at a general election held on November 2, 1971. Dates appearing in
parentheses following a section heading in the Table of Contents, or following
a section in the text, indicate that the provision was subsequently enacted,
amended or repealed on the date given.
TABLE OF CONTENTS
ARTICLE I
NAME AND BOUNDARIES
Section
1.01   Name and Boundaries.
ARTICLE II
FORM OF GOVERNMENT
Section
2.01   Form of Government.
ARTICLE III
POWERS GRANTED
Section
3.01   Powers Granted.
Section
3.02   Manner of Exercise of Powers.
Section
3.03   Construction.
Section
3.04   Intergovernmental Relations.
ARTICLE IV
COUNCIL
Section
4.01   Number and Term.
Section
4.02   Qualifications.
Section
4.03   Removal.
Section
4.04   Organization of Council. (11-6-2001)
Section
4.05   Clerk of Council.
Section
4.06   Powers of Council.
Section
4.07   Regular Council Meetings. (11-2-1976)
Section
4.08   Special Council Meetings. (11-2-1976)
Section
4.09   Meetings to be Open to Public. (11-2-1976)
Section
4.10   Quorum.
Section
4.11   Rules of Council.
Section
4.12   Vacancies in Office of Council. (11-8-2016)
Section
4.13   Salaries.
ARTICLE V
MAYOR
Section
5.01   Term. (5-2-1972)
Section
5.02   Judicial Powers.
Section
5.03   Legislative Powers.
Section
5.04   Other Powers.
Section
5.05   Vacancies. (11-2-1976)
ARTICLE VI
LEGISLATIVE PROCEDURE; ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS
Section
6.01   Action to be Taken by Ordinance or Resolution.
Section
6.02   Introduction of Ordinances and Resolutions.
Section
6.03   Style of Ordinances and Resolutions.
Section
6.04   Subject of Ordinances and Resolutions.
Section
6.05   Reading of Ordinances and Resolutions.
Section
6.06   Vote Required for Passage of Motions, Ordinances and Resolutions.
Section
6.07   Content of Emergency Ordinances and Resolutions.
Section
6.08   Effective Date of Ordinances and Resolutions. (11-2-1976)
Section
6.09   Authentication of Ordinances and Resolutions. (11-2-1976)
Section
6.10   Recording of Ordinances and Resolutions.
Section
6.11   Amendment of Ordinances and Resolutions.
Section
6.12   Referral of Zoning Ordinances to Planning Commission.
Section
6.13   Adoption of Technical Codes by Reference.
Section
6.14   Codification of Ordinances and Resolutions.
Section
6.15   Publication of Ordinances and Resolutions. (11-2-1976)
ARTICLE VII
MANAGER
Section
7.01   Appointment and Removal.
Section
7.02   Qualifications.
Section
7.03   Acting Manager.
Section
7.04   Powers and Duties of the Manager.
Section
7.05   Council-Manager Relations.
Section
7.06   Manager May Act as Department Head.
ARTICLE VIII
ADMINISTRATIVE DEPARTMENTS
Section
8.01   Creation of Departments.
Section
8.02   Department of Law - Municipal Attorney.
Section
8.03   Powers and Duties of the Municipal Attorney.
Section
8.04   Department of Finance - Director of Finance.
Section
8.05   Powers and Duties of the Director of Finance.
Section
8.06   Department of Public Service. (11-6-2001)
Section
8.07   Department of Public Safety.
Section
8.08   Duties of Director of Public Safety in General.
Section
8.09   Police Department. (11-2-1976)
Section
8.10   Fire Department. (11-2-1976)
Section
8.11   Rules of Government of Police and Fire Departments.
ARTICLE IX
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
Section
9.01   Planning Commission - Membership.
Section
9.02   Planning Commission - Powers and Duties.
Section
9.03   Civil Service Commission - Membership. (11-5-1996)
Section
9.04   Civil Service - Classified and Unclassified Service.
Section
9.05   Civil Service Commission - Powers and Duties.
Section
9.06   Park, Recreation and Cemetery Board - Membership.
Section
9.07   Park, Recreation and Cemetery Board - Powers and Duties.
Section
9.08   Charter Review Commission.
Section
9.09   Boards and Commissions - Organization. (11-2-1976)
Section
9.10   Vacancy in Board or Commission.
Section
9.11   Removal of Members of Boards and Commissions.
ARTICLE X
NOMINATIONS, ELECTIONS AND RECALL
Section
10.01   Nominations. (11-2-1976)
Section
10.02   Municipal Elections. (11-2-1976)
Section
10.03   Special Elections.
Section
10.04   Conduct of Elections.
Section
10.05   Recall Elections.
ARTICLE XI
INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM
Section
11.01   General Authority - Initiative and Referendum.
Section
11.02   Commencement of Proceedings; Petitioners’ Committee; Affidavit.
Section
11.03   Petitions - Initiative and Referendum.
Section
11.04   Procedure after Filing - Initiative and Referendum.
Section
11.05   Referendum Petitions; Suspension of Effect of Ordinance or Resolution.
Section
11.06   Action on Petitions - Initiative and Referendum.
Section
11.07   Results of Election - Initiative and Referendum.
Section
11.08   Conduct of Elections - Initiative and Referendum.
Section
11.09   Referral of Ordinance or Resolution to the Electors by Council.
ARTICLE XII
FINANCES, TAXATION AND DEBT
Section
12.01   General.
Section
12.02   Limitation on Tax Rate.
Section
12.03   Limitation of Debt.
Section
12.04   Contracting Power.
ARTICLE XIII
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
13.01   Succession.
Section
13.02   Effect of Charter on Existing Laws and Rights.
Section
13.03   Amendments to Charter.
Section
13.04   Conflict of Interest.
Section
13.05   Effect of Partial Invalidity.
Section
13.06   Construction of Charter.
Section
13.07   Fiscal Year.
Section
13.08   Public Health.
ARTICLE XIV
TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS
Section
14.01   Effective Date of Charter.
Section
14.02   Continuance of Present Officials - Abolishment of Offices.
Section
14.03   Continuance of Present Employees.
ARTICLE I
NAME AND BOUNDARIES
SECTION 1.01  NAME AND BOUNDARIES.
   This Municipality, known as the Village of Columbiana, Ohio, shall continue
to be a body politic and corporate, under the name of the Village of
Columbiana, or the City of Columbiana, as the population requires, and with the
same boundaries, with power and authority to change its boundaries and annex
other territory contiguous thereto in the manner authorized by the general laws
of Ohio.
ARTICLE II
FORM OF GOVERNMENT
SECTION 2.01  FORM OF GOVERNMENT.
   The form of government provided in the Charter shall be known as the “Mayor-
Council-Manager Plan.” The powers and functions of the Municipal government
shall be distributed among the Municipality, its citizens, and the various
officers, bodies, boards and commissions as provided under the provisions of
this Charter.
ARTICLE III
POWERS GRANTED
SECTION 3.01  POWERS GRANTED.
   The Municipality shall have all the powers, general or special, governmental
or proprietary, that may now or hereafter lawfully be possessed or exercised by
municipal corporations under the Constitution and laws of the State of Ohio.
SECTION 3.02  MANNER OF EXERCISE OF POWERS.
   All such powers shall be exercised in the manner prescribed in this Charter,
or if not prescribed herein, in such manner as shall be provided by ordinance
of the Council, and when not prescribed in this Charter or provided by
ordinance of Council, then such powers shall be exercised in the manner
provided by the general laws of the State of Ohio until the Council shall
provide a different manner of exercising such powers.
SECTION 3.03  CONSTRUCTION.
   The powers of the Municipality under this Charter shall be construed
liberally in favor of the Municipality, and the specific mention of particular
powers in the Charter shall not be construed as limiting in any way the general
power stated in this article.
SECTION 3.04  INTERGOVERNMENTAL RELATIONS.
   The Municipality may exercise any of its powers or perform any of its
functions and may participate in the financing thereof, jointly or in
cooperation, by contract, or otherwise, with any one or more states or civil
divisions or agencies thereof, or the United States or any agency thereof.
ARTICLE IV
COUNCIL
SECTION 4.01  NUMBER AND TERM.
   The legislative powers of the Municipality, except as otherwise provided by
this Charter and by the Constitution of the State of Ohio, shall be vested in a
Council of six (6) members, consisting of persons elected from the Municipality
at large. All members of Council shall be elected for overlapping terms of four
(4) years; except at the general election to be held in November, 1972, three
(3) members of said Council shall be elected to one (1)-year terms of office,
and three (3) members of said Council shall be elected to three (3)-year terms
of office. At the Municipal election to be held in November, 1973, and each two
(2) years thereafter, three (3) members of said Council shall be elected to
four (4)-year terms of office.
   Members of Council shall take office January 1 of the year following their
election and shall serve until the expiration of their term of office and until
their successors are elected and qualified, or appointed and qualified. If for
any reason a member of Council shall fail to qualify for office within forty-
five (45) days after January 1 of the year following his election, a vacancy
shall be deemed to exist and such vacancy shall be filled in the manner
provided in Section
4.12 of this Charter.
SECTION 4.02  QUALIFICATIONS.
   All members of Council shall have been electors of the Municipality for at
least one (1) continuous year immediately prior to the time of filing as
candidates, and shall continue to be qualified electors of the Municipality
during their respective terms of office. No member of Council shall hold any
other office or employment with the Municipality, except as otherwise allowed
by this Charter or by ordinance of the Council, nor shall any member of Council
hold any other public office, except the following: notary public; member of
the National Guard or State militia; member of the reserves of the armed forces
of the United States; national, State, ward or precinct committeeman of a
political party or any other office of a political party; and delegate to a
municipal, county, state or national convention of a political party.
   Any member of Council who shall cease to possess or who violates any of the
qualifications of office herein provided or who is finally convicted of a
felony involving moral turpitude shall forthwith forfeit his office. Forfeiture
of office as provided herein shall not render void or shall not invalidate any
action of the Council in which such member participated.
SECTION 4.03  REMOVAL.
   Any Councilman may, after absence from his official duties for three (3)
consecutive months, be removed by a majority vote of the remaining members of
the Council; and any Councilman shall, after absence from his official duties
for five (5) consecutive months, be removed by a majority vote of the remaining
members of Council and his office declared vacant. An accused member shall be
notified of the charge against him and given an opportunity to be heard in
person or by counsel.
   The Council shall be the judge of the election, qualifications, and removal
of its members and for such purpose shall have powers to subpoena witnesses and
require the production of records, but the decision of the Council in any case
shall be subject to review by the courts.
   A member of Council shall not vote upon the question of his removal. Failure
to maintain qualifications or removal from office shall not render void or
shall not invalidate any action of the Council in which such member
participated.
SECTION 4.04  ORGANIZATION OF COUNCIL.
   On or before the eighth (8th) day of January next, following each regular
Municipal election, the members of Council shall meet at the Council Chambers
for the purpose of organization. At such meeting the Council shall elect one
(1) of its members thereof as President of Council to serve until his successor
shall have been elected. In the event the President of Council ceases to be a
member thereof or succeeds to the office of Mayor, the Council shall elect
another member to serve as President until another President of Council is
elected in the manner hereinbefore provided.
(Amended Nov. 6, 2001)
SECTION 4.05  CLERK OF COUNCIL.
   The Clerk of Council shall be appointed by the Manager with the approval of
the Council and shall serve at its pleasure. The Clerk of Council shall attend
all meetings of the Council and shall keep an accurate and complete journal of
the proceedings of Council and perform such other duties as this Charter, the
laws of Ohio, or the Council may require. In addition, the Clerk of Council
shall maintain, or cause to be maintained, a complete file of all official
blueprints, maps and other records at the Municipal Hall, or other designated
place, provided the failure to maintain such blueprints, maps and other records
shall not invalidate or otherwise affect any action taken by the Council or any
other officer, employee, agent or independent contractor of the Municipality.
All such blueprints, maps or other records shall be available for public
inspection at all reasonable times, provided that the non-availability of such
blueprints, maps or other records shall not invalidate or otherwise affect any
action taken by the Council or any other officer, employee, agent or
independent contractor of the Municipality.
   The Clerk of Council may be a person having other office, employment or
appointment with the Municipality. The Council may employ such other persons
and consultants as it deems necessary for the proper discharge of its duties.
SECTION 4.06  POWERS OF COUNCIL.
   All legislative powers of the Municipality shall be vested in the Council
except as otherwise provided by this Charter and the Constitution of the State
of Ohio. Without limitation of the foregoing, the Council shall have and
possess the following powers:
   (a)   The power to levy taxes and incur debts subject to the limitations
imposed thereon by this Charter and the Constitution of the State of Ohio.
   (b)   The power to adopt and to provide for the enforcement of local public
safety, public services, and other similar regulations as are not in conflict
with general laws.
   (c)   The power to provide for the exercise of all powers of local self-
government granted to the Municipality by the Constitution of the State of Ohio
in a manner not inconsistent with this Charter or the Constitution of the State
of Ohio.
   (d)   The power to fix the number of employees in the various offices,
departments, divisions, bureaus, boards, and commissions of the Municipality
and to fix the rate of their compensation, hours of work, mandatory retirement
ages and to provide such fringe benefits as deemed proper by the Council.
   (e)   The power to require such bonds as in the opinion of the Council are
necessary for the faithful discharge of the duties of the officers and
employees of the Municipality. The premium for said bonds shall be paid by the
Municipality.
   (f)   The power to create other offices, departments, divisions, bureaus,
boards, and commissions; and the power to combine, change and abolish any
office, department, division, bureau, board, or commission. The power herein
above expressed in this subsection shall be exercised by ordinance.  The
Council shall not abolish the offices of Manager, Mayor, Clerk of Council,
Council members, Civil Service Commission members and Municipal Attorney. The
Manager may hold such other offices and positions with the Municipality as
provided by this Charter or as the Council may authorize by a vote of a
majority of its members. The Council may authorize the Finance Director to hold
the position of Clerk of Council by a vote of a majority of its members.
   (g)   The power to adopt and provide for the enforcement of zoning
classifications, districts, uses and regulations by ordinance; to adopt and
provide for the enforcement of ordinances regulating the subdivision and
platting of land within the Municipality; to regulate the subdivision and
platting of land outside of the boundaries of the Municipality as provided by
general law; to adopt and provide for the enforcement of ordinances requiring
actual construction or assurance of construction of streets, utility lines and
facilities, sidewalks, curbs and gutters and other improvements or facilities
as a condition precedent to the approval of a plat of a subdivision; to adopt
and provide for the enforcement of ordinances regulating the construction,
reconstruction, alteration, enlargement, repair or demolition of buildings and
other structures within the Municipality; to adopt and to provide for the
enforcement of housing codes or ordinances, regulating the use and occupancy of
any land, building or structure within the Municipality.
   (h)   The power to establish, by ordinance, the rate of charges made to
consumers of all Municipal utilities and services.
   (i)   The power to provide, without competitive bidding, for an annual or
special independent audit of any or all Municipal funds. Such audit may be in
addition to an audit by representatives of the State Auditor or other State
official or agency as may be determined to be required under the Constitution
of the State of Ohio.
   (j)   The Council, in addition to all other rights and powers granted to it
under the general law, may, by ordinance, grant permission to any person, firm,
or corporation to construct and operate a public utility on, across, under or
above any public street or ground within the Municipality. It may prescribe in
the ordinance the kind and quality of service or product to be furnished, the
rate or rates to be charged therefor, and any other terms conducive to the
public interest, provided that such grant of permission shall not extend beyond
twenty-five (25) years; however, such grant may be amended or renewed in the
manner and subject to the provisions established by this Charter for original
grants. No consent of the owners of property abutting on any public street or
ground shall be necessary to the effectiveness of any such grant, amendment or
renewal. All such grants, amendments or renewals shall be made subject to the
continuing right of the Council to provide reasonable regulations for adequacy
of service and maintenance and the operations of such utilities with reference
to such streets and public grounds, including the right to require
reconstruction, relocation or discontinuance of appliances, plant or equipment
used in such streets or public grounds as shall, in the opinion of Council, be
necessary in the public interest.
   (k)   The power to acquire title to or interests in real property shall be
vested in the Council, whether such property is acquired by: the exercise of
the power of eminent domain, purchase, gift, lease, lease with option to
purchase, devise, bequest, in trust, or otherwise. The power to sell or
otherwise convey, lease, lease with option to purchase, or grant interests in
real property shall be vested in the manner as provided by the ordinance
authorizing the sale, conveyance, lease or grant. Title to all real property
shall be taken in the name of the Municipality.
   (l)   The power to adopt the annual budget and appropriation measures of the
Municipality.
   (m)   The power to appoint the members of all boards and commissions created
by the Charter or by enactments of the Council, except as may be otherwise
provided in this Charter.
   (n)   The power to accept gifts and grants to and on behalf of the
Municipality.
   (o)   The power to inquire into the conduct of any officer, employee, agent,
or independent contractor in the exercise of their powers, duties, or
functions, or in their performance of work or service or supplying of
equipment, materials or supplies to or on the behalf of the Municipality; and
to inquire into and investigate any and all Municipal affairs. In the exercise
of this power the Council shall have the power to subpoena witnesses and
require the production of records and other evidence in the manner provided in
the rules, regulations or by-laws of the Council, and in the absence of such
provisions, the Mayor or President of Council shall have the power to issue
subpoenas for witnesses and the production of records and other evidence.
   (p)   The power to exercise all other powers granted to legislative
authorities of municipalities by the Constitution and laws of the State of
Ohio, and to exercise all other powers granted to the Council by and under this
Charter.
SECTION 4.07  REGULAR COUNCIL MEETINGS.
   The Council shall meet at such times and places as may be prescribed by its
ordinances, resolutions, rules or by motion, and all such meetings shall be
convened and the same shall be conducted in accordance with the applicable
statutes of the Revised Code of Ohio concerned with open public meetings and
the ordinances and resolutions of the Council which are not in conflict
therewith. Regular meetings shall be held at least twice in each calendar
month, except that during the months of July and August, the Council may
dispense with one (1) or more of its regular meetings so long as a regular
Council meeting is held at least once during each of said months.
(Amended Nov. 2, 1976)
SECTION 4.08  SPECIAL COUNCIL MEETINGS.
   Special meetings of Council may be called, convened and conducted in
accordance with the applicable statutes of the Revised Code of Ohio concerned
with open public meetings and the ordinances and resolutions of the Council
which are not in conflict therewith. Special meetings may be called by motion
of the Council taken at any regular or special meeting thereof or shall be
called by the Clerk upon the written request of the Mayor, or the President of
Council, or of three (3) members of Council. Any such request shall state the
time, place and date thereof and the subject or subjects to be considered at
the meeting. Unless four (4) members in attendance concur, no other subject or
subjects shall be considered. Notice in writing of each such special meeting
called at the request of the Mayor, President of Council, or three (3) members
of Council, shall be given to each member of the Council by serving the same on
each of them personally or by leaving a copy thereof at his usual place of
residence not less than twenty-four (24)  hours preceding the date and hour of
such meeting. Service of such notice may be waived in writing, either prior or
subsequent to such meeting, and shall be deemed conclusively to have been
waived by any member of Council or the Mayor who is present at such special
meeting.
(Amended Nov. 2, 1976)
SECTION 4.09  MEETINGS TO BE OPEN TO PUBLIC.
   All meetings of Council, as the same are defined by the applicable statutes
of the Revised Code of Ohio, shall be open public meetings, and formal action
or a vote of Council shall be taken therein. Council may hold an executive
session only at a regular or special meeting for the sole purpose of
considering those matters which are specifically provided for by the applicable
statutes of the Revised Code of Ohio concerning executive sessions of public
bodies.
(Amended Nov. 2, 1976)
SECTION 4.10  QUORUM.
   A majority of the members of Council shall constitute a quorum for the
transaction of business at any meeting of the Council, but a number less than a
quorum may adjourn the meeting from time to time and compel the attendance of
absent members in such manner and under such penalties as may be prescribed by
ordinance, resolution or by rules of the Council. At any meeting at which a
quorum is present, any action may be taken by the affirmative vote of a
majority of the members of the Council present, unless a larger number be
required by the provisions of this Charter.
SECTION 4.11  RULES OF COUNCIL.
   The Council may adopt, amend, and repeal rules, regulations and bylaws by a
majority vote of the members thereof without the necessity of complying with
the provisions required in this Charter for the adoption of ordinances or
resolutions. Such rules may be waived or suspended upon a motion concurred in
by a majority vote of the members of Council.
SECTION 4.12  VACANCIES IN OFFICE OF COUNCIL.
   1.   A vacancy shall be deemed to occur in the Council upon: the
presentation of a written resignation to the Mayor or President of Council,
which resignation shall be effective immediately unless a later time is
specified therein; the death of a Councilman; the determination by the Council
that a member of Council has failed to qualify within the period of time
allowed by Section
4.01 of this Charter or has ceased to possess or has violated any of the
qualifications of the office of Council member; or the removal of such
Councilman as provided in Section
4.02 or Section
4.03 of this Charter.
   2.   Any vacancy in the Council shall be filled by a majority vote of the
remaining members of the Council, and the person chosen to fill a vacancy shall
serve until his successor is elected and qualified, or appointed and qualified,
as hereinafter provided.
   3.   The person chosen to fill such vacancy in the manner herein above
provided in paragraph 2. of this Section shall serve for the unexpired term of
that person whose resignation, death, failure to qualify or to maintain
qualifications, or removal created such vacancy and until that person's
successor is elected and qualified, upon the condition that such vacancy shall
occur on or after the primary election day preceding the first regular
Municipal election occurring within such unexpired term.
   4.   Otherwise, the person chosen to fill such vacancy in the manner herein
above provided in paragraph 2. of this Section shall serve for the unexpired
term of that person whose resignation, death, failure to qualify or to maintain
qualifications, or removal created such vacancy and until that person's
successor is elected and qualified, upon the conditions that such vacancy shall
occur prior to the primary election day immediately preceding the first regular
Municipal election within such unexpired term, and that the person so chosen to
fill such vacancy is thereafter elected to complete such unexpired term at said
regular Municipal election for which any qualified person may be nominated and
elected by the filing of petitions containing the signatures of fifty (50)
qualified electors of the Municipality with the appropriate Board of Elections
not later than 4:00 P.M. of the ninetieth (90th) day before said regular
Municipal election.
(Amended Nov. 8, 2016)
SECTION 4.13  SALARIES.
   On the effective date of this Charter: the salaries of members of Council
shall be two hundred forty dollars ($240.00) per year, and the members of all
boards and commissions shall serve without compensation.
   On and after the effective date of this Charter the compensation of members
of Council, and members of all boards and commissions established by or under
this Charter may be increased at any time; however, if such increase occurs
during the term of persons holding such positions, the increases shall not be
effective as to such persons until the expiration of two (2) years after the
effective date of the ordinance increasing such salaries, or the end of the
term of the persons holding such positions, whichever shall occur first. The
compensation of members of Council, and members of all boards and commissions
shall not be decreased during the term for which they were elected or
appointed. The compensation of all other officers and employees of the
Municipality may be increased or decreased at any time by ordinance. The
payment of allowances for expenses or the reimbursement of expenses and the
granting of fringe benefits, as may be provided by the Council, shall not be
considered an increase in compensation that is prohibited by this section.
ARTICLE V
MAYOR
SECTION 5.01  TERM.
   The Mayor shall be elected at the general election in the year 1973 and
every four years thereafter. His term shall commence on the first day of
January following his election and expire on the last day in December four (4)
years hence.
(Amended May 2, 1972)
SECTION 5.02  JUDICIAL POWERS.
   The Mayor shall have jurisdiction in civil and criminal cases as provided by
the laws of Ohio, including all statutes now or hereafter enacted, until such
jurisdiction is placed elsewhere by law.
SECTION 5.03  LEGISLATIVE POWERS.
   The Mayor shall preside at all meetings of Council but shall have no vote
therein except in case of a tie vote. He shall be considered a member of
Council when so voting.
SECTION 5.04  OTHER POWERS.
   The Mayor shall be recognized as the official head of the Municipality for
all ceremonial purposes, by the Governor for military purposes, and by the
courts for the purpose of serving civil process.
SECTION 5.05  VACANCIES.
   When the Mayor is absent or inaccessible or is unable for any cause or
reason to perform his duties, the President of Council shall become the Acting
Mayor, but shall not thereby cease to be a Councilman.
   In the event the office of Mayor shall become vacant for any reason, the
President of Council shall thereupon become the Mayor and serve for the
unexpired term and his offices as President of Council and Councilman shall
become vacant. When the President of Council is absent or inaccessible or for
any reason unable to perform his duties as Acting Mayor, then Council, by a
vote of the majority of the remaining members of Council, shall designate one
of their members to act as Mayor.
(Amended Nov. 2, 1976)
ARTICLE VI
LEGISLATIVE PROCEDURE; ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS
SECTION 6.01  ACTION TO BE TAKEN BY ORDINANCE OR RESOLUTION.
   Action of Council shall be by ordinance, resolution, or motion. Every action
of a general and permanent nature, or granting a franchise; or levying a tax;
or appropriating money; or contracting an indebtedness, to be evidenced by the
issuance of bonds or notes; or for the purchase, lease or transfer of public
property; or establishing an offense and fixing the penalty therefor, shall be
taken by ordinance, in the manner hereinafter provided. All other action may be
by resolution or motion.
SECTION 6.02  INTRODUCTION OF ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS.
   Any member of Council may, at a regular meeting or a special meeting,
introduce any ordinance or resolution. Such ordinance or resolution shall be in
written or printed form and shall contain a concise title, and specify the form
of publication.
SECTION 6.03  STYLE OF ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS.
   Each ordinance shall contain an enacting clause as follows: “Be it Ordained
by the Council of The Village (City) of Columbiana, State of Ohio”, and each
resolution shall contain an enacting clause as follows: “Be It Resolved by the
Council of the Village (City) of Columbiana, State of Ohio.”
SECTION 6.04  SUBJECT OF ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS.
   Each ordinance or resolution shall contain only one (1) subject which shall
be expressed in its title, provided, however, that appropriation ordinances may
contain the various subjects, accounts and amounts for which monies are
appropriated, and that ordinances and resolutions which are codified or
recodified are not subject to the limitation of containing one (1) subject.
SECTION 6.05  READING OF ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS.
   Each ordinance or resolution shall be read fully and distinctly at two (2)
meetings of Council separated by at least ten (10) days. Council may, upon
affirmative vote by four (4) Councilmen, dispense with the requirement that an
ordinance or resolution be read on two (2) separate days and authorize the
adoption of an ordinance or resolution as emergency legislation upon its first
reading; and Council may, upon affirmative vote by four (4) Councilmen,
dispense with the requirement that an ordinance or resolution be read fully and
distinctly for its first or second reading, or for both its first and second
readings, and authorize such reading or readings to be by title only. Motions
to dispense with the requirement that an ordinance or resolution be read on two
(2) separate days and motions to dispense with the requirement that an
ordinance or resolution be read fully and distinctly shall be separately
stated, and a separate vote shall be taken on each such motion.
SECTION 6.06  VOTE REQUIRED FOR PASSAGE OF MOTIONS, ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS.
   The vote by Council upon the passage of each motion, ordinance and
resolution shall be taken by yeas and nays and entered on the Journal. The
passage of motions shall require a majority vote by Council. A vote on the
question of passage of each ordinance or resolution shall be taken following
each reading; and no ordinance or resolution shall be passed without a majority
vote of all members of Council, except that each emergency ordinance or
resolution shall require the affirmative vote by at least five (5) members of
Council for its enactment, provided, however, that if such emergency ordinance
or resolution shall fail to receive the required affirmative vote by five (5)
members of Council, but receives the necessary majority vote for passage as a
non-emergency ordinance or resolution, it shall be considered passed as a non-
emergency ordinance or resolution and shall become effective as provided by
this Charter. A majority of the members present at any regular or special
meeting of Council may compel the attendance of absent members as provided in
Section
4.10 of this Charter.
SECTION 6.07  CONTENT OF EMERGENCY ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS.
   Each emergency ordinance or resolution shall determine that said ordinance
or resolution is necessary for the immediate preservation of the public peace,
health, safety, or welfare, and shall contain a statement defining such
emergency.
SECTION 6.08  EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS.
   Each ordinance or resolution shall take effect, unless a later time be
specified therein, immediately upon passage.
(Amended Nov. 2, 1976)
SECTION 6.09  AUTHENTICATION OF ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS.
   Each ordinance or resolution shall be authenticated by the signature of the
Presiding Officer of Council and the Clerk of Council; however, the failure or
refusal of such officers to sign such ordinances or resolutions shall not
invalidate an otherwise properly enacted ordinance or resolution.
(Amended Nov. 2, 1976)
SECTION 6.10  RECORDING OF ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS.
   Each ordinance or resolution shall be recorded in a book or other record
prescribed by the Council, established and maintained for that purpose. The
Clerk of Council, or a duly authorized deputy to said Clerk, shall, upon the
request of any person and upon the payment of a fee, as established by the
Council, certify true copies of any ordinance or resolution, which certified
copies shall be admissable as evidence in any court.
SECTION 6.11  AMENDMENT OF ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS.
   No ordinance or resolution, or any section thereof, shall be revised or
amended unless the new ordinance or resolution contains the entire ordinance,
resolution or section or subsection as revised or amended, and the ordinance,
resolution or section or subsection so amended shall be repealed. This
requirement shall not prevent the amendment of an ordinance or resolution by
the addition of a new section, sections, subsection or subsections and in such
case the full text of the former ordinance or resolution need not be set forth.
This requirement shall not prevent repeals by implication by the subsequent
enactment of an inconsistent provision.
   Except in the case of a codification or recodification of ordinances and
resolutions, a separate vote shall be taken on each ordinance or resolution
proposed to be amended.
   Ordinances and resolutions that have been introduced and have received their
first reading, or their first and second reading, but have not been voted on as
to passage, may be amended or revised upon approval of a majority vote of the
members of the Council, and such amended or revised ordinance or resolution
need not receive readings in addition to the readings required by Section
6.05 of this Charter because of such amendment or revision.
SECTION 6.12  REFERRAL OF ZONING ORDINANCES TO PLANNING COMMISSION.
   Each ordinance or resolution establishing, amending, revising, changing or
repealing zoning classifications, districts, uses, or regulations shall be
referred to the Planning Commission immediately after its first reading. Within
thirty (30) days of such referral the Planning Commission shall cause such
ordinance or resolution to be returned to the Clerk of Council together with
the written recommendations of the majority of the members of such Commission.
   No such ordinance or resolution which violates, differs from, or departs
from the written recommendations of the Planning Commission shall take effect
unless passed and approved by a vote of not less than four (4) of the members
of the Council. This provision shall not be construed to mean that an ordinance
or resolution recommended for passage by the Planning Commission shall be
passed by less than the votes required by Section
6.06 of this Charter.
SECTION 6.13  ADOPTION OF TECHNICAL CODES BY REFERENCE.
   Council may, by ordinance, adopt standard ordinances and codes prepared by
the Federal government or any agency thereof, the State or any department,
board or other agency or political subdivision of the State, or any standard or
model ordinance or code prepared and promulgated by a public or private
organization, including, but not limited to, codes and regulations pertaining
to fire, fire hazards, fire prevention, plumbing code, electrical code,
building code, refrigeration machinery code, piping code, boiler code, heating
code, air conditioning code, housing code, and such other matters as the
Council may determine to be appropriate by incorporation by reference. The
ordinance adopting any such standard ordinance or code shall make reference to
the date and source of such standard ordinance or code without reproducing the
same at length in the ordinance. In such cases, publication of the standard
ordinance or code shall not be required, but at least one (1) copy of such code
shall be kept at all times in the office of the Clerk of Council and available
for reference by interested persons. If the standard ordinance or code, after
its adoption by reference by the Council, is amended, the Council may adopt the
amendment or change by incorporation by reference in an ordinance under the
same procedure as is established herein for the adoption of the original
standard ordinance or code without the necessity of setting forth in full in
the ordinance the provisions either of the amendment or change to the original
ordinance or the standard ordinance or code.
SECTION 6.14  CODIFICATION OF ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS.
   By a majority vote of the members of the Council, the Council may cause the
ordinances and resolutions of the Municipality to be revised, codified,
recodified, rearranged, or published in book form. Such revisions,
codification, recodification, rearrangement or publication of ordinances and
resolutions in book form shall be immediately effective upon approval of a
majority vote of the members of the Council, and may contain new matter
therein. The Clerk of Council shall cause a notice of such proposed revision,
codification, recodification, rearrangement or publication of ordinances in
book form to be published one (1) time in a newspaper determined by the Council
to be of circulation within the Municipality at least seven (7) days prior to
the final approval thereof by the Council, and no further publication shall be
necessary. A current service supplementing such revision, codification,
recodification, rearrangement or publication of ordinances and resolutions in
book form shall be maintained in the manner prescribed by the Council.
SECTION 6.15  PUBLICATION OF ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS.
   Each ordinance or resolution, when introduced in the Council, shall be
published as hereinafter provided:
   a.   By publication in full once in a newspaper determined by Council to be
of circulation within the Municipality; or
   b.   By publication of its title, and a brief description of the context,
once in a newspaper determined by Council to be of circulation within the
Municipality, and such publication shall contain a statement that a copy of the
full text of such ordinance or resolution is posted for inspection at the
Municipal Building, Columbiana, Ohio. The Clerk of Council shall cause such
publication to be made immediately following introduction, and posted for seven
(7) consecutive days, if posting is required.
   A failure to post or publish, omission, delay or error in said publication
on the part of a newspaper, its officers, employees or agents, shall not cause
such ordinance or resolution to be declared invalid, or otherwise affect the
validity of such ordinance or resolution, and in such events the Clerk of
Council may post or authorize publication at a later date. After the posting or
publication of each ordinance or resolution as hereinabove provided, the Clerk
of Council shall affix the appropriate following certification to the copy of
the ordinance or resolution maintained in the official journal or record
provided for in Section
6.10 of this Charter, and such certification shall be prima facie evidence of
such publication.
   1.   The following Certificate of Publication shall be used when the full
text of an ordinance or resolution is published as provided by subparagraph a.
of this section:
   CERTIFICATION OF PUBLICATION
I, the undersigned Clerk of Council of the Village (City) of Columbiana, Ohio,
hereby certify that the full text of the foregoing (ordinance or resolution)
was published in the (name of newspaper in which publication took place) on the
___________________ day of ________________________, 20___, and that at such
date said newspaper was determined by the Council to be of circulation within
the Village (City) of Columbiana, Ohio.
      Dated this ____________ day of __________________, 20___.
                  CLERK OF COUNCIL
                  VILLAGE (CITY) OF COLUMBIANA, OHIO
   2.   The following Certificate of Publication shall be used when the title
to an ordinance or resolution is published as provided by subparagraph b. of
this section:
   CERTIFICATION OF PUBLICATION
I, the undersigned Clerk of Council of the Village (City) of Columbiana, Ohio,
hereby certify that the title to the foregoing (ordinance or resolution) was
published in the (name of newspaper in which publication took place) on the
_____ day of __________, 20___, and that at such date said newspaper was
determined by the Council to be of circulation within the Village (City) of
Columbiana, Ohio; and that said publication contained in addition to the title
of the foregoing (ordinance or resolution) a statement that a copy of the full
text of such (ordinance or resolution) was posted for inspection for seven (7)
consecutive days at the Municipal Building, Columbiana, Ohio.
      Dated this _____________ day of ________________ , 20____.
                  CLERK OF COUNCIL
                  VILLAGE (CITY) OF COLUMBIANA, OHIO
   The failure of the Clerk of Council to affix the appropriate “Certificate of
Publication” provided hereinabove shall not affect the validity of an otherwise
duly and properly enacted ordinance or resolution.
(Amended Nov. 2, 1976)
ARTICLE VII
MANAGER
SECTION 7.01  APPOINTMENT AND REMOVAL.
   A Manager shall be appointed by the Council. A majority vote of the members
of the Council shall be required for the appointment of the Manager. The
Council may remove the Manager from office in accordance with the following
procedures:
   a.   If the Manager has served less than six (6) months, he may be removed
by a vote of five (5) members of Council voting for his dismissal, without the
benefit of the provisions of subsections b., c., and d. of this section.
   b.   If the Manager has served six (6) months or more the Council shall
adopt by a majority vote of its members a preliminary resolution which must
state the reasons for removal and may suspend the Manager from duty for a
period not to exceed forty-five (45) days. A copy of the resolution shall be
delivered promptly to the Manager, and said resolution may go into immediate
effect and need not be published.
   c.   Within five (5) days after a copy of the resolution is delivered to the
Manager, he may file with the Clerk of Council a written request for a public
hearing. This hearing shall be held at a regular or special Council meeting not
earlier than fifteen (15) days or later than thirty (30) days after the request
is filed. The date of the public hearing shall be set by the President of
Council. The Manager may file with the Clerk of Council a written reply to the
reasons for removal contained in the preliminary resolutions, not later than
five (5) days before the hearing.
   d.   The Council may adopt a final resolution of removal, which may be made
effective immediately, by a majority vote of its members at any time after five
(5) days from the date when a copy of the preliminary resolution was delivered
to the Manager, if he has not requested a public hearing, or at any time after
the public hearing if he has requested one (1).
   e.   The Manager shall continue to receive his salary until the effective
date of a final resolution of removal. The decision of the Council to suspend
or remove the Manager shall be in the sole discretion of the Council and shall
not be subject to review by any court.
   f.   If the Manager is suspended from duty under subsection a. or b., the
Council shall appoint by vote of a majority of the members thereof an
administrative officer who shall serve as Acting Manager until the Manager is
restored to duty, or until Council shall appoint another person as Acting
Manager, or until another person is appointed Manager in accordance with this
Charter. The Acting Manager so appointed shall exercise all powers, duties and
functions of the Manager under this Charter.
   The Council shall fix the compensation of the Manager.
SECTION 7.02  QUALIFICATIONS.
   The Manager shall be appointed solely on the basis of his executive and
administrative qualifications, and need not be a resident of the Municipality
at the time of his appointment, but shall become a resident of the Municipality
within six (6) months after his appointment unless residence outside the
Municipality is approved by a majority vote of the members of the Council. No
one elected or appointed as a member of Council may be appointed as Manager
until two (2) years after such member has terminated his membership on the
Council.
SECTION 7.03  ACTING MANAGER.
   The Manager may designate, by letter filed with the Clerk of Council, any
qualified administrative officer of the Municipality to perform his powers,
duties and functions during his temporary absence from the Municipality or
during his disability. Such designation shall not be effective until the
Council has approved it by a majority vote of the members of the Council, and
the Council may revoke such designation by a majority vote of the members
thereto. If such designation has not been made and the Manager is absent from
the Municipality, or unable to perform his duties or to make such designation,
the Council may, by motion, appoint any qualified administrative officer of the
Municipality to perform the powers, duties and functions of the Manager until
he shall return to the Municipality or the disability ceases. The Acting
Manager so designated shall exercise all powers, duties and functions of the
Manager during the temporary absence from the Municipality or disability of the
Manager.
   In the event of a vacancy in the office of Manager, the Council may
designate a person as Acting Manager, who shall exercise all powers, duties and
functions of the Manager until a Manager is appointed.
SECTION 7.04  POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE MANAGER.
   The Manager shall be the chief executive, administrative, and law
enforcement officer of the Municipality. He shall be responsible to the Council
for the administration of all Municipal affairs placed in his charge by or
under this Charter, the ordinances of the Municipality and State laws. He shall
have the following powers and duties:
   1.   He shall appoint and, when he deems it necessary for the good of the
service, suspend or remove or otherwise discipline all Municipal employees and
appointive administrative officers, except as provided for by or under this
Charter, in the manner provided by the rules adopted by the Civil Service
Commission, when city status is attained, pursuant to this Charter. He may
authorize any administrative officer who is subject to his direction and
supervision to exercise these powers with respect to subordinates in that
officer’s department, office or agency. He shall not have the power or
authority to appoint or remove, suspend or discipline the Director of Law or
any member of any board or commission established under this Charter.
   2.   He shall direct and supervise the administration of all departments,
offices and agencies of the Municipality, except as otherwise provided by this
Charter.
   3.   He shall attend all Council meetings and shall have the right to take
part in discussion, but may not vote.
   4.   He shall see that all laws, provisions of this Charter and ordinances
and resolutions of the Council, subject to enforcement by him or by officers
subject to his direction and supervision, are faithfully executed.
   5.   He shall prepare and submit the annual budget and capital program to
the Council.
   6.   He shall submit to Council and make available to the public a complete
report on the finances and administrative activities of the Municipality as of
the end of each fiscal year.
   7.   He shall make such other reports as the Council may require concerning
the operations of Municipal departments, offices, boards, commissions and
agencies subject to his direction and supervision.
   8.   He shall keep the Council fully advised as to the financial condition
and future operating and capital needs of the Municipality and make such
recommendations to the Council concerning the affairs of the Municipality as he
deems desirable.
   9.   He shall require reports and information of subordinate officers and
employees of the Municipality as he deems necessary in the orderly operation of
the Municipality, or when requested to do so by the Council or any board or
commission of the Municipality.
   10.   He shall be the contracting officer of the Municipality and shall
award and execute contracts and agreements on behalf of the Municipality in the
manner and under the procedures required by Section
12.04 of this Charter.
   11.   He shall execute on behalf of the Municipality all contracts and
agreements, except as otherwise hereinafter provided by Section
12.04 of this Charter, regarding the designation of a purchasing agent,
conveyances, evidences of indebtedness and other instruments to which the
Municipality is a part.
   12.   He shall affix to official documents and instruments of the
Municipality the Manager’s Seal, which shall be the seal of the Municipality,
but the absence of the seal shall not affect the validity of any such document
or instrument.
   13.   He shall perform such other duties and have such other powers as are
conferred or required by this Charter, by any ordinance or resolution of the
Council, or by the laws of the State of Ohio.
SECTION 7.05  COUNCIL-MANAGER RELATIONS.
   Neither the Council nor any of its members shall in any manner dictate the
appointment or removal of any administrative officers or employees whom the
Manager or any of his subordinates are empowered to appoint, unless otherwise
provided by this Charter, but the Council may express its views and fully and
freely discuss with the Manager anything pertaining to appointment and removal
of such officers and employees. Except for the purpose of inquiries and
investigations, the Council or its members shall deal with officers and
employees who are subject to the direction and supervision of the Manager
solely through the Manager, and neither the Council nor its members shall give
orders to any such officer or employee, either publicly or privately, except
that Council may require of the Municipal Attorney and Director of Finance such
reports, information, and opinions as Council shall determine. This section
shall not be construed as limiting the power of Council to remove or suspend
the Manager because of his practices in connection with the appointment,
promotion, disciplining or removal of officers and employees of the
Municipality.
SECTION 7.06  MANAGER MAY ACT AS DEPARTMENT HEAD.
   The Manager shall serve as the Director of Finance and the head of the
Departments of Public Service and Public Safety until separate positions are
created as provided by Section
8.04, Section
8.06, and Section
8.07 of this Charter, and he may act as head of any other department or
division of the government, except he shall not act as Municipal Attorney, nor
shall he act as the Chief of the Division of Police, or Chief of the Division
of Fire. The Manager may designate one person to serve as head of one or more
departments or divisions, except that the Municipal Attorney shall not serve or
act as head of any other department or division.
ARTICLE VIII
ADMINISTRATIVE DEPARTMENTS
SECTION 8.01  CREATION OF DEPARTMENTS.
   For the purpose of carrying on the administrative functions of the
Municipality, the following departments are hereby established: Department of
Law, Department of Finance, Department of Public Service, and Department of
Public Safety. The work of the departments of the Municipality shall be
distributed among such divisions as provided in this Charter and as provided by
ordinance. The Council may create new departments and divisions and combine,
change and abolish any department or division in the manner and subject to the
limitations as provided in Section
4.06(f) of this Charter.
SECTION 8.02  DEPARTMENT OF LAW - MUNICIPAL ATTORNEY.
   The Municipal Attorney shall be the head of the Department of Law. He shall
be appointed by a majority vote of the Council, and shall serve at the pleasure
of the Council and may be removed by a majority vote of the Council. The
Municipal Attorney must be admitted to the practice of law in the State of Ohio
and shall be a resident of the Municipality unless residence outside the
Municipality is approved by a majority vote of the members of the Council.
SECTION 8.03  POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE MUNICIPAL ATTORNEY.
   The Municipal Attorney shall be the legal adviser, attorney, and counsel for
the Municipality, and for all offices, departments, divisions, bureaus, boards,
commissions and bodies of the Municipality in connection with Municipal
affairs; and, subject to the direction of the Council, shall represent the
Municipality in all proceedings in court or before any administrative board or
body. He shall perform such other duties consistent with his office as may be
required by this Charter, by ordinance or resolution of the Council, or by the
laws of the State of Ohio.
   The Municipal Attorney shall be the prosecuting attorney on behalf of the
Municipality and shall prosecute cases brought before courts of competent
jurisdiction. He shall be responsible for the preparation of all contracts and
other writings in which the Municipality is concerned and shall endorse on each
his approval as to the form thereof. Upon the authorization of the Council, he
shall defend all actions against officials and employees of the Municipality in
either their official or individual capacities. When requested by a member of
Council, including the Mayor, the Manager, the Chairman of any board or
commission, or the head of any department or division, he shall give his
written opinion on the questions or request made, or his advice on any matter
contained in such request.
   The Council may provide for such assistants and special counsel to the
Municipal Attorney as shall be deemed advisable. All assistants shall be
responsible to the Municipal Attorney, and when authorized by him, may exercise
all or any part of the powers and duties granted to the Municipal Attorney
under this section. Special counsel may be selected by the Council or the
Municipal Attorney, as determined by the Council, and such special counsel may
perform those powers and functions as authorized by and in the manner provided
by the Council.
SECTION 8.04  DEPARTMENT OF FINANCE - DIRECTOR OF FINANCE.
   The Manager shall serve as the Director of Finance, unless the Council
shall, by a majority vote of its members, create the separate office of
Director of Finance. If such separate office is created by the Council, the
Director of Finance shall be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the
Manager, and he may hold any other administrative office or position of
employment with the Municipality, except he shall not act as Municipal
Attorney. If a separate office of Director of Finance is created by the
Council, such separate office may be abolished by a majority vote of the
members of the Council, in which event the Manager shall become the Director of
Finance until such time as the Council shall again create such a separate
office in the manner hereinbefore provided.
   The Finance Director shall be the head of the Department of Finance. He
shall be qualified by training or experience to discharge the duties as the
head of the Department of Finance in a capable manner.
   The Manager may designate an officer or employee of the Municipality who,
during the absence or disability of, or during a vacancy in, the office of the
Director of Finance, shall exercise the powers and discharge the duties and
functions of the Director of Finance under the title of Acting Finance
Director. Such designation may be revoked by the Manager at any time.
SECTION 8.05  POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE DIRECTOR OF FINANCE.
   The Director of Finance shall be the fiscal officer of the Municipality. He
shall keep the financial records of the Municipality, exhibiting accurate
statements of all monies received and expended, of all property owned by the
Municipality, and of all taxes and assessments. He shall advise the Manager and
the Council concerning the financial condition of the Municipality and shall
examine all payrolls, bills and other claims against the Municipality and shall
issue no warrants unless he finds that the claim is in proper form, correctly
computed, duly approved and that an appropriation has been made therefor. He
shall collect all money due and payable to the Municipality and shall be the
custodian of all public money of the Municipality and shall disburse the same
as may be required by law or ordinance. He shall render statements to and
receive payments from the customers of the utilities operated by the
Municipality, and shall administer and collect all taxes levied by the
Municipality, except those taxes where the laws of the State of Ohio require a
County or State official to administer and collect the tax. This section shall
not be construed to prevent the Council from entering into or authorizing
contracts with other municipal corporations, the State of Ohio or its political
subdivisions, or private persons, firms or corporations, for the rendering of
statements to and receipt of payments from customers of utilities operated by
the Municipality or for the administration and collection of taxes. He shall
examine and audit the accounts of all other officers, employees, departments,
boards and commissions, and shall assist the Manager in the preparation and
submission of appropriation measures, estimates, budgets and other financial
matters. He shall perform all other duties now or hereafter imposed on City
Auditors and Treasurers under the laws of the State of Ohio and shall perform
such other duties, consistent with his office, as may be required by this
Charter, by ordinance or resolution of Council, or as directed by the Manager.
   The Director of Finance shall prepare annual financial and other reports
required by law and shall make periodic reports concerning appropriations,
encumbrances and expenditures of the departments, divisions, boards, and
commissions as may be required by the Council or the Manager. He shall submit
to the Council and the Manager, and make available to the public, a complete
report on the finances of the Municipality as of the end of each fiscal year.
SECTION 8.06  DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SERVICE.
   The Manager shall serve as the head of the department to Public Service,
unless the Council shall, by a majority vote of its members, create the
position of Service Director. If such position is created, the Service Director
shall be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the Manager. The Service
Director may hold any other administrative office or position of employment
with the Municipality, except he shall not act as the Municipal Attorney. If a
separate position of Service Director is created by the Council, such separate
position may be abolished by a majority vote of the members of the Council, in
which event the Manager shall become the Service Director until such a separate
position in the manner hereinbefore provided. The Service Director, or the
Manager, if the separate position of Service Director has not been provided by
all divisions, offices, bureaus or agencies within the Department of Public
Service.
   The following divisions are established under the Department of Public
Service:
   a.   Division of Water, to be headed by a superintendent.
   b.   Division of Wastewater, to be headed by a superintendent.
   c.   Division of Streets, to be headed by a superintendent.
   d.   Division of Cemeteries and Parks, to be headed by a superintendent.
   e.   Division of Light and Power, to be headed by a superintendent.
   f.   Such other divisions or bureaus as may be authorized by the Council by
ordinance. One (1) person may serve as the head of any number of divisions.
(Amended Nov. 6, 2001)
SECTION 8.07  DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SAFETY.
   The Director of Public Safety shall be the head of the Department of Public
Safety.
   The Manager, in addition to his other duties, shall be, and shall perform
the duties of, the Director of Public Safety, until such time as Council may
determine that it is in the best interest of the Municipality to appoint some
other person to that office. Upon making such determination, the Council shall
declare the office of Director of Public Safety vacant, and the Director of
Public Safety shall then be appointed by the Manager with confirmation by
Council.
SECTION 8.08  DUTIES OF DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC SAFETY IN GENERAL.
   The Director of Public Safety shall be the head of the Police and Fire
Departments and shall be responsible for the enforcement of all police, fire,
health and safety regulations that may be prescribed by resolutions and
ordinances of the Municipality, or laws of Ohio.
SECTION 8.09  POLICE DEPARTMENT.
   The Police Department shall consist of a Chief of Police and such other
officers, patrolmen, and personnel as the Director of Public Safety shall deem
advisable. The Chief of Police and all officers, patrolmen, and personnel shall
be appointed by the Director of Public Safety, subject to approval of the
Manager and Council, and when applicable the civil service provisions of this
Charter. As otherwise more fully set out in the Charter, at the time the civil
service provisions of this Charter go into effect, all members of the Police
Department who have served their six (6) months probationary period and an
additional period of not less than ninety (90) days, shall be automatically
placed under the applicable civil service provisions in the appropriate
category and classification, without being required to take an examination for
the position held at that time. Until such time as the civil service provisions
of this Charter are put into effect, all members of the Police Department shall
have tenure in accordance with the applicable statutes of the Revised Code of
Ohio, now or hereinafter in effect concerning tenure of police officers in a
village, and the removal of any police officer during this period shall be
accomplished in accordance with the applicable statutes of the Revised Code of
Ohio concerned with the removal of police officers in a village, provided that
the Village Manager, rather than the Mayor, shall bear the responsibility of
filing with the Council the written charges against such police officer.
(Amended Nov. 2, 1976)
SECTION 8.10  FIRE DEPARTMENT.
   At the present time, the Municipality is protected by the Volunteer Fire
Department of Columbiana. The Fire Chief and other officers are elected by the
members of the Fire Department. This arrangement shall continue under the
Charter unless changed, abrogated or cancelled by the Constitution or laws of
the State of Ohio, or by ordinance passed by Council of this Municipality. If
any of the above conditions should come to pass, then there shall be set up
automatically a Municipal Fire Department as follows: The Fire Department shall
consist of a Fire Chief and such other officers, firemen and personnel as the
Director of Public Safety shall deem advisable, and the Fire Chief and all
other officers, firemen, and personnel shall be appointed by the Director of
Public Safety, subject to the approval of the Manager and Council, and when
applicable the civil service provisions of this Charter. Until the civil
service provisions of this Charter are put into effect, if a Fire Department
shall be set up, as above noted, the members thereof shall have tenure, all as
set out in the statutes of the Revised Code of Ohio providing for tenure for
members of a village fire department. A member of the Fire Department may,
during this period, be removed pursuant to the procedures set up in the Revised
Code of Ohio for the removal of members of village fire departments, provided
that the Village Manager shall bear the responsibility for filing the written
charges against such member whereby said removal procedures are initiated.
Whenever the applicable civil service provisions of this Charter become
operative, all members of the Fire Department who have served their six (6)
months probationary period and an additional period of not less than ninety
(90) days, shall be automatically placed under the applicable civil service
provisions in the appropriate category and classification, without being
required to take an examination for the position held at that time.
(Amended Nov. 2, 1976)
SECTION 8.11  RULES OF GOVERNMENT OF POLICE AND FIRE DEPARTMENTS.
   The Manager shall make and publish, with the approval of Council, written
rules for the government of the Police and Fire Departments, and the conduct
and discipline of members thereof.
ARTICLE IX
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
SECTION 9.01  PLANNING COMMISSION - MEMBERSHIP.
   There is hereby created and established a Planning Commission, which shall
consist of five (5) members as hereinafter provided. The Mayor shall serve as a
member of the Planning Commission; one (1) other member of the Council, to be
elected by a majority vote of the members of Council for the remainder of his
term as a member of the Council, shall be a member of the Planning Commission;
and the Commission shall include three (3) citizens of the Municipality to be
appointed by a majority vote of the members of the Council for terms of six (6)
years each, except that the term of one (1) of the citizen members of the first
commission appointed under this Charter shall be for six (6) years, one (1) for
four (4) years and one (1) for two (2) years, and thereafter each citizen
member shall be appointed for a term of six (6) years, and shall continue in
office until his successor is appointed.
SECTION 9.02  PLANNING COMMISSION - POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Planning Commission shall conduct studies, surveys and prepare plans,
reports and maps relative to the overall planning of the growth, development,
redevelopment, rehabilitation, and renewal of the Municipality, and may make
such recommendations relative thereto to the Council as it feels are in the
best interest of the Municipality. The Planning Commission shall continuously
review and report to the Council its recommendations concerning the
Municipality’s capital improvement programs, subdivision, platting and zoning
ordinances and regulations. The Planning Commission shall cooperate with other
governmental or private planning agencies to secure the maximum benefit to the
Municipality of the work, studies, surveys and reports of such other planning
agencies. Other powers and duties of the Planning Commission shall include
those established by this Charter and by the Council by ordinance, but until
such ordinances shall be passed, it shall possess such other powers and duties
as are provided by the general laws of Ohio, to the extent that such general
laws do not conflict with the provisions of this Charter.
SECTION 9.03  CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION - MEMBERSHIP.
   When city status is attained, if permitted by the laws of Ohio, Council may
determine by ordinance whether or not to establish City civil service or any
alternative personnel plan for employee appointments and promotions which may
then be lawfully established by a charter municipality. If City civil service
is established, there is hereby created and established a Civil Service
Commission, which shall consist of three (3) members appointed by a majority
vote of the Council for terms of six (6) years, provided that the members of
the Commission first appointed under this Charter shall be as follows: one (1)
member shall be appointed for a term of two (2) years, one (1) member shall be
appointed for a term of four (4) years, and one (1) member shall be appointed
for a term of six (6) years. Thereafter, each member shall be appointed for a
six (6)-year term and shall continue in office until his successor is
appointed. Not more than two (2) members shall be of the same political party.
(Amended Nov. 5, 1996)
SECTION 9.04  CIVIL SERVICE - CLASSIFIED AND UNCLASSIFIED SERVICE.
   All compensated positions in the service of the Municipality shall be in the
classified service and shall be appointed pursuant to competitive examinations,
except the following, which shall comprise the unclassified service of the
Municipality:
   1.   Member of Council, including the Mayor.
   2.   The Clerk of Council and other employees of the Council.
   3.   The Manager.
   4.   The Director of Finance.
   5.   The Municipal Attorney and his assistants and special legal counsel.
   6.   The Safety and Service Directors and any Assistant Safety and Service
Directors.
   7.   All heads of other Departments and heads of Divisions within
Departments, including the Divisions of Police and Fire.
   8.   Professional engineers employed by the Municipality.
   9.   Members of boards and commissions established by this Charter or by
ordinance of Council.
   10.   Volunteer members of the Division of Fire, members of the auxiliary
police unit within the Division of Police, and part-time employees of the
Divisions of Police and Fire.
   11.   The secretary of each board and commission established by this Charter
or by ordinance, provided that if such secretary holds other employment within
the classified service of this Municipality, this section shall not exempt such
person from the requirement of competitive examination to hold such employment.
   12.   Persons of exceptional professional or scientific qualifications
engaged as consultants.
   13.   Unskilled laborers as defined and authorized by the Civil Service
Commission.
   14.   Temporary employees who are not employed for more than ninety (90)
continuous days or for more than ninety (90) days in one (1) year.
   15.   One (1) personal secretary to the Manager, one (1) personal secretary
to the Municipal Attorney, and one (1) deputy or clerk to the Director of
Finance, the Safety Director, and the Service Director, provided, however, that
it shall be necessary for such positions to have been created by the Council.
   The Civil Service Commission shall appoint and remove, subject to the civil
service provisions of this Charter, all employees of the Commission.
SECTION 9.05  CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION - POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The provisions of the laws of the State of Ohio regarding selection,
promotion, demotion, discipline, and removal of employees within the classified
service of the Municipality as provided by Section
9.04 of this Charter, shall be applicable under this Charter unless such
provisions conflict with the provisions of this Charter, and provided that the
Civil Service Commission shall have the power to adopt rules and regulations
concerning the selection, promotion, demotion, discipline, and removal of
employees within the classified service of the Municipality, which rules and
regulations may modify, supplement, or supersede the laws of the State of Ohio,
and in the case of conflict shall prevail over the laws of the State of Ohio.
   The Civil Service Commission shall appoint and remove, subject to the Civil
Service provisions of this Charter, all employees of the Commission.
   An employee holding a municipal position at the time this Charter takes
effect shall not be subject to any tests as a condition of continuance in the
same position, but in all other respects shall be subject to the personnel
system provided for by this Charter.
SECTION 9.06  PARK, RECREATION AND CEMETERY BOARD - MEMBERSHIP.
   There is hereby created and established a Park, Recreation and Cemetery
Board, which shall consist of six (6) members as hereinafter provided. Two (2)
members shall be members of the Board of  Education or members appointed by
such Board of Education; two (2) shall be appointed by the Manager; and two (2)
members shall be appointed by a majority vote of the Council. Members of the
Park, Recreation and Cemetery Board shall be appointed for a term of five (5)
years each, provided that the first persons appointed pursuant to this section
shall be appointed as follows: the two (2) members to be appointed by the
Manager shall be appointed for two (2)-year terms; the two (2) members to be
appointed by the Board of Education shall be appointed for three (3)-year
terms; and the two (2) members to be appointed by the Council shall be
appointed for four (4)-year terms. Thereafter, each member shall be appointed
for a five (5)-year term and shall continue in his office until his successor
is appointed. If the Board of Education shall fail to appoint the members as
hereinabove provided within sixty (60) days after the effective date of this
Section, or within sixty (60) days after any vacancy shall occur for which said
Board of Education is to make the appointment, or if it is finally determined
by any court that said Board of Education does not have the power under the
laws of the State of Ohio to make such appointment, then and in those events
the Council shall make the appointment of such members.
SECTION 9.07  PARK, RECREATION AND CEMETERY BOARD - POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Park, Recreation and Cemetery Board shall make such recommendations and
reports to the Manager, Council, Planning Commission and other officers,
departments, divisions and boards, and commissions as it deems advisable
regarding the acquisition, development, maintenance, repair, and operation of
parks, playgrounds, recreational and cemetery facilities and programs of the
Municipality. The Board may cooperate with organized groups concerned with
recreation programs and may stimulate citizen interest in the care and
preservation of parks and historical and scenic sites. The Board may act as
trustee for any property, asset, or funds donated to the Municipality for park,
recreational or cemetery purposes, provided the donor designates or provides
for the designation of the Board as such trustee. In such an event the Board
shall have all those powers and duties necessary to carry out the purposes of
the trust. The Board may recommend the amount of any fees or charges for the
use of park, recreational and cemetery facilities; however, the Council shall
fix all such fees or charges. Subject to the provisions of ordinances passed by
the Council, the Board shall exercise supervision and control over the planting
and care of trees, plants, and shrubs in the parks, parkways, recreation
grounds, streets, boulevards, sidewalks and cemeteries of the Municipality. The
Board shall exercise such additional powers and duties as provided by Council
by ordinance. In the exercise of its powers and duties, the Board shall request
of the Manager such manpower, work, supplies and equipment as it deems
necessary, and the Manager, subject to the provisions of this Charter
concerning purchasing and personnel, shall provide such manpower, work,
supplies and equipment as has been authorized by the Council through
appropriation to such Board, and to the extent that such manpower, supplies and
equipment shall be available for such purposes, considering the overall needs
of the Municipality.
SECTION 9.08  CHARTER REVIEW COMMISSION.
   During the month of January, 1976, or as soon thereafter as possible, and
each five (5) years thereafter, the Mayor shall appoint five (5) electors of
the Municipality as members of a Charter Review Commission. Such appointments
shall be subject to confirmation by a majority vote of the Council. If the
Council fails to vote upon the confirmation of any person appointed to such
commission within thirty (30) days after the name of any such person is filed
with the Clerk of Council by the Mayor, such person shall be deemed confirmed
by operation of law. No member of the Charter Review Commission may hold office
or employment with the Municipality, and all members of such Commission shall
serve without compensation; however, such Commission may hire such temporary
employees and retain special counsel and other consultants as it may deem
necessary. The Council shall appropriate all money necessary to pay the
expenses of the Commission, including the compensation of such employees,
counsel, and consultants. All meetings of the Commission shall be open to the
public. The Commission shall review the Charter of the Municipality and shall
recommend, within six (6) months after the confirmation of the last of the
members thereof to be confirmed, such alterations, revisions and amendments, if
any, to the Charter, as in its judgment are desirable. Such recommendations
shall be directed to the Council. After consideration of the recommendations of
the Charter Review Commission, the Council may submit all, any, or none of such
proposed alterations, revisions or amendments to the electors of the
Municipality in the manner provided by Article XVIII, Section 9, of the
Constitution of Ohio. The terms of the members of the Commission shall
terminate at the end of such six (6)-month period in which the Commission is
required to report its recommendations to the Council.
SECTION 9.09  BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS - ORGANIZATION.
   At the first meeting in each year of the Planning Commission, Civil Service
Commission, Park, Recreation and Cemetery Board, Charter Review Commission, and
any other board or commission created by ordinances, the members of such boards
and commissions shall each elect a chairman and a secretary by a majority vote
of the members appointed to such board or commission. The chairman and
secretary of each board or commission hereinabove referred to shall serve in
such capacity at the pleasure of such board or commission. The chairman of each
such board or commission shall be a member of such board or commission, but in
no event shall the chairman of any such board or commission, in his dual
capacity as a member and presiding officer, cast more than one (1) vote on any
action. The secretary of each such board or commission may be elected from
within or without the membership of such board or commission, and may hold
other office or employment with the Municipality. The secretary of each such
board or commission shall keep an accurate record of the proceedings of such
board or commission. Members of the boards and commissions hereinabove referred
to, except those members appointed by the Board of Education, shall be electors
of the Municipality at the time of their appointment and during their
respective terms of office and shall not hold other office or employment with
the Municipality except as authorized by this Charter.
   A majority of the members of each of the boards and commissions hereinabove
referred to shall constitute a quorum for meetings of such board or commission;
and a majority vote of the members appointed to each such board or commission
shall be necessary to take any action and for the passage of motions by such
board or commission. Rules providing for the number and manner of calling
regular and special meetings, and providing for the conduct and government of
meetings of each such board or commission, shall be adopted by a majority vote
of the members of each such board or commission, and such rules shall comply
with the applicable statutes of the Revised Code of Ohio concerned with open
public meetings and the ordinances and resolutions of the Council which are not
in conflict therewith.
(Amended Nov. 2, 1976)
SECTION 9.10  VACANCY IN BOARD OR COMMISSION.
   Unless otherwise provided by this Charter, a vacancy during the term of any
member of a board or commission created by this Charter or by ordinance of the
Council shall be filled for the unexpired term in the manner authorized for an
original appointment.
SECTION 9.11  REMOVAL OF MEMBERS OF BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS.
   The Council may remove members of any board or commission established by
this Charter or by ordinance, for gross misconduct, malfeasance, misfeasance,
or nonfeasance in office, final conviction of a felony involving moral
turpitude, judicial declaration of incompetency, persistent and willful failure
to abide by the rules adopted by the board or commission of which he is a
member, or willful violation of this Charter, provided that such removal shall
not take place without the affirmative vote of four (4) members of Council, nor
until the accused official shall have been notified in writing of the charge
against him and given an opportunity to be heard in person or by legal counsel.
The Council and the accused official shall have the power to subpoena witnesses
and the production of evidence. The President of Council and the Mayor shall
have the power to issue subpoenas for witnesses and the production of evidence
on behalf of the Council or the accused official, and each shall have the power
to administer oaths.
   Upon the required vote to remove a member of a board or commission as
provided by this section of this Charter, such member shall forfeit his office
and such office shall become vacant and shall be filled in the manner provided
by this Charter. Any person removed from office under this section of this
Charter shall not be eligible to become a candidate for, or hold, any elective
office, or to serve as a member of a board or commission of the Municipality
for a period of five (5) years after his removal.
ARTICLE X
NOMINATIONS, ELECTIONS AND RECALL
SECTION 10.01  NOMINATIONS.
   Candidates for Mayor shall be nominated at a partisan primary election held
on the first Tuesday after the first Monday in June in the odd numbered years
in which the Mayor is to be elected, or at such other time as may hereinafter
be provided by the Ohio election laws pertaining to the conduct of municipal
primaries, commencing in the year 1973 and each four (4) years thereafter.
Candidates for Member of Council shall be nominated at a partisan primary
election held on the first Tuesday after the first Monday in June, or at such
other time as may hereinafter be provided by the Ohio election laws pertaining
to the conduct of municipal primaries, as follows: In the year 1972, each
political party may nominate not more than six (6) candidates for Member of
Council. The three (3) candidates of each party receiving the largest number of
votes shall be deemed nominated for three (3)-year terms of office, and the
three (3) candidates of each party receiving the next largest number of votes
shall be deemed nominated for one (1)-year terms of office. Commencing in the
year 1973, and each two (2) years thereafter, each political party may nominate
not more than three (3) candidates for Member of Council. Each person desiring
to become a candidate for a party nomination to such offices to be voted for at
a primary election, shall, not later than 4:00 p. m. of the ninetieth (90th)
day before the day of such primary election, or at such other time as may
hereinafter be provided by the Ohio election laws pertaining to the conduct of
municipal primaries, file with the appropriate Board of Elections a declaration
of candidacy and nominating petitions, which shall contain signatures of
electors of the same political party as the candidate as required by the
election laws of the State of Ohio. Each person desiring to become a candidate
for Mayor or Member of Council as an independent shall file a statement of
candidacy and nominating petitions with the appropriate Board of Elections
containing signatures of electors as required by the election laws of the State
of Ohio, not later than 4:00 p.m. of the ninetieth (90th) day before the day of
such primary election, or at such other time as may hereinafter be provided by
the Ohio election laws pertaining to the conduct of municipal primaries. The
procedure established by the Ohio election laws for filing and voting shall be
followed, except as modified by this Charter.
(Amended Nov. 2, 1976)
SECTION 10.02  MUNICIPAL ELECTIONS.
   The Municipal election for Mayor shall be held on the first Tuesday after
the first Monday in November in the odd numbered years in which the Mayor is to
be elected, or at such other time as may hereafter be provided by the Ohio
election laws pertaining to the conduct of municipal elections, commencing in
the year 1973 and each four (4) years thereafter.
   The Municipal election for Members of Council shall be held on the first
Tuesday after the first Monday in November, or at such other time as may
hereafter be provided by the Ohio election laws pertaining to the conduct of
municipal elections, as follows: At the general election to be held in
November, 1972, three (3) Members of Council shall be elected to one (1)-year
terms of office, and three (3) Members of Council shall be elected to three
(3)-year terms of office. At the Municipal election to be held in November,
1973, and each two (2) years thereafter, three (3) Members of Council shall be
elected to four (4)-year terms of office.
   The procedure established by the Ohio election laws for the conduct of
municipal elections shall be followed, except as modified by this Charter.
(Amended Nov. 2, 1976)
SECTION 10.03  SPECIAL ELECTIONS.
   The Council may, at any time, by ordinance or resolution, order a special
election, the purpose of which shall be set forth in the ordinance or
resolution.
SECTION 10.04  CONDUCT OF ELECTIONS.
   All regular, primary and special Municipal elections shall be conducted by
the Board of Elections of the county in which the Municipality is located under
the provisions of this Charter, so far as they are applicable. Where the
Charter is silent, the provisions of the Ohio election laws shall be followed.
SECTION 10.05  RECALL ELECTIONS.
   The electors shall have the power to remove from office by a recall election
any elected officer of the Municipality who has served at least six (6) months
of the term to which he was elected or appointed, by filing a petition
demanding his removal with the Clerk of Council, who shall note thereon the
name and address of the person filing the petition and the date the petition is
filed. The Clerk of Council shall issue a receipt to the person filing the
petition and shall attach a copy of such receipt to the petition. The petition
may be circulated in separate parts, but such separate parts shall be bound
together and filed as one (1) instrument. Each part shall contain the name of
and office held by the person whose removal is sought and a statement, in not
more than two hundred (200) words, of the alleged grounds or reasons for the
removal. Such petition shall be signed by at least that number of electors
which equals twenty-five (25) percent of the total votes cast for the office of
Mayor at the last preceding Municipal election at which a Mayor was elected.
   Within ten (10) days after the day such petition is filed, the Clerk of
Council shall determine whether or not the petition meets the requirements
hereof. If the Clerk of Council shall find the petition insufficient, he shall
promptly certify the particulars in which the petition is defective, and
deliver a copy of such certificate to the person who filed the petition and
make a record of such delivery. Such person shall be allowed a period of twenty
(20) days after the day of such delivery in which to make the petition
sufficient by amendment. If the Clerk of Council shall find the petition or the
amended petition sufficient, he shall promptly certify such finding to the
Council, shall deliver a copy of such certificate to the person whose removal
is sought, and shall make a record of such delivery.
   If such person sought to be removed shall not resign within five (5) days
after such delivery to him, the Council shall thereafter fix a day for holding
a recall election, not less than sixty (60) days or more than seventy-five (75)
days after the date of such delivery.
   Such recall election may be at a regular Municipal election, a Municipal
primary election, or a special election and such special election may be on the
same day fixed by law for a general election or primary election, or on any
other day as established by the Council. The Clerk of Council shall certify to
the appropriate Board of Elections that an election is to be held on the
question of the removal of the accused official on the date fixed by Council as
hereinbefore provided, and the Clerk of Council shall cause notice of such
election to be published on the same day of each week for two (2) consecutive
weeks in a newspaper determined by said Clerk to be of circulation in the
Municipality if such election is to be held on a day which is not the day of a
regular Municipal or primary election or of a general or primary election.
   At such election this question shall be placed on the ballot: “Shall (naming
the person whose removal is sought) be allowed to continue as (name the office
held by such person)?”, with provision being made on the ballot for voting
“yes” or “no” on such question. If a majority of the votes cast shall be voted
negatively, such officer shall be considered as removed, his office shall be
vacant, and such vacancy shall be filled in the manner provided in this
Charter. The person removed by such recall election shall not be eligible for
appointment to fill the vacancy created thereby; however, said removal shall
not bar such person from becoming a candidate for office of the Municipality at
any subsequent election. If the person named in such petition is not removed at
such recall election, then additional recall petitions shall not be filed
seeking his removal for a period of one (1) year following such election. The
removal of any officer under the provisions of this section shall not affect
the validity of any ordinance, resolution or any other action in which such
officer shall have participated.
ARTICLE XI
INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM
SECTION 11.01  GENERAL AUTHORITY- INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM.
   (a)   Initiative.  The qualified voters of the Municipality shall have the
power to propose ordinances and resolutions to the Council and, if Council
fails to adopt an ordinance or resolution so proposed without any change in
substance, to adopt or reject it at an election, provided that such power shall
not extend to the budget or capital program or any ordinance or resolution
relating to the appropriation of money or salaries of Municipal officers or
employees, or to the removal of any officer of the Municipality.
   (b)   Referendum.  The qualified electors of the Municipality shall have
power to require reconsideration by the Council of any adopted ordinance or
resolution and, if the Council fails to repeal an ordinance or resolution so
reconsidered, to approve or reject it at an election, provided that such power
shall not extend to the budget or capital program or ordinance or resolution
relating to the appropriation of money or the levy of taxes, or any other
ordinance or resolution which takes effect immediately under the provisions of
Section
6.08 of this Charter, or to the removal of any officer of the Municipality.
SECTION 11.02  COMMENCEMENT OF PROCEEDINGS; PETITIONERS’ COMMITTEE; AFFIDAVIT.
   Any five (5) electors may commence initiative or referendum proceedings by
filing with the Clerk of Council an affidavit stating they will constitute the
petitioners’ committee and be responsible for circulating the petition and
filing it in proper form, stating their names and addresses and specifying the
address to which all notices to the committee are to be sent, and setting out
in full the proposed initiative ordinance or resolution or citing the ordinance
or resolution sought to be reconsidered.
   Within five (5) days after the affidavit of the petitioners’ committee is
filed, the Clerk shall specify to the petitioners’ committee the appropriate
petition forms that are to be used.
SECTION 11.03  PETITIONS - INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM.
   (a)   Number of Signatures.  Initiative and referendum petitions must be
given by qualified electors of the Municipality equal in number to at least ten
(10) percent of the total number of qualified electors voting for the office of
Governor at the last general election at which a Governor was elected.
   (b)   Form and Content.  All papers of a petition shall be uniform in size
and style, and each petition shall be assembled as one (1) instrument for
filing. Each signature shall be executed in ink or indelible pencil, and shall
be followed by the address of the person signing, his ward and precinct, and
the date of signing. Petitions shall contain, or have attached thereto
throughout their circulation, the full text of the ordinance or resolution
proposed or sought to be reconsidered.
   (c)   Affidavit of Circulation.  Each petition shall have attached to it,
when filed, an affidavit executed by the circulator thereof stating that he
personally circulated the paper, the number of signatures thereon, that all the
signatures were affixed in his presence, that he believes them to be the
genuine signatures of the persons whose names they purport to be, and that each
signer had an opportunity before signing to read the full text of the ordinance
or resolution proposed or sought to be reconsidered.
   (d)   Time for Filing Referendum Petitions.  Referendum petitions shall be
filed with the Clerk of Council within thirty (30) days after the effective
date of the ordinance or resolution sought to be reconsidered.
SECTION 11.04  PROCEDURE AFTER FILING-INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM.
   (a)   Certificate of Clerk; Amendment.  Within twenty (20) days after the
petition is filed, the Clerk of Council shall complete a certificate as to its
sufficiency, specifying, if it is insufficient, the particulars wherein it is
defective and shall promptly send a copy of the certificate to the petitioners’
committee by registered mail. A petition certified insufficient for lack of the
required number of valid signatures may be amended once if the petitioners’
committee files a notice of intention to amend it with the Clerk of Council
within two (2) days after receiving the copy of his certificate and files a
supplementary petition upon additional papers within ten (10) days after
receiving the copy of such certificate. Such supplementary petition shall
comply with the requirements of subsections (b) and (c) of Section
11.03 above, and within five (5) days after it is filed with the Clerk of
Council, he shall complete a certificate as to the sufficiency of the petition
as amended and promptly send a copy of such certificate to the petitioners’
committee by registered mail as in the case of an original petition. If a
petition or amended petition is certified sufficient, or if a petition or
amended petition is certified insufficient and the petitioners’ committee does
not elect to amend or request Council review under subsection (b) of this
section within the time required, the Clerk of Council shall promptly present
his certificate to the Council, and the certificate shall then be a final
determination as to the sufficiency of the petition.
   (b)   Council Review.  If a petition has been certified insufficient and the
petitioners’ committee does not file notice of intention to amend it or if an
amended petition has been certified insufficient, the committee may, within two
(2) days after receiving the copy of such certificate, file a request with the
Clerk of Council that it be reviewed by the Council. The Council shall review
the certificate at its next meeting following the filing of such request and
approve or disapprove it, and the Council’s determination shall then be a final
determination as to the sufficiency of the petition.
SECTION 11.05  REFERENDUM PETITIONS; SUSPENSION OF EFFECT OF ORDINANCE OR
RESOLUTION.
   When a referendum petition is filed with the Clerk of Council, the ordinance
or resolution sought to be reconsidered shall be suspended from taking effect.
Such suspension shall terminate when:
   (1)   There is a final determination of insufficiency of the petition; or
   (2)   The petitioners’ committee withdraws the petition; or
   (3)   The Council repeals the ordinance; or
   (4)   Five (5) days have elapsed after the Board of Elections certifies the
official vote on the question.
SECTION 11.06  ACTION ON PETITIONS - INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM.
   (a)   Action by Council. When an initiative or referendum petition has been
finally determined sufficient, the Council shall consider the proposed
initiative ordinance or resolution in the manner provided in
Article VI of this Charter or may reconsider the referred ordinance or
resolution by voting its repeal. If the Council fails to adopt a proposed
initiative ordinance or resolution without any change in substance within sixty
(60) days, or fails to repeal the referred ordinance or resolution within
thirty (30) days after the date the petition was finally determined sufficient,
the Council shall submit the proposed or referred ordinance to the electors of
the Municipality.
   (b)   Submission to Electors.  The vote of the electors on a proposed or
referred ordinance or resolution shall be held not less than sixty (60) days
and not later than one (1) year from the date of the final Council vote
thereon. If no regular Municipal election is to be held within the period
prescribed in this subsection, the Council shall provide for a special
election; otherwise, the vote shall be held at the same time as such regular
Municipal election, except that the Council may in its discretion provide for a
special election at an earlier date within the prescribed period, which special
election may be held on the same day and at the same time as a State, general
or primary election, or a Municipal primary election.
   (c)   Withdrawal of Petitions.  An initiative or referendum petition may be
withdrawn at any time prior to the sixtieth (60th) day preceding the day
scheduled for the election by filing with the Clerk of Council a request for
withdrawal signed by at least four (4) members of the petitioners’ committee.
Upon the filing of such request, the petition shall have no further force or
effect, all proceedings thereon shall be terminated, and the Clerk of Council
shall certify such withdrawal of the petition and the termination of the
proceedings under such petition to the appropriate Board of Elections.
SECTION 11.07  RESULTS OF ELECTION - INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM.
   (a)   Initiative.  If a majority of the qualified electors voting on a
proposed initiative ordinance or resolution vote in its favor, it shall be
considered adopted upon certification of the election results and shall be
treated in all respects in the same manner as ordinances and resolutions of the
same kind adopted by the Council; however, no publication of such ordinance or
resolution shall be required. If conflicting ordinances or resolutions are
approved at the same election, the one receiving the greatest number of
affirmative votes shall prevail to the extent of such conflict.
   (b)   Referendum.  If a majority of the qualified electors voting on a
referred ordinance or resolution vote against it, it shall not take effect. If
a majority of the qualified electors voting on a referred ordinance or
resolution vote for it, it shall become effective five (5) days after the Board
of Elections certifies the official vote on the question, and no publication of
such ordinance or resolution shall be required.
SECTION 11.08  CONDUCT OF ELECTIONS - INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM.
   Elections on ordinances or resolutions referred to the electors under the
initiative and referendum procedures set forth in this Charter shall be
conducted by the appropriate Board of Elections under the provisions of this
Charter as far as they are applicable. Where the Charter is silent concerning
the conduct of the election, the provisions of the Ohio election laws shall be
followed.
SECTION 11.09  REFERRAL OF ORDINANCE OR RESOLUTION TO THE ELECTORS BY COUNCIL.
   By the affirmative vote of four (4) members of the Council any pending
ordinance or resolution may be referred to the electors of the Municipality at
a general, primary or special election. The action of referral provided for in
this section shall be taken by motion, and shall go into immediate effect
without publication. Such motion shall be passed not less than sixty (60) days
prior to the date of the primary or general election at which such referred
ordinance or resolution is to be submitted. In the event that such ordinance or
resolution is to be referred for approval or rejection at a special election,
the Council shall, by motion, fix a date for such special election at a date
not less than sixty (60) days after the date of the passage of the motion to
refer, and the Clerk of Council shall cause notice of the special election to
be published on the same day of each week for two (2) consecutive weeks in a
newspaper determined by Council to be of circulation in the Municipality.
   The Clerk of Council shall certify to the appropriate Board of Elections
that an election is to be held referring such ordinance or resolution to a vote
of the electors at the date fixed by Council as hereinbefore provided. The
Clerk of Council shall also certify a copy of the ordinance or resolution to be
voted upon to the appropriate Board of Elections.
   At such primary, general, or special election, this question shall be placed
upon the ballot: “Shall an (ordinance or resolution) providing: (the wording
contained in the title of the proposed ordinance or resolution shall be
inserted here) be adopted?”; with the provision of the ballot for voting
affirmatively or negatively. In the event a majority of those voting on the
issue shall be in the affirmative, the ordinance or resolution shall be adopted
without the need of further action by the Council and it shall go into
immediate effect, without the need for further publication.
ARTICLE XII
FINANCES, TAXATION AND DEBT
SECTION 12.01  GENERAL.
   The laws of the State of Ohio relating generally to budgets, appropriations,
debts, bonds, assessments and other fiscal matters of the Municipality shall be
applicable to the Municipality, except as modified by or necessarily
inconsistent with the provisions of this Charter or ordinances of Council
enacted pursuant thereto, and except when provision therefor is made in the
Constitution of the State of Ohio.
SECTION 12.02  LIMITATION ON TAX RATE.
   The power of Council to levy taxes shall be subject to the limitations now
or hereafter provided by the Constitution and the general laws of the State of
Ohio and nothing contained in this Charter shall be construed as authorizing
the levy of any taxes in excess of such limitations without a vote of the
people, provided, that this Charter shall not operate as a limitation upon the
power of Council to levy taxes upon such other subjects and for such other
purposes as may be lawful under the Constitution and laws of the State of Ohio,
nor shall the authority of Council to submit additional levies to a vote of the
people under the authority of the Constitution or laws of the State of Ohio be
deemed impaired or abridged by reason of any provision of this Charter.
SECTION 12.03  LIMITATION OF DEBT.
   The Municipality shall not incur debt in excess of the limitation imposed by
the Constitution and the laws of the State of Ohio.
SECTION 12.04  CONTRACTING POWER.
   The Manager shall be the contracting officer of the Municipality, and shall
award and execute contracts and agreements on behalf of the Municipality in the
manner and under the procedures required by this Charter, provided that:
   a.   When the expenditure of funds for the purchase of supplies, equipment
or materials, or to provide labor for any work to be performed under a contract
exceeds the amount specified by the laws of the State of Ohio for which such
purchases or work may be accomplished without advertisement and competitive
bidding, such expenditure shall first be authorized and directed by ordinance
passed by Council. The Manager shall award a written contract to the lowest and
best bidder after advertisement on the same day of the week for not less than
two (2) nor more than four (4) consecutive weeks in a newspaper determined by
the Council to be of general circulation within the Municipality.
   b.   Compensation of persons and employees; contracts with persons, firms or
corporations for services requiring specialized skill, knowledge, or training;
and expenditures required because of a real and present emergency arising in
connection with the construction, maintenance, operation or repair of Municipal
buildings, equipment and facilities, and provision for Municipal services, when
authorized by ordinance adopted by an affirmative vote of four (4) members of
the Council; need not be advertised and notices need not be published as
provided hereinabove.
   c.   Modifications and changes to contracts awarded under competitive
bidding, and in excess of the amount specified by the laws of the State of Ohio
for which competitive bidding is required shall first be authorized by
ordinance, however, competitive bidding shall not be required.
   d.   The Manager may designate an administrative officer or employee of the
Municipality to act as purchasing agent to award and execute contracts, orders,
or agreements on behalf of the Municipality, when such contracts, orders or
agreements do not authorize an expenditure of money in excess of the amount
specified by the laws of the State of Ohio for which competitive bidding is
required.
   e.   The Manager, or any other person designated by him as purchasing agent,
shall not willfully cause or allow any contract or order to be split or divided
into separate orders or contracts in order to avoid the requirements of
competitive bidding as provided by this Charter.
ARTICLE XIII
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION 13.01  SUCCESSION.
   The Village of Columbiana, under this Charter, is hereby declared to be the
legal successor of the Village of Columbiana, under the laws of the State of
Ohio, and as such it has title to all property, real and personal, owned by its
predecessor, including all monies on deposit and all taxes in process of
collection, together with all accounts receivable and rights of action. The
Municipality is liable for all outstanding orders, contracts, and debts of its
predecessor, and for any other obligations for which it may be held liable, as
such successor, by any court of competent jurisdiction. All contracts entered
into by the Municipality or for its benefit prior to January 1, 1973, shall
continue in full force and effect.
SECTION 13.02  EFFECT OF CHARTER ON EXISTING LAWS AND RIGHTS.
   The adoption of this Charter shall not affect any pre-existing rights of the
Municipality, nor any right or liability or pending suit or prosecution, either
on behalf of or against the Municipality or any officer thereof, nor any
franchise granted by the Municipality, or pending proceedings for the
authorization of public improvements or the levy of assessments therefor.
Except as a contrary intent appears herein, all acts of the Council of the
Municipality, including ordinances and resolutions in effect at the date this
Charter becomes effective, shall continue in effect until lawfully amended or
repealed.
   No action or proceeding pending against the Municipality or an officer
thereof shall be abated or affected by the adoption of this Charter, but all
such actions or proceedings shall be prosecuted or defended under the laws in
effect at the time of the filing thereof.
SECTION 13.03  AMENDMENTS TO CHARTER.
   This Charter may be amended as provided by Article XVIII, Section 9, of the
Constitution of Ohio.
SECTION 13.04  CONFLICT OF INTEREST.
   No officer or employee of the Municipality shall have any substantial
financial interest, direct or indirect, in any contract with or sale to the
Municipality of any material, supplies, or services, or any lands, or interest
in lands. Any such person violating the provisions hereof shall forfeit his
position and any such sale or contract shall be voidable at the option of the
Council.
   This provision shall not apply where a Court shall order the purchase or
sale of property, whether real or personal, owned by or in which such an
officer or employee has an interest therein, to the Municipality. No ordinance,
resolution or other action taken by Council, nor any action taken by any other
officer or employee of the Municipality, shall be invalidated or made
ineffective because any officer or employee has such a financial interest in
any such contract or sale, except that such sale or contract may be voided at
the option of Council as hereinabove provided.
SECTION 13.05  EFFECT OF PARTIAL INVALIDITY.
   A determination that any article, section, or part of any article or
section, of this Charter is invalid shall not invalidate or impair the force or
effect of any other part thereof, except to the extent that such other part is
wholly dependent for its operation upon the part declared invalid.
SECTION 13.06  CONSTRUCTION OF CHARTER.
   The article and section headings herein have been inserted for convenience
for purposes of reference and are not intended to define or limit the scope of,
or otherwise affect, any provision of this Charter.
   In order that a ready means may be at hand for reconciling any conflicts,
resolving any inconsistencies, and clarifying any obscurities which may be
discovered in the language of this Charter, the power is hereby vested in the
Council to interpret the various sections and parts of this Charter, in harmony
with the spirit thereof, by ordinance, resolution, or other measures of said
Council, adopted by the affirmative vote of four (4) or more of its members.
   Masculine pronouns used in this Charter shall be construed to include the
feminine pronoun, and the singular number shall be construed to include the
plural number whenever the context shall require.
SECTION 13.07  FISCAL YEAR.
   The fiscal year of the Municipality shall be that as fixed by the general
law for municipalities within the State of Ohio. If such general law shall fail
to provide for such a fiscal year, then it shall begin with the first day of
January and shall end with the next succeeding thirty-first day of December.
SECTION 13.08  PUBLIC HEALTH.
   Until the Municipality shall become a city as provided under the general
law, the Municipality shall remain a part of such health district as shall be
established by general law for villages.
   When the Municipality shall be a city, the Board of Health of the city
health district shall be established as provided by general law, except that
the members of such city health district shall be appointed by a majority vote
of the Council, and a member of Council may be appointed as a member of such
Board. Such Board shall have the same powers and duties as provided by general
law.
   Nothing in this Charter, or in the laws of Ohio, shall be construed to
impair or to derogate from the power of the Council to make, by ordinance, any
local sanitary and similar regulations, not in conflict with general laws. The
Council may, by ordinance, confide the enforcement of such regulations to any
board of health established pursuant to this Charter or the general law, and
having jurisdiction within the Municipality, or may provide for their
enforcement by or under the direction of the Manager.
ARTICLE XIV
TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS
SECTION 14.01  EFFECTIVE DATE OF CHARTER.
   This Charter shall be submitted to the electors of the Municipality at the
general election to be held November 2, 1971, and if approved by the electors
shall, for the purpose of nominating and electing officers of the Municipality
and conducting Municipal elections, take effect from the time of its approval
by the electors of the Municipality; and for all other purposes it shall take
effect on the first day of January in the year nineteen hundred seventy-three
(January 1, 1973).
SECTION 14.02  CONTINUANCE OF PRESENT OFFICIALS - ABOLISHMENT OF OFFICES.
   As of January 1, 1973, the following offices established under the general
law of Ohio applicable to statutory villages shall be abolished: Mayor, members
of Council, Treasurer, and the Clerk of and the members of the Board of
Trustees of Public Affairs. Any unexpired term of any person holding any of
such offices shall expire, terminate and end.
   The office of Village Clerk, established under the general laws of Ohio
applicable to statutory villages, shall continue until such time as a person is
appointed as Manager, or the Council shall designate an Acting Manager under
this Charter, and during such time of continuance after January 1, 1973, said
Village Clerk shall perform those duties as required by and under this Charter
of the Director of Finance. When the Council shall appoint a Manager, or
designate an Acting Manager, the office of Village Clerk, established under the
general laws, shall be abolished and the unexpired term of said Village Clerk
shall expire, terminate, and end.
   Except as otherwise provided by this Charter, all other persons holding
office at the time this Charter takes effect shall continue in office and in
the performance of their duties until provisions shall have been otherwise made
in accordance with this Charter for the performance of, or discontinuance of,
the duties of any such office. When such provision shall have been made, the
term of any officer shall expire and the office shall be abolished. The powers
which are conferred, and the duties which are imposed upon any officer, body,
commission, board, department, or division of the Municipality under the laws
of the State, or under any Municipal ordinance or contract in force at the time
of the taking effect of this Charter shall, if such office, body, commission,
board, department, or division is abolished by this Charter, be thereafter
exercised and discharged by the officer, body, commission, board, department,
or division upon whom are imposed corresponding functions, powers, and duties
by this Charter or by any ordinance or resolution of the Council thereafter
enacted.
SECTION 14.03  CONTINUANCE OF PRESENT EMPLOYEES.
   Every employee of the Municipal government on January 1, 1973, shall
continue in such employment and thereafter be subject in all respects to the
provisions of this Charter and ordinances, resolutions, rules, or regulations
enacted or promulgated thereunder.
PART TWO:  ADMINISTRATION CODE
      TITLE TWO - General Provisions
         Chap.
202.   Codified Ordinances.
         Chap.
204.   Official Standards.
         Chap.
206.   Purchases and Sales.
         Chap.
208.   Public Records.
         Chap.
210.   Municipal Policies and Plans.
      TITLE FOUR - Legislation
         Chap.
220.   Council.
         Chap.
222.   Mayor.
         Chap.
224.   Ordinances and Resolutions.
      TITLE SIX - Administration
         Chap.
250.   Manager.
         Chap.
252.   Department of Law.
         Chap.
254.   Department of Finance.
         Chap.
256.   Department of Public Safety.
         Chap.
258.  Department of Public Service.
         Chap.
260.   Engineer.
         Chap.
262.   Police Department.
         Chap.
264.   Fire Department.
         Chap.
266.   Building Department.
         Chap.
270.   Employees Generally.
      TITLE EIGHT - Boards and Commissions
         Chap.
280.   Planning Commission.
         Chap.
282.   Board of Zoning Appeals.
         Chap.
284.   Civil Service Commission.
         Chap.
286.   Park, Recreation and Cemetery Board.
         Chap.
288.   Charter Review Commission.
         Chap.
290.   Board of Review (Income Tax).
         Chap.
292.   Board of Health.
         Chap.
294.   Drinking Water Source Protection Committee.
      TITLE TEN - Judiciary
         Chap.
298.   Mayor's Court.
TITLE TWO:  GENERAL PROVISIONS
CHAPTER 202:  CODIFIED ORDINANCES
Section
202.01   Designation; citation; headings.
202.02   General definitions.
202.03   Rules of construction.
202.04   Revivor; effect of re-enactment, amendment or repeal.
202.05   Construction of section references.
202.06   Conflicts of laws.
202.07   Determination of legislative intent.
202.08   Severability.
202.99   General penalty.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   See section histories for similar state law
   Codification in book form - see Ohio R.C. 731.23
   Imprisonment until fine paid - see Ohio R.C. 1905.30, 2947.14
   Ordinances and resolutions - see ADM.
Ch. 224
   Limitations on criminal prosecutions - see GEN. OFF.
606.06
§ 202.01  DESIGNATION; CITATION; HEADINGS.
   This volume consists of all ordinances and resolutions of a general and
permanent nature of the municipality, as revised, codified, arranged, numbered
and consolidated into component codes, titles, chapters and sections, and as
such shall be  known and may be designated as the Codified Ordinances of
Columbiana, Ohio, for which designation “Codified Ordinances” may be
substituted. Code, title, chapter and section headings do not constitute any
part of the law as contained in these Codified Ordinances.
(ORC 1.01)
§ 202.02  GENERAL DEFINITIONS.
   As used in the Codified Ordinances, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   (a)   “And” may be read “or,” and “or” may be read “and,” if the sense
requires it.
   (b)   “Another,” when used to designate the owner of property which is the
subject of an offense, includes not only natural persons but also every other
owner of property.
   (c)   “Bond” includes an undertaking.
   (d)   “Child” includes child by adoption.
   (e)   “Council” means the legislative authority of the municipality.
   (f)   “County” means Columbiana County or Mahoning County, whichever is
applicable.
   (g)   “Fire Chief” shall include the Chief of the Fire Department if such
Fire Department has been established in the municipality, and shall include the
Fire Prevention Officer if no Fire Department has been established in the
municipality.
   (h)   “Imprisoned” shall have the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 1.05.
   (i)   “Internet” means the international computer network of both federal
and non-federal interoperable packet switched data networks, including the
graphical subnetwork known as the world wide web.
   (j)   “Keeper” or “proprietor” includes all persons, whether acting by
themselves or as a servant, agent, or employee.
   (k)   “Land” or “real estate” includes rights and easements of incorporeal
nature.
   (l)   “Legislative authority” means the legislative authority of the
municipality.
   (m)   “May” is permissive.
   (n)   “Municipality” or “City” means the Municipality of Columbiana, Ohio.
   (o)   “OAC” refers to the Ohio Administrative Code.
   (p)   “Oath” includes affirmation; and “swear” includes affirm.
   (q)   “Ohio R.C.,” “ORC” or “Revised Code” refers to the Ohio Revised Code.
   (r)   “Owner,” when applied to property, includes any part owner, joint
owner, or tenant in common of the whole or part of such property.
   (s)   “Person” includes an individual, corporation, business trust, estate,
trust, partnership, and association.
   (t)   “Personal property” includes all property except real property.
   (u)   “Plan of sewerage,” “system of sewerage,” “sewer,” and “sewers”
includes sewers, sewage disposal works and treatment plants, and sewage pumping
stations, together with facilities and appurtenances necessary and proper
therefor.
   (v)   “Premises,” as applied to property, includes land and buildings.
   (w)   “Property” includes real, personal, mixed estates, and interests.
   (x)   “Public authority” includes boards of education; the municipal,
county, state, or federal government, its officers, or an agency thereof; or
any duly authorized public official.
   (y)   “Public place” includes any street, sidewalk, park, cemetery, school
yard, body of water or watercourse, public conveyance, or any other place for
the sale of merchandise, public accommodation, or amusement.
   (z)   “Real property” includes lands, tenements, and hereditaments.
   (aa)   “Registered mail” includes certified mail; and “certified mail”
includes registered mail.
   (bb)   “Shall” is mandatory.
   (cc)   “Sidewalk” means that portion of the street between the curb line and
the adjacent property line intended for the use of pedestrians.
   (dd)   “State” means the State of Ohio.
   (ee)   “Street” includes alleys, avenues, boulevards, lanes, roads,
highways, viaducts, and all other public thoroughfares within the municipality.
   (ff)   “Tenant” or “occupant,” as applied to premises, includes any person
holding a written or oral lease, or who actually occupies the whole or any part
of such premises, alone or with others.
   (gg)   “Undertaking” includes a bond.
   (hh)   “Week” means seven consecutive days.
   (ii)   “Whoever” includes all persons, natural and artificial; partners;
principals, agents, and employees; and all officials, public or private.
   (jj)   “Writing” includes printing.
   (kk)   “Written” or “in writing” include any representation of words,
letters, symbols, or figures; this provision does not affect any law relating
to signatures.
   (ll)   “Year” means 12 consecutive months.
(ORC 1.02, 1.05, 1.44, 1.59, 701.01)
§ 202.03  RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.
   (a)   Common and technical use.  Words and phrases in these Codified
Ordinances shall be read in context and construed according to the rules of
grammar and common usage. Words and phrases that have acquired a technical or
particular meaning, whether by legislative definition or otherwise, shall be
construed accordingly.
(ORC 1.42)
   (b)   Singular and plural; gender; tense.
      (1)   The singular includes the plural, and the plural includes the
singular.
      (2)   Words of one gender include the other genders.
      (3)   Words in the present tense include the future.
(ORC 1.43)
   (c)   Computation of time.
      (1)   The time within which an act is required by law to be done shall be
computed by excluding the first and including the last day, except that when
the last day falls on Sunday or a legal holiday, then the act may be done on
that next succeeding day which is not Sunday or a legal holiday.
      (2)   When a public office, in which an act required by law is to be
performed, is closed to the public for the entire day which constitutes the
last day for doing such act or before its usual closing time on such day, then
such act may be performed on the next succeeding day which is not a Sunday or a
legal holiday as defined in Ohio R.C. 1.14.
(ORC 1.14)
      (3)   If a number of months is to be computed by counting the months from
a particular day, the period ends on the same numerical day in the concluding
month as the day of the month from which the computation is begun, unless there
are not that many days in the concluding month, in which case the period ends
on the last day of that month.
(ORC 1.45)
      (4)   When an act is to take effect or become operative from and after a
day named, no part of that day shall be included. If priority of legal rights
depends upon the order of events on the same day, such priority shall be
determined by the times in the day at which they respectively occurred.
(ORC 1.15)
   (d)   Authority.  When the law requires an act to be done which may by law
as well be done by an agent as by the principal, such requirement shall be
construed to include all such acts when done by an authorized agent.
   (e)   Joint authority.  All words purporting to give joint authority to
three or more municipal officers or other persons shall be construed as giving
such authority to a majority of such officers or other persons, unless it shall
be otherwise expressly declared in the law giving the authority or inconsistent
with state statute or Charter provisions.
   (f)   Exceptions.  The rules of construction shall not apply to any law
which shall contain any express provision excluding such construction, or when
the subject matter or context of such law may be repugnant thereto.
§ 202.04  REVIVOR; EFFECT OF RE-ENACTMENT, AMENDMENT OR REPEAL.
   (a)   A provision of these Codified Ordinances which is re-enacted or
amended is intended to be a continuation of the prior provision of these
Codified Ordinances and not a new enactment, so far as it is the same as the
prior provision.
(ORC 1.54)
   (b)   The repeal of a repealing provision of these Codified Ordinances does
not revive the provision originally repealed nor impair the effect of any
saving clause therein.
(ORC 1.57)
   (c)   The re-enactment, amendment or repeal of a provision of these Codified
Ordinances does not, except as provided in division (d) hereof:
      (1)   Affect the prior operation of the provision or any prior action
taken thereunder;
      (2)   Affect any validation, cure, right, privilege, obligation or
liability previously acquired, accrued, accorded or incurred thereunder;
      (3)   Affect any violation thereof or penalty, forfeiture or punishment
incurred with respect thereto, prior to the amendment or repeal;
      (4)   Affect any investigation, proceeding or remedy with respect to any
such privilege, obligation, liability, penalty, forfeiture or punishment; and
the investigation, proceeding or remedy may be instituted, continued or
enforced, and the penalty, forfeiture or punishment imposed, as if the
provision had not been repealed or amended.
   (d)   If the penalty, forfeiture or punishment for any offense is reduced by
a re-enactment or amendment of a provision of these Codified Ordinances, the
penalty, forfeiture or punishment, if not already imposed, shall be imposed
according to the provision as amended.
(ORC 1.58)
§ 202.05  CONSTRUCTION OF SECTION REFERENCES.
   (a)   Wherever in a penalty section reference is made to a violation of a
series of sections, or of subsections or other subdivisions of a section, such
reference shall be construed to mean a violation of any section, subsection or
other such subdivision included in such reference.
   (b)   References in these Codified Ordinances to action taken or authorized
under designated sections of these Codified Ordinances include, in every case,
action taken or authorized under the applicable legislative provision which is
superseded by these Codified Ordinances.
(ORC 1.23)
   (c)   A reference to any portion of a provision of these Codified Ordinances
applies to all re-enactments or amendments thereof.
(ORC 1.55)
   (d)   If a section refers to a series of numbers or letters, the first and
the last numbers or letters are included.
(ORC 1.56)
§ 202.06  CONFLICTS OF LAWS.
   (a)   All ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations of the
municipality, and all parts of the same, enacted prior to the date of the
adoption of these Codified Ordinances and inconsistent or in conflict with any
of the provisions of these Codified Ordinances, are hereby repealed, save and
except any ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation, or part of the same,
expressly excepted from repeal by the ordinance that adopts these Codified
Ordinances. No ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation, or part of the same,
of the municipality, that is not inconsistent or in conflict with any of the
provisions of these Codified Ordinances and/or that can be reasonably
interpreted to be compatible with the provisions of these Codified Ordinances,
shall be deemed to be repealed by the adoption of these Codified Ordinances.
Such ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations, and all parts of the same,
shall continue to be viable and enforceable by the municipality.
   (b)   In the event of a conflict between any of the provisions of these
Codified Ordinances, or between any of the provisions of these Codified
Ordinances and a provision of any standard code adopted by the municipality
pursuant to Ohio R.C. 731.231 or a Municipal Charter, the provision that
establishes the higher or stricter standard shall control. In the event of a
conflict between any of the provisions of these Codified Ordinances and any
provision of state law, including rules and regulations promulgated pursuant to
state law, the state law, rule or regulation shall control if it is of a kind
required to be in conformity with state law by Article XVIII, Section 3, of the
Ohio Constitution; otherwise, the provision of these Codified Ordinances shall
control.
   (c)   If there is a conflict between figures and words in expressing a
number, the words govern. 
(ORC 1.46)
   (d)   If a general provision conflicts with a special or local provision,
they shall be construed, if possible, so that effect is given to both.  If the
conflict between the provisions is irreconcilable, the special or local
provision prevails as an exception to the general provision, unless the general
provision is the later adoption and the manifest intent is that the general
provision prevail.
(ORC 1.51)
   (e)   If ordinances enacted at different meetings of Council are
irreconcilable, the ordinance latest in date of enactment prevails.
   (f)   If amendments to the same ordinance are enacted at different meetings
of Council, one amendment without reference to another, the amendments are to
be harmonized, if possible, so that effect may be given to each.  If the
amendments are substantively irreconcilable, the latest in date of enactment
prevails.  The fact that a later amendment restates language deleted by an
earlier amendment, or fails to include language inserted by an earlier
amendment, does not of itself make the amendments irreconcilable.  Amendments
are irreconcilable only when changes made by each cannot reasonably be put into
simultaneous operation.
(ORC 1.52)
§ 202.07  DETERMINATION OF LEGISLATIVE INTENT.
   (a)   In enacting a provision of these Codified Ordinances, it is presumed
that:
      (1)   Compliance with the Constitutions of the state and of the United
States is intended;
      (2)   The entire provision is intended to be effective;
      (3)   A just and reasonable result is intended; and
      (4)   A result feasible of execution is intended.
(ORC 1.47)
   (b)   A provision of these Codified Ordinances is presumed to be prospective
in its operation unless it is expressly made retrospective.
(ORC 1.48)
   (c)   If a provision of these Codified Ordinances is ambiguous, the court,
in determining the intention of Council, may consider, among other matters:
      (1)   The object sought to be attained;
      (2)   The circumstances under which provision was enacted;
      (3)   The legislative history;
      (4)   The common law or former legislative provisions, including laws
upon the same or similar subjects;
      (5)   The consequences of a particular construction; and
      (6)   The administrative construction of the provision.
(ORC 1.49)
§ 202.08  SEVERABILITY.
   If any provision of a section of these Codified Ordinances or the
application thereof to any person or circumstances is held invalid, the
invalidity does not affect other provisions or applications of the section or
related sections which can be given effect without the invalid provision or
application, and to this end the provisions are separable.
(ORC 1.50)
§ 202.99  GENERAL PENALTY.
   (a)   Whenever, in these Codified Ordinances or in any ordinance of the
municipality, any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an
offense or a misdemeanor, or whenever the doing of any act is required or the
failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is
otherwise provided, whoever violates any such provision shall be punished by a
fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00), a term of imprisonment not
exceeding six months, or both.  A separate offense shall be deemed committed
each day during or on which a violation continues or occurs.
   (b)   The failure of any officer or employee of the municipality to perform
any official duty imposed by these Codified Ordinances shall not subject the
officer or employee to the penalty imposed for a violation unless a penalty is
specifically provided for such failure.
Statutory reference:
   Ordinance violations and penalties, see Ohio R.C. 715.67
CHAPTER 204:  OFFICIAL STANDARDS
EDITOR’S NOTE:  The State of Ohio operates on Eastern Daylight Savings Time. 
Congress, on March 22, 1966, passed the Uniform Time Act requiring uniform
observance throughout the nation of Daylight Savings Time starting in 1967,
except that a state legislature could exempt the entire state from Daylight
Savings Time or divide a state into not more than two parts, each with a
different time standard.  The Ohio legislature, through inaction, has elected
to observe Eastern Daylight Savings Time throughout the state.
On August 8, 2005, the Energy Policy Act of 2005 was enacted. This Act changed
the time change dates for Daylight Saving Time in the United States. Beginning
in 2007, the State of Ohio begins Daylight Saving Time at 2:00 a.m. on the
second Sunday in March and reverts to standard time at 2:00 a.m. on the first
Sunday in November. The Secretary of Energy will report the impact of this
change to Congress. Congress retains the right to resume the 2005 Daylight
Saving Time schedule once the Department of Energy study is complete.
There are no sections in
Chapter 204.  This chapter has been established to provide a place for cross
references and any future legislation.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   State standard of time - see Ohio R.C. 1.04
   State legal holidays - see Ohio R.C. 1.14, 5.20 et seq., 1303.45
   State flag and other insignia - see Ohio R.C. 5.01 et seq.
   State seals - see Ohio R.C. 5.10 et seq.
CHAPTER 206:  PURCHASES AND SALES
Section
206.01   Personal property.
206.02   Real property.
206.03   ODOT Cooperative Purchasing Program.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Limitation of debt - see CHTR.
12.03
   Contracting power - see CHTR.
12.04
   Acquisition and disposal of real property - see
TSO TABLE E
   Department of Finance - see ADM.
Ch. 254
§ 206.01  PERSONAL PROPERTY.
   (a)   Items of personal property which the Manager may determine to be no
longer needed for any municipal purpose and which have an estimated value of
less than one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00), may be sold by the
Manager after written notice to Council of his or her determination and
intention.
   (b)   Items of personal property which the Manager may determine to be no
longer needed for any municipal purpose and which have an estimated value of
one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) or more may be sold by the
Manager upon passage of an ordinance by Council declaring such property to be
surplus and authorizing such sale by the Manager.
   (c)   Items of personal property described in divisions (a) and (b) hereof
shall be offered for sale through a notice published once each week for two
consecutive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation within the
municipality, and such notice shall require that potential purchasers submit
signed, sealed bids.  Such bids shall be opened publicly by the Manager at a
date and place stated in the notice.  The municipality shall reserve the right
to reject any and all bids.
   (d)   All items of personal property described in divisions (a) and (b)
hereof shall be sold to the highest and best bidder.  In the event no bids are
received, the municipality shall have the option to retain the property,
readvertise the property or dispose of the property by gift, transfer or any
other manner deemed appropriate, the absence of bids being deemed sufficient
proof that the items of property advertised have no fair market value.
(Ord. 73-O-56, passed 9-4-1973)
§ 206.02  REAL PROPERTY.
   (a)   Purchase.  On the written recommendation of the Manager that the
municipality requires real estate or an interest therein for any municipal
purpose, which real estate can be acquired, Council may by ordinance determine
the necessity of acquiring such real estate or interest therein, approve the
proposed purchase, and authorize the Manager to make such purchase and to
expend the necessary funds therefor.
   (b)   Sale.  On the written recommendation of the Manager that real estate,
or any interest therein, owned by the municipality is no longer needed for any
municipal purpose, Council may by ordinance determine that such real estate, or
interest therein, is no longer necessary for any municipal purpose and may
approve the proposed sale and authorize the Manager to make such sale and to
execute the necessary documents to consummate the sale.
   (c)   Demolition.  Upon the written recommendation of the Manager, Council
may by ordinance determine that any building owned by the municipality is no
longer needed for any municipal purpose and may authorize the demolition and/or
sale of any such building or part thereof, and Council may by motion determine
the method by which the building or part thereof shall be sold.
(Ord. 73-O-55, passed 9-4-1973)
§ 206.03  ODOT COOPERATIVE PURCHASING PROGRAM.
   (a)   The Manager hereby requests authority in the name of the municipality
to participate in the Ohio Department of Transportation contracts for the
purchase of machinery, materials, supplies or other articles which the
Department has entered into pursuant to Ohio R.C. 5513.01(B).
   (b)   The Manager is hereby authorized to agree in the name of the
municipality to be bound by all terms and conditions as the Director of
Transportation prescribes.
   (c)   The Manager is hereby authorized to agree in the name of the
municipality to directly pay vendors, under each such contract of the Ohio
Department of Transportation in which the municipality participates, for items
it receives pursuant to the contract.
   (d)   The municipality agrees to hold the Director of Transportation and the
Ohio Department of Transportation harmless for any claim or dispute arising out
of participation in a contract pursuant to Ohio R.C. 5513.01(B).
(Res. 97-R-192, passed 12-2-1997)
CHAPTER 208:  PUBLIC RECORDS
Section
208.01   Purpose.
208.02   Public records.
208.03   Record requests.
208.04   Costs for public records.
208.05   E-mail.
208.06   Failure to respond to a public records request.
208.07   Dissemination of policy.
§ 208.01  PURPOSE.
   It is the policy of the City of Columbiana, Columbiana County, Ohio,
hereinafter referenced as the city, that openness leads to a better informed
citizenry, which leads to better government and better public policy. It is the
policy of the city to strictly adhere to the state’s Public Records Act, being
Ohio R.C. §§ 149.43 et seq.  All exemptions to openness are to be construed in
their narrowest sense and any denial of public records in response to a valid
request must be accompanied by an explanation, including legal authority, as
outlined in the Ohio Revised Code. If the request is in writing, the
explanation must also be in writing.
(Ord. 07-O-2406, passed 10-16-2007)
§ 208.02  PUBLIC RECORDS.
   (a)   The city, in accordance with the Ohio Revised Code, defines records as
including the following:
      (1)   Any document paper, electronic (including, but not limited to, e-
mail), or other format, that is created or received by, or comes under the
jurisdiction of a public office that documents the organization, functions,
policies, decisions, procedures, operations, or other activities of the city.
      (2)   All records of the city are public unless they are specifically
exempt from disclosure under the Ohio Revised Code.
   (b)   It is the policy of the city that, as required by Ohio law, records
will be organized and maintained so that they are readily available for
inspection and copying (See §
208.05 for the e-mail record policy). Record retention schedules are to be
updated regularly and posted prominently.
(Ord. 07-O-2406, passed 10-16-2007)
§ 208.03  RECORD REQUESTS.
   Each request for public records should be evaluated for a response using the
following guidelines:
   (a)   Although no specific language is required to make a request, the
requester must at least identify the records requested with sufficient clarity
to allow the city office to which the request is directed to identify,
retrieve, and review the records. If it is not clear what records are being
sought, the records custodian must contact the requester for clarification, and
should assist the requestor in revising the request by informing the requester
of the manner in which the office keeps its records.
   (b)   The requester does not have to put a records request in writing, and
does not have to provide his or her identity or the intended use of the
requested public record. It is the city’s general policy that this information
is not requested of the requester.
   (c)   Public records are to be available for inspection during regular
business hours, with the exception of published holidays. Public records must
be made available for inspection promptly. Copies of public records must be
made available within a reasonable period of time. The terms “prompt” and
“reasonable” take into account the volume of records requested; the proximity
of the location where the records are stored; and the necessity for any legal
review of the records requested.
   (d)   (1)   Each request should be evaluated for an estimated length of time
required to gather the records. Routine requests for records should be
satisfied immediately if feasible to do so. Routine requests include, but are
not limited to, meeting minutes (both in draft and final form), budgets, salary
information, forms and applications, personnel rosters, and the like. If fewer
than 20 pages of copies are requested or if the records are readily available
in an electronic format that can be e-mailed or downloaded easily, these should
be made as quickly as the equipment allows.
      (2)   If more copies are requested, an appointment should be made with
the requester fixing the date and time when the copies or computer files can be
picked up.
      (3)   All requests for public records must either be satisfied or be
acknowledged in writing by the subject city office within three business days
following the office’s receipt of the request. If a request is deemed
significantly beyond “routine,” such as seeking a voluminous number of copies
or requiring extensive research, the acknowledgment must include the following:
         A.   An estimated number of business days it will take to satisfy the
request;
         B.   An estimated cost if copies are requested; and
         C.   Any items within the request that may be exempt from disclosure.
   (e)   Any denial of public records requested must include an explanation,
including legal authority. If portions of a record are public and portions are
exempt, the exempt portions are to be redacted and the rest released. If there
are redactions, each redaction must be accompanied by a supporting explanation,
including legal authority.
(Ord. 07-O-2406, passed 10-16-2007)
§ 208.04  COSTS FOR PUBLIC RECORDS.
   Those seeking public records will be charged only the actual cost of making
copies.
   (a)   The charge for paper copies is five cents ($0.05) per page.
   (b)   The charge for downloaded computer files to a compact disc is one
dollar ($1.00) per disc.
   (c)   There is no charge for documents e-mailed.
   (d)   Requesters may ask that documents be mailed to them. They will be
charged the actual cost of the postage and mailing supplies.
(Ord. 07-O-2406, passed 10-16-2007)
§ 208.05  E-MAIL.
   Documents in electronic mail format are records as defined by the Ohio
Revised Code when their content relates to the business of the city. E-mail is
to be treated in the same fashion as records in other formats and should follow
the same retention schedules.
   (a)   Records in private e-mail accounts used to conduct public business are
subject to disclosure, and all employee or representatives of this city are
instructed to retain their e-mails that relate to public business (see §
208.02) and to copy them to their business e-mail accounts and/or to the
subject office’s records custodian.
   (b)   Each records custodian is to treat the e-mails from private accounts
as records of the city, filing them in the appropriate way, retaining them per
established schedules and making them available for inspection and copying in
accordance with the Public Records Act, being Ohio R.C. §§ 149.43 et seq.
(Ord. 07-O-2406, passed 10-16-2007)
§ 208.06  FAILURE TO RESPOND TO A PUBLIC RECORDS REQUEST.
   The city recognizes the legal and non-legal consequences of failure to
properly respond to a public records request. In addition to the distrust in
government that failure to comply may cause, the city’s failure to comply with
a request may result in a court ordering the city to comply with the law and to
pay the requester attorney’s fees and damages.
(Ord. 07-O-2406, passed 10-16-2007)
§ 208.07  DISSEMINATION OF POLICY.
   This policy shall be distributed to the records custodians of the city, and
the same shall be conspicuously hung in all offices of the city where public
records may be requested.
(Ord. 07-O-2406, passed 10-16-2007)
CHAPTER 210:  MUNICIPAL POLICIES AND PLANS
Section
210.01   Hazard Mitigation Plan.
210.02   National Incident Management System.
210.03   9-1-1 Plan.
210.04   Capital assets policies and procedures.
210.05   Credit card policy.
210.06   Motor vehicle policy.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Recovery of expenses incurred in responding to hazardous material
emergencies - see GEN. OFF. 660.19
§ 210.01  HAZARD MITIGATION PLAN.
   (a)   The Columbiana County Emergency Management Agency (EMA) has developed
a Multi-Jurisdictional Hazard Mitigation Plan that includes all hazards to
which Columbiana County and its municipalities are susceptible as per § 322 of
the Robert T. Stafford Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance Act, being 42
U.S.C. §§ 5121 et seq.
      (1)   The City of Columbiana has been assessed for its susceptibility to
all hazards.
      (2)   A list of all critical facilities and other assets in the City of
Columbiana that could be affected by hazard events has been generated and
included in a countywide list of assets.
      (3)   The estimated potential losses that Columbiana assets could incur
during a hazard event have been calculated.
      (4)   Goals, objectives, and strategies to mitigate against the hazards
that have been identified in the county, including the City of Columbiana have
been developed.
      (5)   Mitigation measures for the City of Columbiana and surrounding
areas have been analyzed.
      (6)   Mitigation strategies for the City of Columbiana and surrounding
areas have been prioritized.
      (7)   Columbiana County’s stakeholders and EMA have agreed to
periodically review and update the Multi-Jurisdictional Hazard Mitigation Plan.
   (b)   The Council of the City of Columbiana hereby adopts and plans to
implement the actions prescribed in the Multi-Jurisdictional Hazard Mitigation
Plan.
(Res. 06-R-349, passed 11-21-2006)
§ 210.02  NATIONAL INCIDENT MANAGEMENT SYSTEM.
   (a)   (1)   National Incident Management System (NIMS) will provide a
consistent nationwide approach allowing federal, state, local and tribal
governments to work effectively and efficiently to prevent, prepare for,
respond to, and recover from domestic incidents.
      (2)   The Department of Homeland Security has sought extensive input on
NIMS from state, local, and tribal officials, the emergency response community,
and the private sector and has incorporated the best practices currently in use
by incident managers.
      (3)   Effective homeland security incident management involves new
concepts, processes, and protocols that will require refinement over time. The
collective input and guidance from all homeland security partners has been, and
will continue to be, vital to the further development of an effective and
comprehensive national incident management system.
      (4)   NIMS was published by the Department of Homeland Security on March
1, 2004.
      (5)   Homeland Security Presidential Directive (HSPD-5) and NIMS require
all federal departments and agencies to adopt NIMS and use it in domestic
incident management and emergency prevention, preparedness, response, recovery,
and mitigation programs and activities, as well as to assist state, local or
tribal entities.
      (6)   HSPD-5 and NIMS require federal departments and agencies to make
state, tribal and local organizations adopt NIMS as a condition for federal
preparedness assistance beginning in federal fiscal year 2005.
      (7)   Short-term compliance will include adopting the basic tenets of the
Incident Command System identified in the NIMS document. The Secretary of
Homeland Security published standards, guidelines, and protocols for
determining compliance in December 2004.
   (b)   The City of Columbiana shall utilize the Incident Management System
prescribed by the Department of Homeland Security, as implemented by the Ohio
EMA.
   (c)   The City Manager for the City of Columbiana shall determine the
timetable and steps necessary for the expedient implementation of this section.
   (d)   The City of Columbiana will begin training on NIMS and revise the City
of Columbiana’s Emergency Operations Plan as soon as practicable.
(Res. 05-R-324, passed 6-21-2005)
§ 210.03  9-1-1 PLAN.
   The Council for the City of Columbiana, Ohio do and hereby formally adopt
the Columbiana County 9-1-1 Final Plan dated September 27, 2005 and that the
Columbiana County Board of Commissioners, the 9-1-1 Planning Committee, and the
9-1-1 Technical Advisory Committee determine to proceed to implement this Plan.
(Res. 05-R-333, passed 10-18-2005)
§ 210.04  CAPITAL ASSETS POLICIES AND PROCEDURES.
   The capital assets policies and procedures, attached to Ordinance No. 09-O-
2546 as Exhibit A, the same being made a part of this section as if rewritten
herein, is hereby approved and adopted by reference.
(Ord. 09-O-2546, passed 10-6-2009)
§ 210.05  CREDIT CARD POLICY.
   (a)   This policy applies to all (i) payment cards, checks or other payment
instruments associated with a credit account issued by a financial institution
or a retailer, and (ii) payment cards related to the receipt of grant funds.
All such cards and instruments are referred to herein as "credit cards".
   (b)   This policy does not apply to procurement cards (P-cards), or to gas
cards or other payment cards that are capable of use only for the purchase of
certain limited types of goods.
   (c)   The City of Columbiana will not obtain or maintain any debit cards.
   (d)   The Director of Finance will work with the appropriate financial
institutions that issue credit cards to determine the best type of credit card
accounts for the city, and also to determine which store credit card accounts
the city will utilize.
      (1)   The Director of Finance is responsible for working with the issuing
financial institution to determine the dates when credit cards expire and the
re-issuance of replacement cards.
      (2)   The Director of Finance is responsible for determining, when
necessary, the need to cancel a credit card account and any adjustment to
credit limits on the credit cards.
      (3)   The Director of Finance is responsible for notifying the issuing
financial institution of a lost or stolen card.
   (e)   Credit cards will be established in the name of the City of Columbiana
and the specific name of an individual with a maximum credit limit for each set
by the city.
   (f)   (1)   Credit cards may be issued to:
         (a)   City Manager with a credit limit up to $5,000.
         (b)   Director of Finance with a credit limit up to $5,000.
      (2)   The City of Columbiana as a whole was approved for a credit limit
of $100,000, in 2018, with individual cards for the above named officials
approved for a credit limit of $5,000.
      (3)   A credit card may not be used by anyone other than the individual
to whom it is issued.
   (g)   Prior to initial receipt of a credit card, each individual must agree
to and sign the Credit Card Responsibility and Use Procedures.
   (h)   City Council authorizes the use of city credit cards for use in
connection with Council-approved or city-related activities and for only those
types of expenses that are for the benefit of the city that serve a valid and
proper public purpose shall be paid for by credit card. Credit cards will be
used primarily for travel expenses to conferences and/or workshops and pre-
payment of materials when required by a vendor. In any event, credit cards may
be used only for expenditures that are within the applicable budget and
departmental guidelines.
   (i)   For each purchase made using a credit card, an itemized receipt
indicating the amount paid, the vendor, and the goods/services purchased must
be submitted to the Director of Finance promptly following the purchase.
   (j)   Use of a credit card for personal expenditures, for expenditures in
excess of the applicable credit limit, or otherwise in violation of this policy
constitutes a misuse of the credit card. Any city personnel engaging in misuse
of a credit card will be responsible to reimburse the city for any unauthorized
expenditures and may be subject to disciplinary action up to and including
termination of employment.
   (k)   The City Manager will appoint a Compliance Officer to review all
credit card accounts every six months, including: the number of accounts and
issued/active cards, account expiration dates and credit limits. The Director
of Finance may not also serve as the Compliance Officer.
   (l)   The Compliance Officer may use a credit card only with the prior
authorization of the Director of Finance, except that the City Manager serving
in the role as Compliance Officer may use a credit card as otherwise authorized
in this policy.
   (m)   The Compliance Officer may not authorize City personnel to use a
credit card, except that the City Manager serving in the role as Compliance
Officer may authorize such use in accordance with this policy.
   (n)   If a credit card is lost or stolen, or if city personnel become aware
of unauthorized or fraudulent use of any of the city's credit card accounts,
the same must be reported immediately to the Director of Finance and Compliance
Officer.
   (o)   All monthly credit card statements and other correspondence associated
with the credit card accounts will be sent to the City of Columbiana. Payment
of the monthly statements must be made in a timely fashion so that finance
charges and late payment fees are not incurred.
   (p)   If the Compliance Officer is authorized to use a credit card, on a
monthly basis, the Director of Finance (or the Director of Finance's designee,
who may not be the Compliance Officer) will review the credit card statements
and will sign an attestation to such review.
   (q)   On an annual basis, the Director of Finance (or the Director of
Finance's designee) will submit a report to the City Council regarding all
credit card rewards received by the city.
(Ord. 19-O-2993, passed 1-15-2019)
§ 210.06  MOTOR VEHICLE POLICY.
   (a)   City vehicles - generally.
      (1)   All vehicles owned or leased by the employer shall be plainly
marked as the property of the city, or shall carry city vehicle license plates.
      (2)   Vehicles may be provided for those officials, department heads, and
employees who require transportation in the course of their duties. Employer-
owned vehicles are not to be used for employee travel to and from work unless
authorized by the City Manager. Vehicles shall not be used for personal use.
The City Manager shall only approve employer owned vehicles to be used from
travel to and from work for safety forces or other non-safety forces that are
required by the nature of their job duties to respond to emergencies (e.g.
electric and water/sewer employees responding to emergency call out to repair
services). The department head may also assign a city vehicle to employees
attending training, seminars, conferences, or similar programs approved in
advance by the City Manager.
      (3)   Employer-owned vehicles shall be used by employees whenever
possible on approved city business.
      (4)   At any time a city vehicle is used, a vehicle mileage log must be
completed.
   (b)   Assignment of city vehicles.
      (1)   Permanent vehicle assignments or assignment of a vehicle to attend
a conference, meeting, etc. will be made based on written request which
provides documented justification. Approval will be based on transportation
needs, emergency requirements, call-out availability, after hours meetings,
cost effectiveness, or as other determined by the employer.
      (2)   Permanent vehicle assignments shall be reviewed annually by the
employer during the budget appropriations process. All permanent vehicle
assignments shall be reported to the City Finance Director for income tax
purposes. Employees assigned vehicles shall assist the City Finance Director’s
Office in meeting the IRS rules. All employees who have permanently assigned
vehicles shall keep a daily record of any personal use of the vehicle. This
shall include, but not be limited to, commuting to and from work. All costs
associated with personal use must be added as income to the employee’s W-
2 statement. The records shall also include maintenance, insurance, fuel, etc.
Failure to maintain and provide such information may result in loss of use of
the vehicle. Those employees assigned a vehicle due to the nature job duties as
a result of the necessity to respond to emergency call outs shall not have the
mileage related to commuting to and from work considered as income as permitted
by IRS rules.
   (c)   Qualifications for using city vehicles or personal vehicles on city
business.
      (1)   All operators of city owned or leased vehicles or employees using
their own vehicles for city business shall be at least 18 years of age.  Only
city employees may drive city-owned or leased vehicles.
      (2)   All drivers must have a current, valid Ohio driver's license that
covers the type of vehicle to be operated.  A copy of the license must be
placed in the driver's file. In those classifications which require a certain
motor vehicle license, newly hired employees must generally possess such
license as a condition of employment, and all current employees must maintain
said license for the duration of their employment in said classification.  Loss
of license and driving privileges by such employees may result in termination
of employment for incompetency.  All employees must report a loss of licensure
or driving privileges to their department head/designee.
      (3)   Employees operating a vehicle on behalf of the employer are
expected to operate the vehicle in a responsible manner.  An individual's
driving record as maintained by the State of Ohio Bureau of Motor Vehicles
(BMV), or record from any other state or country in which the driver or
applicant has resided or operated a motor vehicle during the previous 36
months, or any other legal source, will be used as an indication of the
individual's ability to responsibly operate a vehicle.  The employer will
review annually the BMV driving record of each city employee who operates a
vehicle on behalf of the employer.
      (4)   A.   The following is a non-exhaustive listing of motor vehicle
related occurrences (violations, convictions, and accidents), the appearance of
which on the driving record of a city employee during the previous 36 month
period will normally result in the suspension of the employee's driving
privileges for the city.
         B.   A conviction for:
            1.   Driving while under the influence of alcohol or drugs;
            2.   Vehicular homicide or manslaughter;
            3.   Leaving the scene of an accident;
            4.   Attempting to elude or flee a police officer after a traffic
violation;
            5.   Drag racing;
            6.   Other intentional and dangerous or reckless use of a motor
vehicle.
      (5)   In a case where the employer or the State of Ohio has suspended the
employee's driving privileges, or the employee becomes uninsurable under the
employer's policy, and driving is an essential function of the employee's
position, the employer may take appropriate disciplinary action up to and
including termination of employment by the city. The employer may also require
employees to participate in remedial or defensive driving courses when
employees evidence poor driving records at the employee's expense.
      (6)   An applicant may be denied employment on the basis of an
unsatisfactory driving record.  At the discretion of the employer, denial may
be made without regard to the number of points or violations or whether they
occurred within the State of Ohio.  The employer will review the BMV driving
record of any applicant who, if employed, will be operating a vehicle on behalf
of the employer, prior to making an offer of employment.
      (7)   Drivers shall immediately report to their department head/designee
any on-duty traffic incidents/violations (e.g. moving violation, accident,
etc.).  Employees are responsible for traffic fines issued to them or the city
as a result of their operation of a city vehicle. Employees are not required to
report individual off-duty traffic incidents/violations (e.g. moving violation,
accident, etc.) but must report to their department head/designee any occasion
where they have accumulated more than six points on their driving record.
      (8)   Employees who use their personal vehicle for official employer
business will be reimbursed on a mileage basis at the authorized rate.  A
Personal Expense Statement Form shall be completed.
   (d)   Insurance.
      (1)   Employees who use city-owned vehicles must be insurable under the
employer's insurance policy. An employee who must operate city-owned vehicles
as part of the essential functions of the employee's position who becomes
uninsurable under the employer's policy shall be subject to disciplinary action
up to and including termination of employment.
      (2)   Insurance coverage for personal vehicles used on employer business
shall be the responsibility of the owner of the vehicle.  All employees who use
their own vehicle on city business shall show proof of liability insurance to
the employer in the amounts of at least one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000)
per person, three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000) per accident, Bodily
Injury, and fifty thousand dollars ($50,000) Property Damage.  No mileage
reimbursement shall be authorized until a current certificate of insurance is
on file.
   (e)   Use of vehicles.
      (1)   Vehicles plainly marked as property of the city shall not be used
for any purpose other than official city business.
      (2)   Employees must continuously recognize that use of an employer-owned
vehicle is a privilege and that they are constantly visible as an official
representative of the city.  Employees should show every courtesy while
operating a city vehicle or their personal vehicle on city business in order to
enhance the good reputation of the city.
      (3)   Employees shall exercise caution and responsibility and adhere to
all safety regulations when operating employer-owned vehicles.  Operators and
passengers shall wear safety belts at all times while driving or riding in an
employer-owned vehicle or their personal vehicle on employer business. 
Negligent, reckless, or improper operation of vehicles while on employer
business is grounds for disciplinary action.
      (4)   Except as otherwise provided herein, passengers not on official
city business and hitchhikers are not permitted in city-owned vehicles.  A
family member or friend may be permitted as a passenger in city-owned
automobiles only if approved in advance by the employer.  Only city employees
may drive a city vehicle.
      (5)   Employees who must operate a city vehicle as part of their job or
their personal vehicle on city business, either on a regular or occasional
basis, are required to report any suspension or revocation of their driver's
license to the department head immediately.  The department head shall
immediately notify the City Manager in writing.
      (6)   Use of alcoholic beverages or controlled substances prior to or
during operation of a city vehicle is prohibited.  Alcoholic beverages or
controlled substances shall not be transported in a city vehicle except as
required in the performance of the employee's duties (e.g., law enforcement). 
Any employee convicted of operating a city vehicle while under the influence of
alcohol or drugs will be subject to immediate dismissal.
      (7)   Turn signals and warning signals shall be utilized by all vehicle
operators.  Vehicle headlights shall be used at all times vehicle is in use
during periods of limited visibility or any time the vehicle windshield wipers
are in use.
      (8)   Employees are responsible for ensuring any city vehicle which they
are permitted to take home is properly maintained, kept locked, and parked in a
safe and secure location.
      (9)   Employees shall ensure any city vehicle which they use is cleaned,
fully fueled, and readied for service upon completion of its use.
      (10)   The operator of a vehicle shall be responsible for seeing that any
service, safety, or maintenance items are corrected on the vehicle or reported
to the proper authority.
   (f)   Accidents/traffic citations involving city vehicles or personal
vehicles while on employer business.
      (1)   Accident reports shall be completed and submitted to the employer
within 24 hours of an accident.
      (2)   Parking, moving violations, and other fines received while
operating a city vehicle or a personally owned vehicle while on city business
are the responsibility of the operator.
      (3)   Operators involved in accidents while operating a city vehicle in a
non- approved manner will be subject to appropriate disciplinary action and may
be liable for the cost to repair the vehicle.
(Ord. 19-O-2996, passed 2-19-2019)
TITLE FOUR:  LEGISLATION
CHAPTER 220:  COUNCIL
Section
220.01   Rules of Council.
220.02   Special meetings.
220.03   Meetings of boards and commissions.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Legislative powers of Mayor - see CHTR.
5.03
   Council generally - see CHTR.
Art. IV
   Council-Manager relations - see CHTR.
7.05
   Responsibilities re initiative and referendum - see CHTR.
11.04(b),
11.06(a),
11.09
   Determination of legislative intent - see ADM.
202.07
   Traffic control powers - see TRAF.
406.07
§ 220.01  RULES OF COUNCIL.
   (a)   Council shall meet on the first and third Tuesdays of each month
except that one of the meetings may be dispensed with during the summer as
provided in §
4.07 of the Charter.  All Council meetings shall begin promptly at 7:00 p.m.
   (b)   All Council meetings shall open with prayer, followed by the Pledge of
Allegiance.
   (c)   Copies of the minutes of the last regular and any interim special
Council meetings shall be distributed to Council members prior to the next
regular meeting.
   (d)   The minutes of previous meetings shall be approved without reading
unless a full or partial reading is requested by a member of Council.  A copy
of the minutes shall be posted and available to the public.
   (e)   The agenda of the next regular Council meeting shall be given to the
press in time for publication on the Wednesday preceding each regular meeting. 
This requirement shall not prevent discussion or action on items not offered
for publication or not published.
   (f)   Items on the published agenda shall be considered and acted on first
and in the order published, unless this rule is waived by Council.
   (g)   Motions may not be open for discussion until properly seconded by a
member of Council or the presiding officer.
   (h)   Council discussion shall be on an informal basis, with questions,
answers and opinions being passed freely from one to another so long as
courtesy and order prevail.
   (i)   Any time two or more persons attempt to talk at the same time, the
presiding officer shall call for order by raps of the gavel, and silence shall
reign until the floor is again granted by the presiding officer.
   (j)   Anyone speaking indistinctly shall be requested by the presiding
officer to speak so that all can hear.
   (k)   Any speaker digressing from the subject under consideration may be
requested by the presiding officer to return to the subject or relinquish the
floor.
   (l)   In the case of tie votes on matters not previously classified as an
emergency according to §
6.06 of the Charter, the presiding officer may table the matter until the next
regular meeting. If, at the next regular meeting, the tie still exists, the
presiding officer shall break the tie without further delay.
   (m)   The floor shall be offered to any citizen indicating a desire to speak
by a raised hand before the question is put to a vote. If two or more citizens
indicate a desire to speak, each shall be limited to three minutes, until all
have been heard.
   (n)   Citizens’ comments shall be limited to the subject at hand and shall
be directed to Council as a whole.
   (o)   All persons present at Council meetings shall recognize the right of
all to speak at the proper time by remaining silent until granted the floor.
   (p)   After completion of the business at hand, the floor shall be opened
for comments or proposals from any citizen on any subject.
   (q)   If a citizen’s request for proposed legislation is made, the request
shall be considered only as to whether or not the matter should be formalized
and considered further. Formalization of the request shall require the vote of
only three Council members.
   (r)   Requested legislation approved for consideration shall be reduced to
writing, approved as to form by the Municipal Attorney, and entered on the
agenda of some future meeting, and be presented for action in accordance with
Article VI of the Charter.
   (s)   These rules of Council may be amended or repealed and may be waived or
suspended at any time, in accordance with §
4.11 of the Charter.
(1974 Code, § 121.01)  (Ord. 01-O-1921, passed 12-4-2001; Ord. 02-O-1936,
passed 2-15-2002; Ord. 15-O-2853, passed 1-5-2016)
§ 220.02  SPECIAL MEETINGS.
   (a)   At least 24 hours advance notice of any special meeting of this
Council or any board or Commission of the municipality shall be provided to the
news media which has requested such notification, except in the event of an
emergency requiring immediate official action, in which case the Council, Board
or Commission calling such special meeting shall notify the news media which
has requested such notification immediately of the date, time, location and
purpose of such meeting.
   (b)   Any person may, upon request, receive reasonable advance notice of all
meetings of this Council and/or any Board or Commission of the municipality at
which a specific type of public business is to be discussed as hereinafter
provided:
      (1)   The request shall be in writing and shall describe in sufficient
detail the specific type of public business to which such request applies;
      (2)   The request shall include the name, address and telephone number of
the person making such request; and
      (3)   The request shall be accompanied by a sufficient number of self
addressed, stamped envelopes for mailing advance notices.
(Res. 02-R-269, passed 4-2-2002)
§ 220.03  MEETINGS OF BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS.
   (a)   All meetings of Planning Commission and the Park Recreation and
Cemetery Board shall commence at 7:00 p.m.
   (b)   All meetings of the Board of Zoning Appeals shall commence at 7:00
p.m.
   (c)   All meetings of the Civil Service Commission shall commence at 6:30
p.m.
(Ord. 07-O-2369, passed 3-20-2007; Ord. 15-O-2853, passed 1-5-2016)
CHAPTER 222:  MAYOR
EDITOR’S NOTE: There are no sections in
Chapter 222.  This chapter has been established to provide a place for cross
references and any future legislation.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Charter provisions - see CHTR.
Art. V
   Mayor’s Court - see ADM.
Ch. 298
CHAPTER 224:  ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS
Section
224.01   Fee for ordinance preparation.
224.02   Manner of publication.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Legislative procedure - see CHTR.
Art. VI
   Referral of zoning ordinances to Planning Commission - see CHTR.
6.12
   Codification - see CHTR.
6.14
   Publication - see CHTR.
6.15
   Suspension of effect of ordinances - see CHTR.
11.05
   Rules of Council - see ADM.
220.01
§ 224.01  FEE FOR ORDINANCE PREPARATION.
   Whenever a petition has been filed, or after a hearing has been held, and it
becomes necessary for an ordinance to be prepared for action by Council, the
petitioner shall, in addition to any other fees or charges payable to the
municipality, be required to pay to the Director of Finance, upon passage of
the ordinance, the attorney fees customarily charged by attorneys in the
county, for the preparation of the ordinance.  The minimum fees to be charged
shall be as follows:
 
Zoning ordinances     $35.00
Annexation ordinances 35.00
Vacation ordinances   35.00
Variation ordinances  35.00
 
(Ord. 73-O-30, passed 5-1-1973)
§ 224.02  MANNER OF PUBLICATION.
   (a)   Council hereby designates the Morning Journal as the newspaper to be
of general circulation in the municipality.
   (b)   The publication of ordinances and resolutions shall be by title and a
brief description of the context of the ordinance or resolution, along with a
statement to be included in such publication that a copy of the full text is
posted for inspection by the general public at the Municipal Building.  The
Clerk of Council shall cause such ordinance or resolution to be so published
immediately following introduction, and the same shall also be posted for seven
consecutive days.
   (c)   The following certification of publication shall be used:
I, the undersigned Clerk of Council of the Municipality of Columbiana, Ohio,
hereby certify that the title to the foregoing (ordinance or resolution) was
published in the ___________________ on the _______ day of ________________,
20____, and that at such date said newspaper was determined by Council to be of
general circulation within the Municipality of Columbiana, Ohio, and that said
publication contained, in addition to the title of the foregoing (ordinance or
resolution), a statement that a copy of the full text of such (ordinance or
resolution) was posted for inspection for seven (7) consecutive days at the
Municipal Building, 28 West Friend Street, Columbiana, Ohio.
   Dated __________________, 20____.
   Clerk of Council
   Municipality of Columbiana, Ohio
(Ord. 84-O-718, passed 3-20-1984)
CHAPTER 250:  MANAGER
Section
250.01   Payment of fire loss claims.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Charter provisions - see CHTR.
7.01 et seq.
   Manager as contracting officer of municipality - see CHTR.
12.04
   Purchase and sale of property - see ADM.
Ch. 206
   Traffic control powers - see TRAF.
406.01 et seq.
   To be Income Tax Administrator - see B.R. & T.
880.08
§ 250.01  PAYMENT OF FIRE LOSS CLAIMS.
   (a)   The municipality hereby adopts by reference, as if fully rewritten
herein, the provisions of Ohio R.C. 3929.86(C) and (D) for the express purpose
of authorizing the procedure set forth therein with respect to the payment of
fire loss claims.
   (b)   The Manager is hereby designated as the officer of the municipality
authorized to carry out the duties of the municipality as the same are set
forth in Ohio R.C. 3929.86(C) and (D).
   (c)   The Manager is hereby authorized to file a certified copy of this
section for public record with the Ohio Superintendent of Insurance, as
required by Ohio R.C. 3929.86(C), and to take any additional steps as may be
necessary to comply with Ohio R.C. 3929.86(C) and (D).
CHAPTER 252:  DEPARTMENT OF LAW
EDITOR’S NOTE: There are no sections in
Chapter 252.  This chapter has been established to provide a place for cross
references and any future legislation.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Establishment - see CHTR.
8.01
   Municipal Attorney - see CHTR.
8.02
CHAPTER 254:  DEPARTMENT OF FINANCE
Section
254.01   Director of Finance.
254.02   Income tax administration.
254.03   Investment of surplus funds.
254.04   Investment policy.
254.05   Law Enforcement Trust Fund.
254.06   Acceptance of credit and debit cards for payment.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Creation - see CHTR.
8.01
   Director - see CHTR.
8.04,
8.05
   Finance, taxation and debt - see CHTR.
Art. XII
   Fiscal year - see CHTR.
13.07
   Income tax - see B.R. & T.
Ch. 880,
Ch. 881
§ 254.01  DIRECTOR OF FINANCE.
   (a)   There is hereby established, pursuant to §
8.04 of the Charter, the position of Director of Finance in the Department of
Finance.
   (b)   The Manager shall appoint the Director of Finance who shall serve at
the pleasure of the Manager.
   (c)   The Director of Finance shall perform such duties as the Manager shall
designate and as per §
8.05 of the Charter.
(Ord. 89-O-1131, passed 11-21-1989)
§ 254.02  INCOME TAX ADMINISTRATION.
   (a)   The personnel necessary to administer the municipal income tax shall
come under the general direction of the Director of Finance.
   (b)   Such personnel shall consist of one full-time deputy and one part-time
deputy, which employees, under the general direction of the Director of
Finance, shall administer the municipal income tax.
(Ord. 1666, passed 2-18-1969; Ord. 1697, passed 8-5-1969)
§ 254.03  INVESTMENT OF SURPLUS FUNDS.
   Whenever there are monies in the Treasury of the municipality which will not
be required to be used by the municipality for a period of six months or more,
such monies may, in lieu of being deposited in a bank or banks, be invested in
the obligations as are specified in Ohio R.C. 731.56.  Such investments shall
be in the manner and pursuant to the terms and provisions set forth in Ohio
R.C. 731.56 et seq.
(Ord. 888, passed 5-18-1954)
§ 254.04  INVESTMENT POLICY.
   (a)   The following investment and deposit objectives shall be applied in
the management of municipal funds:
      (1)   The primary objective of the municipality’s investment activities
shall be the preservation of capital and the protection of investment
principal.
      (2)   The Finance Director shall strive to maximize the return on the
portfolio, but shall avoid assuming unreasonable investment risks.
      (3)   The municipality’s investment portfolio shall remain sufficiently
liquid to enable the municipality to meet operating requirements which might
reasonably be anticipated.
      (4)   The municipality’s investments shall be diversified to avoid the
assumption of unreasonable and avoidable risks associated with specific types
of securities or individual financial situations.
      (5)   Investments shall be made with the exercise of that degree of
judgment and care, under circumstances then prevailing, which persons of
prudence, discretion and intelligence exercise in the management of their own
affairs, not for speculation but for investment, considering the probable
safety, of their capital as well as the probable income to be derived.
      (6)   A factor in determining which depository should hold the
municipality’s public funds shall be the municipality’s desire to obtain the
best possible banking services at the least possible cost.
   (b)   To the extent possible, the municipality’s active, interim and
inactive investments shall be made so as to complement its anticipated cash
flow requirements.
   (c)   Securities shall be purchased only through financial institutions
located within the State of Ohio or through “primary securities dealers” as
designated by the Federal Reserve Bank.  A list of these institutions shall be
maintained by the Finance Director.  The Finance Director:
      (1)   May make additions to the authorized list when the investment and
deposit policy requirements are met;
      (2)   Shall make deletions from the list:
         A.   If and as directed by ordinance of Council;
         B.   Upon failure of the financial institution to meet the foregoing
investment and deposit policy requirements; or
         C.   Upon request of the financial institution or dealer.
      (3)   May make deletions from the list if he or she determines or has
reason to believe that:
         A.   The financial institution or dealer is experiencing financial
difficulties;
         B.   There is consistent lack of competitiveness by the financial
institution or dealer;
         C.   The account representative handling the municipality’s account
lacks experience or familiarity in providing service to large institutional
accounts; or
         D.   It is in the best interests of the municipality.
   (d)   The Finance Director may invest on behalf of and in the name of the
municipality in the following instruments at a price not exceeding their fair
market value:
      (1)   Government securities, including:
         A.   Negotiable direct obligations of the United States or obligations
issued by federal agencies the principal and interest on which are
unconditionally guaranteed by the United States, and bonds, notes, debentures
or other obligations or securities issued by any federal government agency,
whether or not they are guaranteed by the United States, including, but not
limited to, the following.
            1.   Direct obligation:
               a.   Treasury bills;
               b.   Treasury notes;
               c.   Treasury bonds;
               d.   STAR Ohio.
            2.   Obligations of the following federal agencies:
               a.   Government National Mortgage Associations (GNMA);
               b.   Small Business Association (SBA);
               c.   Federal Housing Administration (FHA);
               d.   Farmers Home Administration (FMHA);
               e.   General Services Administration (GSA).
         B.   Obligations of the Federal Farm Credit Banks, Export-Import Bank
of Washington, Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation or Federal Home Loan Bank
or its district banks, including Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation
participation certificates, or obligations guaranteed by the Government
National Mortgage Association.
      (2)   Non-negotiable interest-bearing time certificates of deposits and
savings accounts in banks organized under the laws of this state, national
banks organized under the laws of the United States doing business and situated
in this state, savings and loan associations under state supervision, or
savings and loan associations located in this state and organized under federal
law and under federal supervision, provided that any such deposits and savings
accounts are secured by collateral as provided in division (e) hereof.
      (3)   Bankers acceptances which are eligible for purchase by the Federal
Reserve System and which are issued by institutions which are ranked nationally
as being in the top 50 in asset and deposit size within their industry.
      (4)   Repurchased agreements of a bank or savings and loan association
organized under the laws of the United States or any state thereof and reverse
repurchase agreements for negotiable direct obligations of the United States,
federal agencies and federal instrumentalities as follows.
         A.   U.S. Treasury bills and notes;
         B.   Government National Mortgage Association (GNMA);
         C.   Federal Farm Credit Bank obligations;
         D.   Federal Home Loan Bank obligations.
      (5)   Now Accounts, Super Now Accounts or any other similar account
authorized by the FDIC.
   (e)   Municipal funds deposited pursuant to divisions (d)(2) and (5) hereof
shall be secured by collateral pledged at market value in an amount equal to at
least 100% of the deposit less the amount insured by the Federal Deposit
Insurance Corporation.  The following securities shall be eligible to be
pledged as collateral:
      (1)   Bonds, notes or other obligations of the United States; or bonds,
notes or other obligations guaranteed as to principal and interest by the
United States or those for which the faith of the United States is pledged for
the payment of principal and interest thereon, by language appearing in the
instruments specifically providing such guarantee or pledge and not merely by
interpretation or otherwise;
      (2)   Bonds, notes, debentures or other obligations or securities issued
by any federal government agency, or the Export-Import Bank of Washington,
bonds, notes or other obligations guaranteed as to principal and interest by
the United States or those for which faith of the United States is pledged for
the payment of principal and interest thereon, by interpretation or otherwise
and not by language appearing in the instruments specifically providing such
guarantee or pledge;
      (3)   Bonds and other obligations of this state;
      (4)   Bonds and other obligations of any county, township, school
district, municipal corporation or other legally constituted taxing subdivision
of this state, which is not at the time of such deposit in default in the
payment of principal or interest on any of its bonds or other obligations for
which the full faith and credit of the issuing subdivision is pledged; and
      (5)   Bonds of other states of the United States which have not, during
the ten years immediately preceding the time of such deposit, defaulted in
payments of either interest or principal on any of their bonds.
   (f)   Any securities pledged as collateral pursuant to division (e) hereof
shall be delivered either to the Finance Director or to an independent
financial institution approved by the Finance Director to serve as trustee
(herein referred to as the “trustee”) under a trust agreement therefor entered
into between the municipality and such institution in a form approved by the
Director of Law.  Fees and expenses of the trustee shall be paid by the
depository.
   (g)   If the depository fails to pay over any part of a deposit due the
municipality, the Finance Director shall have the option of selling, in the
manner determined by the Finance Director, any of the securities deposited
pursuant to the provisions of this section.  If the bonds or other securities
are on deposit with the trustee, the Finance Director may request the trustee
to deliver to the Finance Director any of the securities so deposited, and the
Finance Director shall have the option to sell such securities in the manner
determined by the Finance Director.  When a sale of securities has been made,
upon payment to the Finance Director of the purchase money, the Finance
Director shall transfer such securities to the purchaser, whereupon the
absolute ownership of such securities shall pass to the purchaser.  Any surplus
remaining after deducting the amount due the municipality and expenses of the
sales shall be paid to the depository.
   (h)   When a depository has deposited securities with the trustee in
accordance with division (f) hereof, the depository may substitute or exchange
eligible securities having a current market value equal to or greater than the
current market value of the securities then on deposit and for which they are
to be substituted or exchanged only if one of the following is true.
      (1)   The Finance Director gives written authorization for such
substitution or exchange.
      (2)   The Finance Director has authorized the depository to make such
substitution or exchange on a continuing basis during a specified period
without prior approval of each substitution or exchange.  Written authorization
shall be sent to the trustee stating that substitution may be made on a
continuing basis during a specified period under the conditions specified
therein.
      (3)   No continuing authorization for substitution or exchange has been
given by the Finance Director, the depository has notified the Finance Director
and the trustee of an intended substitution or exchange, and the Finance
Director has failed to object to the trustee within ten business days after
receipt by the Finance Director of the notice of proposed substitution.  The
notice to the Finance Director and to the trustee shall be given in writing and
delivered personally or by certified or registered mail with a return receipt
requested.
   (i)   The depository shall notify the Finance Director of any substitution
or exchange of securities authorized pursuant to division (h) hereof.  Upon
request from the Finance Director, the depository and the trustee shall each
furnish a detailed statement setting forth the face and market values of all
securities pledged.
   (j)   With the approval of the Finance Director, a depository may provide
collateral for municipal funds deposited pursuant to divisions (d)(2), (3) and
(5) hereof through a single pool of securities pledged for deposits of all
public funds held by the depository, subject to the following conditions.
      (1)   Securities committed to the pool must have a market value at least
equal to 110% of all public monies on deposit with the depository, including
the amount covered by federal deposit insurance.
      (2)   The securities eligible for deposit in the pool shall be those
described in division (e) hereof.
      (3)   The securities constituting the pool shall be delivered to a
trustee as described in division (f) hereof.  Fees and expenses of the trustee
shall be paid by the depository.
      (4)   If the depository fails to pay over any part of the deposit due the
municipality, the Finance Director may request the trustee to deliver to the
Finance Director any of the securities on deposit with the trustee, provided
the value of the securities delivered does not exceed the amount necessary to
produce an amount equal to the municipal deposits made and not paid over, less
the portions of such deposits covered by the federal deposit insurance, plus
any accrued interest due on the deposits.  In any event, the value of such
securities shall not exceed the municipality’s proportional interest in the
market value of the pool as of the date of the depository’s failure to pay over
the deposits.  The Finance Director shall have the option to sell the
securities in such manner as determined by the Finance Director.  Any surplus
remaining after deducting the amount due the municipality and expenses of the
sale shall be paid to the depository.
      (5)   Within 30 days of the end of each calendar quarter, the trustee
shall provide a detailed statement setting forth the face and market values of
all securities pledged to the pool and the total of all public funds on
deposit.
      (6)   If at any time the market value of the pool is less than 110% of
all public deposits held by the trustee, the depository shall immediately add
securities to the pool sufficient to bring the market value of the pool to at
least 110% of all public funds on deposit with the trustee.
      (7)   Failure of the institution to comply with any of the provisions of
this section shall be cause for the immediate suspension of the institution as
a qualified depository for any municipal funds.
   (k)   The Finance Director is hereby authorized and directed to invest the
municipality’s  funds so as to yield the highest returns consistent with the
municipality’s investment principals provided in division (a) hereof and
applicable investment strategy.
   (l)   Price and rate quotations for all investments may be obtained from
sources within or outside the municipality.
   (m)   The Finance Director is hereby authorized and directed to prepare and
distribute a request for proposals for banking services in such form as may be
approved by the Director of Law.  Such a request shall be made as often as
deemed appropriate by the Finance Director, but in no case less often than
every three years.
   (n)   The Finance Director is hereby authorized and directed to seek
completion in the investment of all municipal funds and may invest all or part
of such funds outside the designated central depository bank.  However, the
central depository bank may bid for such investments just as any other
financial institution.
   (o)   Upon request of the Manager, the Mayor and Council, the Finance
Director shall provide reports of the municipality’s investments to the
Manager, the Mayor and Council.
   (p)   The Finance Director is authorized to pool cash balances from the
several funds of the municipality for investment purposes.
   (q)   The Finance Director and the Manager, the Mayor and Council shall be
relieved from any liability for the loss of any public monies deposited or
invested pursuant to and in compliance with this section, including, but not
limited to, losses occasioned by the sale of any instruments, securities or
obligations, the closing of any deposit accounts and the failure of any
depository, and any deposits or investments heretofore made by the Finance
Director in conformity with this section and in contemplation of the passage of
the same are hereby ratified and confirmed.
(Ord. 96-O-1590, passed 12-30-1996)
§ 254.05  LAW ENFORCEMENT TRUST FUND.
   (a)   There is established a special fund, pursuant to the provisions of
Ohio R.C. 5705.09, which Fund shall be titled the Law Enforcement Trust Fund.
   (b)   The Fund shall be used for the purpose of receiving proceeds or
forfeited monies distributed to the municipality.
   (c)   Monies deposited to the Fund shall be used by the Police Department as
provided by a written internal control policy approved by Council and as
provided by Ohio R.C. 2933.43.
(Ord. 93-O-1369, passed 6-15-1993)
§ 254.06  ACCEPTANCE OF CREDIT AND DEBIT CARDS FOR PAYMENT.
   (a)   The use of Visa, Mastercard and Discover credit and debit cards for
the purpose of paying city utility bills, income tax payments and fines and
costs imposed by Mayor's Court, the same being obligations owed to the city,
shall be and hereby is ratified and approved, which payments shall not exceed
five thousand dollars ($5,000) per transaction.
   (b)   The city shall not seek to recover the financing charges incident to
the use of such credit and debit cards by reason of the probability that, given
the above referenced payment limit of five thousand dollars ($5,000) per
transaction, programming recovery costs would equal or exceed the financing
costs sought to be recovered.
(Res. 09-R-390, passed 6-16-2009)
CHAPTER 256:  DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SERVICE
Section
256.01   Service Director.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Creation - see CHTR.
8.01
   Superintendent, divisions - see CHTR.
8.06
§ 256.01  SERVICE DIRECTOR.
   There is hereby established, pursuant to §
8.06 of the City Charter, the position of Service Director in the Department of
Public Service.  The Manager shall appoint the Director who shall serve at the
pleasure of the Manager.  The Director shall perform such duties as the Manager
shall designate.
(Ord. 78-O-397, passed 8-15-1978)
CHAPTER 258:  DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SAFETY
EDITOR’S NOTE: There are no sections in
Chapter 258.  This chapter has been established to provide a place for cross
references and any future legislation.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Established - see CHTR.
8.01
   Duties of Director - see CHTR.
8.07,
8.08
   Police Department - see ADM.
Ch. 262
   Auxiliary Police Unit - see ADM.
262.01
   Fire Department - see ADM.
Ch. 264
CHAPTER 260:  ENGINEER
EDITOR’S NOTE:  The municipality provides by ordinance for the employment of an
engineer or firm of engineers, designated the Municipal Engineer or just the
Engineer for a stipulated period.  These ordinances provide for the services to
be rendered by such person or persons and the compensation to be paid by the
municipality therefor.  Copies of the latest relevant legislation may be
obtained from the Manager.
There are no sections in
Chapter 260.  This chapter has been established to provide a place for cross
references and any future legislation.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   General duties - see Ohio R.C. 735.32
   Assistants - see Ohio R.C. 735.33
   Improvements to be inspected and approved by the Engineer - see P. & Z.
1250.01
CHAPTER 262:  POLICE DEPARTMENT
EDITOR’S NOTE: The Manager has prepared rules and regulations for the
government of the Police Department as required by §
8.11 of the Charter which contain the duties of members, job description and
performance standards, rules of conduct and disciplinary measures, and which
were approved on March 20, 1973.
Section
262.01   Auxiliary Police Unit.
262.02   Grade promotion system for patrol officers.
262.03   Grade promotion for sergeants.
262.04   Assistance outside municipality.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Charter provisions - see CHTR.
8.09,
8.11
   Assistance of State Criminal Bureau - see Ohio R.C. 109.51 et seq.
   Forwarding fingerprints and other data to State Criminal Bureau - see  Ohio
R.C. 109.58 et seq.
   Peace officer training certificate required for permanent employment - see
Ohio R.C. 109.77
   Police protection application - see Ohio R.C. 505.43, 737.04
   Composition and control - see Ohio R.C. 715.05, 737.05
   Auxiliary Police Unit - see Ohio R.C. 737.051, 737.06
   Police Chief - see Ohio R.C. 737.06
   Disposition of property - see GEN. OFF.
608.16
§ 262.01  AUXILIARY POLICE UNIT.
   (a)   Term of service.  Auxiliary police officers shall serve so long as the
City Manager may direct, or until a resignation submitted by such a member is
accepted by the City Manager.
   (b)   Qualification of members.  Members of the Auxiliary Police Unit need
not be residents of the municipality but must be at least 18 years of age at
the time of their appointment. Such officers are subject to all other
requirements enumerated in the rules and regulations provided for in division
(d) of this section.
   (c)   Control of unit.  The Chief of Police or his designee shall be the
commanding officer of the unit and shall have control of the assignment,
training, stationing and the direction of work of such unit. Auxiliary officers
shall have no police powers or arrest authority and are not sworn peace
officers. Auxiliary officers shall perform only such police duties as are
assigned by the Chief or other designated officer in charge and shall act only
when wearing the prescribed uniform or portion thereof. Examples of authorized
duties include, but are not limited to: traffic direction, crowd control,
parade and special event duty, or other duties as assigned by the Chief or his
designee. The Chief or other designated officer in charge shall prescribe the
time and place such uniform or portion thereof shall be worn. Auxiliary
officers shall obey the chain of command of the Police Department and shall
take orders from any regular appointed members thereof while on assignment.
   (d)   Rules and regulations.  The Chief of Police shall prescribe rules and
regulations for the organization, administration, conduct and control of the
unit.
   (e)   Uniforms. The Chief of Police is authorized to prescribe, by the rules
and regulations, the type of uniform or part thereof which shall be worn by the
members of the unit.
   (f)   Service on voluntary basis. All services performed by auxiliary police
officers shall be on a voluntary basis.
   (g)   Nonliability. This section is declared by Council to be an exercise by
the municipality of its police powers for the protection of public peace,
health, property, safety and general welfare. Neither the municipality nor its
agent or representative, an officer appointed under this section or any other
person, who in good faith executes an executive order, rule or regulation
promulgated pursuant to this section, shall be liable for injury or damage
sustained to person or property as the direct or proximate result of such
action.
   (h)   Reserve officers.
      (1)   Eligibility for the classification of reserve officer in the
Auxiliary Police Unit shall be as follows:
         A.   Minimum service as an auxiliary member;
         B.   Minimum age 21;
         C.   Meets Police Department physical standards;
         D.   High school graduate or G.E.D.;
         E.   Acceptable background investigation;
         F.   Meets all other requirements of a full-time officer;
         G.   State certification (OPOTA); and
         H.   Approval by the Public Safety Director.
      (2)   The term of service for a reserve officer shall be so long as the
Public Safety Director may direct, or until a resignation submitted by such
officer is accepted by the Director.
      (3)   The control of such officers shall be the same as set forth in
division (c) of this section, except that reserve officers shall have full
police powers and arrest authority.
      (4)   The reserve officer shall participate in all required auxiliary
police events; shall fulfill all responsibilities required of the auxiliary
member; will attend all intradepartmental training programs; shall accompany
regular police officers on routine patrol as directed by the Chief of Police.
All work performed by reserve officers is voluntary and shall be performed
without compensation. Reserve officers shall display the dedication, ethics and
integrity of a professional police officer; shall be armed on duty only; shall
be on duty only at the direction of the Chief of Police; and shall have full
arrest powers at the direction of the Chief of Police.
(Ord. 80-O-497, passed 4-15-1980; Ord. 81-O-575, passed 7-7-1981; Ord. 09-O-
2543, passed 9-15-2009)
§ 262.02  GRADE PROMOTION SYSTEM FOR PATROL OFFICERS.
   (a)   A person hired by the municipality as a patrol officer shall be
considered a probationary patrol officer for not less than 180 days nor more
than one year from the date upon which his or her active service commenced with
the Police Department.
   (b)   A probationary patrol officer shall be promoted to patrol officer
grade three as defined in division (c) hereof, subject to division (a) hereof,
only upon the condition that he or she is recommended for the same by the Chief
of Police and that such recommendation is accepted and approved by the Manager
within the probationary period.
   (c)   The rank of patrol officer shall be graded as follows in terms of
length of time in service beyond such probationary period:
      (1)   The patrol officer grade three status requires the successful
completion of the probationary period status, as set forth in divisions (a) and
(b) hereof.
      (2)   The patrol officer grade two status requires not less than 18
months of service at the patrol officer grade three level.
      (3)   The patrol officer grade one status requires not less than 36
months of  service at the patrol officer grade two level.
   (d)   (1)   Each patrol officer shall be eligible for promotion through the
three grades in accordance with the time in service requirements, conditioned
upon his or her achievement of a satisfactory performance level and his or her
maintenance of the same for not less than one year prior to the date of his or
her eligibility for a grade promotion. No patrol officer shall be promoted
beyond the grade immediately beyond his or her current grade.
      (2)   Each patrol officer who completes his or her first full year as a
patrol officer grade one shall, on January 1 of the following year and on
January 1 of each succeeding year thereafter, receive an annual salary increase
of 1%, conditioned upon such patrol officer’s continuous maintenance of a
satisfactory performance level within grade one. In addition, each such patrol
officer shall receive such 1% salary increase on a retroactive basis for that
period of time between the date of completion of such patrol officer’s first
full year as a patrol officer grade one and January 1 of the following year.
      (3)   If any such patrol officer fails to continuously maintain a
satisfactory performance level during any calendar year, such patrol officer
shall not be eligible for the 1% salary increase which would otherwise commence
as of January 1 of the following year. However, if such patrol officer’s
performance level is thereafter improved so as to meet the satisfactory
performance level requirements, then such patrol officer shall thereafter be
eligible for the annual salary increase of 1% as of January 1 of the year
following such patrol officer’s continuous maintenance of a satisfactory
performance level during the previous year, but in no event shall such patrol
officer be entitled to the retroactive application of such annual salary
increase of 1%.
   (e)   The satisfactory performance level of each patrol officer shall be
determined by means of a personal evaluation procedure which shall be
administered by the Chief of Police and the Manager and completed with regard
to each patrol officer, excluding probationary patrol officers, upon the
completion of each six months of service. “Satisfactory performance level,” as
used in this section, means not less than 80% of the maximum performance
expectation established by means of the personnel evaluation procedure.
   (f)   The personnel evaluation procedure employed for such purpose shall be
established by the Chief of Police and the Manager and approved by Council, and
may be changed or modified from time to time by the Chief and the Manager upon
the condition that such changes or modifications are approved by Council.
   (g)   For the purpose of implementing the grade promotion system as the same
applies to the current staff of municipal patrol officer, excluding current
probationary patrol officers, an exception shall be made upon the passage of
this section (Ordinance 76-O-245, passed June 1, 1976) to division (c) hereof
so as to provide for the administration of the personnel evaluation procedure,
with regard to each of such persons, immediately upon the date that this
section becomes effective (Ordinance 76-O-245, passed June 1, 1976). Each
patrol officer who achieves a satisfactory performance level shall be placed
forthwith in the grade and at the exact point of time within such grade to
which his or her current time in service entitles him or her and such
achievement shall represent the equivalent of six months of satisfactory
performance in such grade. If, however, any such person fails to achieve a
satisfactory performance level on such occasion, then such person shall be
placed forthwith in the grade to which his or her current time in service
entitles him or her, but he or she shall not receive credit for such equivalent
of six months of satisfactory performance.
   (h)   The rank of sergeant shall be held by an individual whose
qualifications for such rank shall be established by the Chief of Police and
the Manager. The appointment of an individual to the rank of sergeant shall be
subject to the approval of the Manager and Council, but it is not mandatory
that an individual so appointed shall be subject to, or affected by, this
section.
(Ord. 76-O-245, passed 6-1-1976; Ord. 85-O-820, passed 3-19-1985)
§ 262.03  GRADE PROMOTION FOR SERGEANTS.
   (a)   The rank of sergeant grade three shall be held by an individual whose
qualifications  for such rank shall be established by the Chief and the Manager
(Public Safety Director).  The appointment of any individual to the rank of
sergeant grade three shall be subject to the approval of the Manager and
Council, but it is not mandatory that an individual so appointed shall be
subject to, or affected by, this section.
   (b)   A sergeant grade three shall be eligible for promotion to a sergeant
grade two after two years of service as a sergeant grade three.
   (c)   A sergeant grade two shall be eligible for promotion to a sergeant
grade one after three years of service as a sergeant grade two.
   (d)   A sergeant grade three shall be promoted to a sergeant grade two and a
sergeant grade two shall be promoted to a sergeant grade one only upon the
condition that he or she is recommended for the same by the Chief of Police and
that such recommendation is accepted and approved by the Manager (Public Safety
Director) within the time provided in divisions (b) and (c) hereof.
   (e)   (1)   Each sergeant shall be eligible for promotion through such
grades in accordance with the time in service requirements only upon the
condition that he or she has achieved a satisfactory performance level and
maintained the same for not less than one year prior to the date of his or her
eligibility for the grade promotion. No sergeant shall be promoted beyond the
grade immediately beyond his or her current grade.
      (2)   Each sergeant who completes his or her first full year as sergeant
grade one shall, on January 1 of the following year and on January 1 of each
succeeding year thereafter, receive an annual salary increase of 1%,
conditioned upon such sergeant’s continuous maintenance of a satisfactory
performance level within grade one. In addition, each such sergeant shall
receive such 1% salary increase on a retroactive basis for that period of time
between the date of completion of such sergeant’s first full year as a sergeant
grade one and January 1 of the following year.
      (3)   If any such sergeant fails to continuously maintain a satisfactory
performance level during any calendar year, such sergeant shall not be eligible
for the 1% salary increase which would otherwise commence as of January 1 of
the following year. However, if such sergeant’s performance level is thereafter
improved so as to meet the satisfactory performance level requirements, then
such sergeant shall thereafter be eligible for the annual salary increase of 1%
as of January 1 of the year following such sergeant’s continuous maintenance of
a satisfactory performance level during the previous year, but in no event
shall such sergeant be entitled to the retroactive application of such annual
salary increase of 1%.
   (f)   The satisfactory performance level of each sergeant shall be
determined by means of a personal evaluation procedure which shall be
administered by the Chief of Police and the Manager and completed with regard
to each such sergeant as to his or her ability as a supervisor and an officer
upon the completion of each six months of service. “Satisfactory performance
level,” as used in this section, means not less than 80% of the maximum
performance expectation established by means of the personal evaluation
procedure.
   (g)   The personnel evaluation procedure employed for such purpose shall be
established by the Chief and the Manager (Public Safety Director) and approved
by Council and may be changed or modified from time to time by the Chief and
the Manager (Public Safety Director) upon the condition that such changes or
modifications are approved by Council.
   (h)    For the purpose of implementing the grade promotion system as the
same applies to the current staff of sergeants, effective January 1, 1978, the
sergeants shall be classed  as grade three. An exception shall be made upon
passage of this section (Ordinance  79-O-470, passed December 18, 1979) to
division (f) hereof so as to provide for the administration of the personnel
evaluation procedure, with regard to each of such persons, immediately upon the
date that this section becomes effective (Ordinance 79-O-470, passed December
18, 1979). Each sergeant who achieves a satisfactory performance level shall be
placed forthwith in the grade and at the exact point of time within such grade
to which his or her current time in service entitles him or her. Such
achievement shall represent the equivalent of six months of satisfactory
performance in that grade. If, however, any such person fails to achieve a
satisfactory performance level on such occasion, then such person shall be
placed forthwith in the grade to which his or her current time in service
entitles him or her, but he or she shall not receive credit for such equivalent
of six months of satisfactory performance.
(Ord. 79-O-470, passed 12-18-1979; Ord. 85-O-820, passed 3-19-1985)
§ 262.04  ASSISTANCE OUTSIDE MUNICIPALITY.
   Pursuant to and in keeping with Ohio R.C. 737.041, approval is hereby given
to the Police Department to provide protection to any county, municipal
corporation, township or township police district of this state, to a park
district created pursuant to Ohio R.C. 511.18 or 1545.01, to any
multijurisdictional drug, gang or career criminal task force, or to a
governmental entity of an adjoining state without a contract to provide police
protection, upon the authorization of the Manager as Director of Public Safety.
CHAPTER 264:  FIRE DEPARTMENT
Section
264.01   Composition; compensation; records.
264.02   Clothing allowance.
264.03   Firemen’s Relief and Pension Fund.
264.04   Firefighting and emergency services agreements.
264.05   Fire Levy Fund.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Charter provisions - see CHTR.
8.10,
8.11
   Fire protection contracts - see Ohio R.C. 307.05, 505.44, 717.02
   Composition and control - see Ohio R.C. 715.05, 737.08, 737.21
   Fire Chief - see Ohio R.C. 737.09
   Appointment of emergency firemen - see Ohio R.C. 737.10
   General duties - see Ohio R.C. 737.11
   Hours and leave - see  Ohio R.C. 737.21, 4115.02
   Police and Firemen’s Disability Fund and Pension - see Ohio R.C. Ch. 742
   Following and parking near emergency or safety vehicles - see TRAF.
432.27
§ 264.01  COMPOSITION; COMPENSATION; RECORDS.
   (a)   The Fire Department shall be composed of not more than 30 persons.
They shall be compensated for the actual number of hours employed in the
extinguishing of fires or protecting property at fires within the corporate
limits of the municipality, or at fires other than those covered by contract
with the trustees of Fairfield Township, as well as the actual number of hours
employed at fires in Fairfield Township and which are without the corporate
limits of the municipality.
   (b)   The Secretary of the Fire Department shall keep an actual record of
all members of the Department in attendance at a fire and the actual amount of
time each is present and actually employed, and shall certify the same to
Council for payment.
(Ord. 860, passed 4-7-1953)
§ 264.02  CLOTHING ALLOWANCE.
   There is hereby established a clothing allowance for members of the Fire
Department.  Two dollars ($2.00) per call attended by all regular firefighters
shall be paid as a clothing allowance.  Such allowance shall be used for
cleaning, pressing, repairing and purchasing of new clothing to replace
articles damaged while fighting fires.  This amount shall be payable yearly on
or after November 15.
(Ord. 99-O-1776, passed 12-21-1999)
§ 264.03  FIREMEN’S RELIEF AND PENSION FUND.
   (a)   The Municipal Firemen’s Relief and Pension Fund, which was established
by municipal ordinance on December 19, 1939, is hereby declared operative as of
August 20, 1976.
   (b)   Such Fund shall consist of those assets which have accumulated in
escrow since January 1, 1973, and the same shall be forthwith reclaimed from
escrow for such purposes.
   (c)   Such Fund shall be operated, maintained and conducted in accordance
with the applicable sections of the Ohio Revised Code.
   (d)   Such Fund shall be operated, maintained and conducted by a Board of
Trustees to be selected pursuant to the applicable sections of the Ohio Revised
Code.
   (e)   Such Fund shall require, in addition to such reclaimed escrow monies,
the use of three-tenths of one mill of real and personal property tax revenue,
such use having been initiated prior to January 1, 1967.  The Manager shall
henceforth take any and all appropriate action in order to ensure the
availability and appropriation of such monies.
   (f)   The monies hereby reclaimed from escrow shall be allocated for the
following purposes, and the priority of such purposes, as well as the specific
sums allocated to each of such purposes, shall be determined by the Board of
Trustees of the Fund:
      (1)   Payment of pension benefits shall begin on August 20, 1976, to
those retired persons entitled to the same, and continue, as the amount of the
same is determined by the Board, until such time as the monies derived from the
appropriation of three-tenths of one mill of the tax revenue become available
for use by the Board.
      (2)   Payment shall be made to the Ohio Public Employees Retirement
System on behalf of the active members of the Fire Department whereby such
members may receive credit with the Public Employees Retirement System for past
years of service in the Department.
(Ord. 76-O-257, passed 9-7-1976)
§ 264.04  FIREFIGHTING AND EMERGENCY SERVICES AGREEMENTS.
   (a)   As used in this section:
      (1)   “Emergency medical service” and “emergency medical service
organization” have the same meanings as in Ohio R.C. 4765.01.
      (2)   “Fire protection” means the use of firefighting equipment by the
fire department of a firefighting agency or a private fire company, and
includes the provision of ambulance, emergency medical, and rescue services by
those entities.
      (3)   “Firefighting agency” means the municipality, other municipal
corporation, a township, township fire district, joint ambulance district,
joint emergency medical services district or joint fire district and the office
of the State Fire Marshal.
      (4)   “Motor vehicle” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 4511.01.
      (5)   “Private fire company” means a nonprofit group or organization
owning and operating firefighting equipment not controlled by a firefighting
agency.
   (b)   Any firefighting agency, private fire company, or emergency medical
service organization may contract with any governmental entity in this state or
another jurisdiction to provide fire protection or emergency medical services,
as appropriate, whether on a regular basis or only in times of emergency, upon
the approval of the governing boards or administrative heads of the entities
that are parties to the contract.
   (c)   The municipality may contract with any firefighting agency, private
fire company, or emergency medical service organization of this state or
another jurisdiction to obtain fire protection or emergency medical services,
as appropriate, whether on a regular basis or only in times of emergency, upon
the approval of the governing boards or administrative heads of the entities
that are parties to the contract.
   (d)   (1)   Any firefighting agency other than the office of the State Fire
Marshal, private fire company, or emergency medical service organization may
provide fire protection or emergency medical services, as appropriate, to any
governmental entity in this state or another jurisdiction, without a contract
to provide fire protection or emergency medical services, upon the approval of
the governing board of the agency, company, or organization and upon
authorization by an officer or employee of the agency, company, or organization
designated by that individual’s title, office, or position pursuant to the
authorization of the governing board of the agency, company, or organization.
      (2)   The office of the State Fire Marshal may provide fire protection or
emergency medical services, as appropriate, to any governmental entity,
firefighting agency, private fire company, or emergency medical service
organization in this state or another jurisdiction, without a contract to
provide fire protection or emergency medical services, upon the authorization
of the State Fire Marshal.
   (e)   (1)   Ohio R.C. Chapter 2744, insofar as it is applicable to the
operation of fire departments or emergency medical service organizations,
applies to a political subdivision that is operating a fire department or
emergency medical service organization, and to the members of the fire
department or emergency medical service organization, when the members are
rendering service pursuant to this section outside the boundaries of the
political subdivision.
      (2)   Members acting outside the boundaries of the political subdivision
that is operating the fire department or emergency medical service organization
may participate in any pension or indemnity fund established by the political
subdivision to the same extent as while acting within the boundaries of the
political subdivision, and are entitled to all the rights and benefits of Ohio
R.C. Chapter 4123, to the same extent as while performing service within the
boundaries of the political subdivision.
   (f)   A private fire company or private, nonprofit emergency medical service
organization providing service pursuant to this section to a governmental
entity in this state or another jurisdiction has the same immunities and
defenses in a civil action that a political subdivision has under Ohio R.C.
2744.02.  The employees of such a fire company or emergency medical service
organization have the same immunities and defenses in a civil action that
employees of a political subdivision have under Ohio R.C. 2744.03.
   (g)   (1)   The office of the State Fire Marshal, when providing services
pursuant to this section, is liable for injury, death, or loss to person or
property caused by the negligent operation of any motor vehicle by its
employees upon the public roads, highways, or streets in the state when the
employees are engaged within the scope of their employment and authority,
without regard to the proximity of that operation to the office of the State
Fire Marshal. Notwithstanding Ohio R.C. 2743.02(A)(1), the following are full
defenses to that liability:
         A.   An employee providing fire protection was operating a motor
vehicle while engaged in duty at a fire, proceeding toward a place where a fire
is in progress or is believed to be in progress, or answering any other
emergency and the operation of the vehicle did not constitute willful or wanton
misconduct.
         B.   An employee providing emergency medical services was operating a
motor vehicle while responding to or completing a call for emergency medical
care or treatment, the employee was holding a valid driver’s license issued
under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4507, the operation of the vehicle did not constitute
willful or wanton misconduct, and the operation complies with the precautions
described in Ohio R.C. 4511.03.
      (2)   An employee of the office of the State Fire Marshal, when providing
service pursuant to this section, is immune from liability for injury, death,
or loss to person or property caused by the operation of any motor vehicle upon
the public roads, highways, or streets in the state, without regard to the
proximity of that operation to the office of the State Fire Marshal, unless one
of the following applies:
         A.   The operation of the vehicle was manifestly outside the scope of
the employee’s employment of official responsibilities.
         B.   The operation of the vehicle constituted willful or wanton
misconduct.
(ORC 9.60)
§ 264.05  FIRE LEVY FUND.
   (a)   There is hereby established a special fund to be known as the Fire
Levy Fund in accordance with the provisions of Ohio R.C. 5705.12 subject to the
approval of and in the manner prescribed by the Auditor of the State of Ohio,
which approval shall be forthwith obtained by the City Manager.
   (b)   The monies derived from this Fund shall be used to pay for such
payment for wages and operating expenses of the Volunteer Fire Department.
   (c)   Interest derived from any Fund investments shall be used for the
purposes set forth in division (b) above.
(Ord. 10-O-2604, passed 10-19-2010)
CHAPTER 266:  BUILDING DEPARTMENT
EDITOR’S NOTE: Provisions relating to the Building Department are codified in
Chapter 1442 of the Building and Housing Code.
CHAPTER 270:  EMPLOYEES GENERALLY
EDITOR’S NOTE: Because of the frequency of change, provisions relating to
regular compensation are not codified.  Copies of the latest relevant
legislation may be obtained, at cost, from the Manager.
   Terms and conditions of employment are not set forth in this code, but are
specified in various collective bargaining agreements, the personnel policy
manual, and other ordinances for non-union employees.  Copies of relevant
legislation may be obtained from the City Manager.
Section
270.01   Policies and Procedures Manual.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Conflicts of interest - see CHTR.
13.04; GEN. OFF.
608.10
   Public Employee’s Retirement System - see Ohio R.C. Ch. 145
   Strikes by public employees - see Ohio R.C. Ch. 4117
   Obstructing officers and employees - see GEN. OFF.
608.06,
618.09
   Unlawful interest in contracts - see GEN. OFF.
608.10
   Soliciting improper compensation - see GEN. OFF.
608.11
   Dereliction of duty - see GEN. OFF.
608.12
   Interfering with civil rights - see GEN. OFF.
608.13
   Impersonating an officer or employee - see GEN. OFF.
608.14,
672.17
§ 270.01  POLICIES AND PROCEDURES MANUAL.
   The Policies and Procedures Manual, copies of which are on file in the
office of the City Manager, is adopted and incorporated as part of this Code of
Ordinances as fully as if set out at length herein.
(Ord. 01-O-1906, passed 9-4-2001; Ord. 02-O-1949, passed 6-4-2002; Ord. 03-O-
1999, passed 1-7-2003; Ord. 04-O-2166, passed 12-21-2004)
TITLE EIGHT:  BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
CHAPTER 280:  PLANNING COMMISSION
EDITOR’S NOTE: Provisions relating to the Planning Commission are codified in
Chapter 1220 of the Planning and Zoning Code.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Establishment of Planning and Zoning Commission - see Ohio R.C. 713.01
   Powers and duties - see Ohio R.C. 713.02, 713.06
   Planning Commission to be Platting Commission - see Ohio R.C. 713.03
CHAPTER 282:  BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS
EDITOR’S NOTE: Provisions relating to the Board of Zoning Appeals are codified
in
Chapter 1264 of the Planning and Zoning Code.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Municipal zoning - see Ohio R.C. 713.06 et seq.
CHAPTER 284:  CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION
Section
284.01   Establishment
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Civil service-classified and unclassified service - see CHTR.
9.04
   Civil Service Commission - see CHTR.
9.05
   Organization - see CHTR.
9.09
   Vacancy - see CHTR.
9.10
   Removal of members - see CHTR.
9.11
§ 284.01  ESTABLISHMENT.
   A Municipal Civil Service Commission shall be and hereby is established
which shall consist of three members appointed in accordance with the
provisions of Charter §
9.03, the terms of which offices shall commence on April 29, 2001.
(Ord. 01-O-1882, passed 5-1-2001)
CHAPTER 286:  PARK, RECREATION AND CEMETERY BOARD
Section
286.01   Duties of the Superintendent.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Membership - see CHTR.
9.06
   Powers and duties - see CHTR.
9.07
   Organization - see CHTR.
9.09
   Vacancy - see CHTR.
9.10
   Removal of members - see CHTR.
9.11
   Damaging park - see GEN. OFF.
642.13
   Parks - see S.U. & P.S.
Ch. 1062
§ 286.01  DUTIES OF THE SUPERINTENDENT.
   The Park, Recreation and Cemetery Superintendent shall supervise all park
and cemetery employees, directing and scheduling their duties, and shall see
that all cemetery and park functions are carried out and all records
maintained.
(Ord. 80-O-528, passed 12-16-1980)
CHAPTER 288:  CHARTER REVIEW COMMISSION
EDITOR’S NOTE: There are no sections in
Chapter 288.  This chapter has been established to provide a place for cross
references and any future legislation.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Charter Review Commission - see CHTR.
9.08
   Organization - see CHTR.
9.09
   Vacancy - see CHTR.
9.10
   Removal of members - see CHTR.
9.11
CHAPTER 290:  BOARD OF REVIEW (INCOME TAX)
EDITOR’S NOTE: There are no sections in
Chapter 290.  This chapter has been established to provide a place for cross
references and any future legislation.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Earned Income Tax - see B.R. & T.
Ch. 880
   Board of Review - see B.R. & T.
880.13
CHAPTER 292:  BOARD OF HEALTH
Section
292.01   Public health services.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Public health generally - see CHTR.
13.08
   Animal nuisances - see GEN. OFF.
618.07,
618.13
   Safety, sanitation and health - see GEN. OFF.
Ch. 660
   Noxious odors; filthy accumulations; polluting and diverting watercourses -
see GEN. OFF.
660.04
   Garbage and rubbish collection and disposal - see S.U. & P.S.
Ch. 1060
§ 292.01  PUBLIC HEALTH SERVICES.
   The City Manager is authorized to enter into a contract with the District
Advisory Council of the Columbiana County, Ohio, General Health District to
provide public health services to the City of Columbiana. A copy of the
contract was attached as Exhibit A to Resolution 01-R-261, passed June 19, 2001
and is incorporated herein as if set out in full.
(Res. 01-R-261, passed 6-19-2001)
CHAPTER 294:  DRINKING WATER SOURCE PROTECTION COMMITTEE
Section
294.01   Established.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Public health generally - see CHTR.
13.08
   Animal nuisances - see GEN. OFF.
618.07,
618.13
   Safety, sanitation and health - see GEN. OFF.
Ch. 660
   Noxious odors; filthy accumulations; polluting and diverting watercourses -
see GEN. OFF.
660.04
   Garbage and rubbish collection and disposal - see S.U. & P.S.
Ch. 1060
§ 294.01  ESTABLISHED.
   There is hereby established the Drinking Water Source Protection Committee
for the City of Columbiana to develop and implement an effective drinking water
source protection plan for the City of Columbiana.
(Res. 07-R-362, passed 9-18-2007)
TITLE TEN:  JUDICIARY
CHAPTER 298:  MAYOR’S COURT
EDITOR’S NOTE: Ohio R.C. 1905.01 provides that the Mayor of Columbiana has
jurisdiction to hear and determine any prosecution for the violation of a
Columbiana ordinance, and has jurisdiction in all criminal causes involving
moving traffic violations occurring on state highways located within the
corporate limits of Columbiana, subject to the limitations of Ohio R.C. 2937.08
and 2938.04. In keeping his or her docket and file, the Mayor shall be governed
by the laws pertaining to county courts.
   Ohio R.C. 2937.08 provides that if the court in which a defendant is charged
with an offense is not a court of record (the Mayor’s Court), and the charge is
such that a right to a jury trial exists, such matter shall not be tried before
him or her unless the accused, by writing subscribed by him or her, waives a
jury and consents to be tried by the magistrate. If the defendant, in such
event, does not waive his or her right to a jury trial, then the magistrate
shall require the accused to enter into a recognizance to appear before a court
of record in Columbiana County (the Columbiana County Court, Eastern District)
or in Mahoning County (Mahoning County Court, Area Five) and the magistrate
shall thereupon certify all papers filed, together with a transcript of
proceedings and accrued costs to date, and such recognizance, if given, to the
court of record. However, Rule 23(A) of the Ohio Rules of Criminal Procedure
provides that in petty offense cases, where there is a right to jury trial, the
defendant shall be tried by the court unless he or she demands a jury trial.
The jurisdiction of a Mayor’s Court, in such cases, is further limited by Rule
9 of the Ohio Traffic Rules, which provides that if a jury demand is not made
pursuant to Criminal Rule 23, and the defendant waives his or her right to jury
trial in writing, a mayor may try the case only if (1) his or her compensation
as a judge is not directly dependent upon criminal case convictions, or (2) he
or she is not the chief executive and administrative officer of the
municipality and as such responsible for the financial condition of the
municipality. Guilty and no contest pleas may be taken by any mayor.
   Ohio R.C. 1901.24 and 2938.04 provide that the right to trial by jury shall
be claimed by making demand in writing therefor and filing the same with the
clerk of the court of record not less than three days prior to the date set for
trial or on or before the day following receipt of notice of the date set for
trial, whichever is later. However, Rule 23(A) of the Ohio Rules of Criminal
procedure, which presumptively supersedes Ohio R.C. 2938.04, provides that
right to trial by jury shall be claimed by making demand in writing therefor
and filing the same with the clerk of court not less than ten days prior to the
date set for trial, or on or before the third day following receipt of notice
of the date set for trial, whichever is later. Failure to claim a jury trial as
provided herein is a complete waiver of the right thereto. Ohio R.C. 2938.04
provides, further, that a jury trial may not be had in courts not of record,
but failure to waive a jury in writing where the right to a jury trial may be
asserted shall require the magistrate to certify such case to a court of record
as provided in Ohio R.C. 2937.08.
   Ohio R.C. 2945.17 provides that an accused has a right to be tried by a jury
at any trial in any court for the violation of any Ohio statute or of any
Columbiana ordinance, except in cases in which the penalty involved does not
exceed a fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00).
   The Supreme Court of Ohio, on December 4, 1967, promulgated “Rules of
Practice and Procedure in Traffic Cases For All Courts Inferior to Common
Pleas,” the adoption of which became mandatory prior to March 2, 1969. Amended
Rules, referred to as the Ohio Traffic Rules, became effective on January 1,
1975.
   Effective October 20, 1987, Mayors of Mayor’s Courts were authorized to
suspend the driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit or nonresident
operating privilege of any person who is convicted of or pleads guilty to a
violation of Ohio R.C. 4511.19 or §
434.01 of the Traffic Code (OVI), in accordance with Ohio R.C. 4507.16(B).
Section
298.01   Court costs.
298.02   Satisfaction of fine; credit for time served.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Mayor’s Court - see CHTR.
5.02
   Mayor’s court jurisdiction - see Ohio R.C. 1905.01 et seq.
   Mayor’s powers and duties - see Ohio R.C. 1905.20 et seq.
   Contempt of court - see Ohio R.C. 1905.28, 2935.11
   Peace and search warrants - see Ohio R.C. Ch. 2933
   Detention and arrest - see Ohio R.C. Ch. 2935
   Preliminary examination; bail - see Ohio R.C. Ch. 2937
   Trial - see Ohio R.C. Ch. 2938
   Notification to Director of liquor law convictions - see Ohio R.C. 4301.991
   Record of traffic violations - see Ohio R.C. 4513.37
§ 298.01  COURT COSTS.
   (a)   The Mayor is hereby authorized and directed to assess, in addition to
any and all court costs mandated by the State of Ohio, a charge of thirty-five
dollars ($35.00) in addition to the fine and/or other penalty imposed against
persons convicted in the Mayor's Court of misdemeanor offenses in violation of
any of the provisions of these Codified Ordinances.
   (b)   The Mayor is hereby authorized and directed to assess against person
convicted in the Mayor's Court as aforesaid, in addition to any and all court
costs and/or fees referenced in paragraph (a) above, the actual costs incurred
as a consequence of lawfully appropriate efforts to collect such costs,
including, but not limited to, the costs incurred by the Mayor’s Court by
reason of compliance with the provisions of Ohio R.C. 1905.202 and 4510.22.
   (c)   The Clerk of the Mayor’s Court is hereby authorized and directed to
take any and all appropriate steps in order to ensure total compliance with the
accounting procedures applicable to the aforesaid court costs, fines and/or
penalties and shall deposit such monies, monthly, to the credit of the General
Fund of the municipality. The Clerk shall further account to the State of Ohio
for all court costs mandated by the State of Ohio for the collection by the
Mayor's Court.
(Ord. 09-O-2547, passed 10-6-2009; Ord. 14-O-2758, passed 3-18-2014)
§ 298.02  SATISFACTION OF FINE; CREDIT FOR TIME SERVED.
   (a)   Pursuant to and in keeping with Ohio R.C. 2947.14, if a fine is
imposed, in whole or in part, in punishment of a violation of an ordinance of
the municipality, the Mayor, being the presiding officer in the Mayor’s Court,
or such other judge as may have jurisdiction over such matter, may order that
the offender stand committed to the municipal jail until such fine is paid or
secured to be paid, or is otherwise legally discharged, if such Mayor or judge
determines at a hearing that the offender is able, at that time, to pay the
fine but refuses to do so.  At the hearing, the offender may be represented by
counsel and testify and present evidence as to his or her ability to pay the
fine.  If the Mayor or judge determines, pursuant to this section, that the
offender is able to pay a fine, the determination shall be supported by
findings of fact set forth in writing in a journal entry that indicates the
offender’s income, assets, debts and ability to pay.
   (b)   Any person imprisoned under this section shall receive credit upon the
fine at the rate of thirty dollars ($30.00) per day or fraction thereof.  If
the unpaid fine is less than thirty dollars ($30.00), the person shall be
imprisoned one day.
(Ord. 84-O-772, passed 11-5-1984)
PART FOUR:  TRAFFIC CODE
      TITLE TWO - Administration, Enforcement and Penalties
         Chap.
402.   Definitions.
         Chap.
404.   Enforcement; Impounding.
         Chap.
406.   Traffic Control.
         Chap.
408.   Penalties.
      TITLE FOUR - Public Ways and Traffic Control Devices
         Chap.
412.   Obstruction and Special Uses of Public Ways.
         Chap.
414.   Traffic Control Devices.
         Chap.
416.   Pedestrians.
      TITLE SIX - Vehicles and Operation
         Chap.
432.   Operation Generally.
         Chap.
434.   O.V.I.; Reckless Operation; Speed.
         Chap.
436.   Licensing; Accidents.
         Chap.
438.   Safety and Equipment.
         Chap.
440.   Commercial and Heavy Vehicles.
         Chap.
442.   Drivers of Commercial Vehicles.
         Chap.
444.   Bicycles and Motorcycles.
         Chap.
446.   Snowmobiles, Off-Highway Motorcycles and All-Purpose Vehicles.
      TITLE EIGHT - Parking
         Chap.
452.   Parking Generally.
TITLE TWO:  ADMINISTRATION, ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES
CHAPTER 402:  DEFINITIONS
Section
402.01   Meaning of words and phrases.
402.02   Agricultural tractor; multi-wheel agricultural tractor.
402.03   Alley.
402.04   Arterial street.
402.045   Beacon.
402.05   Bicycle.
402.06   Bus.
402.07   Business district.
402.08   Chauffeured limousine.
402.09     Child day-care center or Type A family day-care home.
402.10   Commercial tractor.
402.11   Controlled-access highway.
402.12   Crosswalk.
402.13   Driver or operator.
402.135   Electric bicycle.
402.14   Emergency vehicle.
402.15   Explosives.
402.16   Expressway.
402.17   Flammable liquid.
402.18   Freeway.
402.185   Funeral escort vehicle.
402.19   Gross weight.
402.193   Highway maintenance vehicle.
402.195   Highway traffic signal.
402.196   Hybrid beacon.
402.20   Intersection.
402.21   Laned highway.
402.215   Local authorities.
402.216   Median.
402.22   Motor vehicle.
402.23   Motorcycle.
402.24   Motorized bicycle or moped.
402.25   Motorized wheelchair.
402.255   Operate.
402.26   Parking.
402.27   Pedestrian.
402.28   Person.
402.29   Pole trailer.
402.30   Police officer.
402.305   Predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense.
402.306   Private road open to public travel.
402.31   Private road or driveway.
402.32   Public safety vehicle.
402.33   Railroad.
402.34   Railroad sign or signal.
402.35   Railroad train.
402.36   Residence district.
402.37   Ridesharing arrangement.
402.38   Right-of-way.
402.385   Road service vehicle.
402.39   Roadway.
402.395   Rural mail delivery vehicle.
402.40   Safety zone.
402.41   School bus.
402.42   Semitrailer.
402.425   Shared-use path.
402.43   Sidewalk.
402.435   State highway.
402.44   State route.
402.45   Stop.
402.46   Stop intersection.
402.47   Stopping and standing.
402.48   Street or highway.
402.49   Through street or highway.
402.50   Thruway.
402.51   Traffic.
402.52   Traffic control device.
402.53   Traffic control signal.
402.54   Trailer.
402.55   Truck.
402.56   Urban district.
402.57   Vehicle.
402.58   Waste collection vehicle.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   See section histories for similar state law
   Blind person defined - see TRAF.
416.02
   Funeral procession defined - see TRAF.
432.23
   Street racing defined - see TRAF.
434.09
   Commercial car defined - see TRAF.
442.01
   Snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle and all-purpose vehicle defined - see
TRAF.
446.01
§ 402.01  MEANING OF WORDS AND PHRASES.
   (a)   Except as otherwise provided, the definitions set forth in Ohio R.C.
4501.01 shall apply to this Traffic Code and the penal laws of the
municipality.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided, the following words and phrases, when
used in this Traffic Code, shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to
them in this chapter.
§ 402.02  AGRICULTURAL TRACTOR; MULTI-WHEEL AGRICULTURAL TRACTOR.
   (a)   “Agricultural tractor” means every self-propelled vehicle designed or
used for drawing other vehicles or wheeled machinery, but having no provision
for carrying loads independently of such other vehicles, and used principally
for agricultural purposes.
(ORC 4511.01(J))
   (b)    “Multi-wheel agricultural tractor” means a type of agricultural
tractor that has two or more wheels or tires on each side of one axle at the
rear of the tractor, is designed or used for drawing other vehicles or wheeled
machinery, has no provision for carrying loads independently of the drawn
vehicles or machinery, and is used principally for agricultural purposes.
(ORC 4511.01(GGG))
§ 402.03  ALLEY.
   “Alley” means a street or highway intended to provide access to the rear or
side of lots or buildings in urban districts, and not intended for the purpose
of through vehicular traffic, and any street or highway that has been declared
an “alley” by the Council.
(ORC 4511.01(XX))
§ 402.04  ARTERIAL STREET.
   “Arterial street” means any United States or state numbered route,
controlled-access highway, or other major radial or circumferential street or
highway designated by local authorities within their respective jurisdictions
as part of a major arterial system of streets or highways.
(ORC 4511.01(CCC))
§ 402.045  BEACON.
   “Beacon” means a highway traffic signal with one or more signal sections
that operate in a flashing mode.
(ORC 4511.01(KKK))
§ 402.05  BICYCLE.
   “Bicycle” means every device, other than a device that is designed solely
for use as a play vehicle by a child, that is propelled solely by human power
upon which a person may ride, and that has two or more wheels, any of which is
more than 14 inches in diameter.
(ORC 4511.01(G))
§ 402.06  BUS.
   “Bus” means every motor vehicle designed for carrying more than nine
passengers, and used for the transportation of persons other than in a
ridesharing arrangement, and every motor vehicle, automobile for hire, or
funeral car, other than a taxicab or motor vehicle used in a ridesharing
arrangement, designed and used for the transportation of persons for
compensation.
(ORC 4511.01(L))
§ 402.07  BUSINESS DISTRICT.
   “Business district” means the territory fronting upon a street or highway,
including the street or highway, between successive intersections within the
municipality, where 50% or more of the frontage between successive
intersections is occupied by buildings in use for business, or within or
outside the municipality where 50% or more of the frontage for a distance of
300 feet or more is occupied by buildings in use for business, and the
character of the territory is indicated by official traffic-control devices.
(ORC 4511.01(NN))
§ 402.08  CHAUFFEURED LIMOUSINE.
   “Chauffeured limousine” means a motor vehicle that is designed to carry nine
or fewer passengers and is operated for hire pursuant to a prearranged contract
for the transportation of passengers on public roads and highways along a route
under the control of the person hiring the vehicle and not over a defined and
regular route. “Prearranged contract” means an agreement, made in advance of
boarding, to provide transportation from a specific location in a chauffeured
limousine. “Chauffeured limousine” does not include any vehicle that is used
exclusively in the business of funeral directing.
(ORC 4501.01(LL))
§ 402.09  CHILD DAY-CARE CENTER OR TYPE A FAMILY DAY-CARE HOME.
   “Child day-care center” and “Type A family day-care home” have the same
meanings as set forth in Ohio R.C. 5104.01.
(ORC 4511.01(FFF))
§ 402.10  COMMERCIAL TRACTOR.
   “Commercial tractor” means every motor vehicle having motive power designed
or used for drawing other vehicles, and not so constructed as to carry any load
thereon, or designed or used for drawing other vehicles while carrying a
portion of the other vehicles, or the load thereon, or both.
(ORC 4511.01(I))
§ 402.11  CONTROLLED-ACCESS HIGHWAY.
   “Controlled-access highway” means every street or highway in respect to
which owners or occupants of abutting lands and other persons have no legal
right or access to or from the same except at certain points only and in a
manner as may be determined by the public authority having jurisdiction over
the street or highway.
(ORC 4511.01(CC))
§ 402.12  CROSSWALK.
   “Crosswalk” means:
   (a)   That part of a roadway at intersections ordinarily included within the
real or projected prolongation of property lines and curb lines or, in the
absence of curbs, the edges of the traversable roadway;
   (b)   Any portion of a roadway at an intersection or elsewhere, distinctly
indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other markings on the surface;
   (c)   Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this definition, there
shall not be a crosswalk where the Legislative Authority has placed signs
indicating no crossing.
(ORC 4511.01(LL))
§ 402.13  DRIVER OR OPERATOR.
   “Driver” or “operator” means every person who drives or is in actual
physical control of a vehicle.
(ORC 4511.01(Y))
§ 402.135  ELECTRIC BICYCLE.
   “Electric bicycle.” Means a “class 1 electric bicycle”, a “class 2 electric
bicycle”, or a “class 3 electric bicycle” as defined below.
   (a)   “Class 1 electric bicycle.” Means a bicycle that is equipped with
fully operable pedals and an electric motor of less than 750 watts that
provides assistance only when the rider is pedaling and ceases to provide
assistance when the bicycle reaches the speed of 20 miles per hour.
   (b)   “Class 2 electric bicycle.” Means a bicycle that is equipped with
fully operable pedals and an electric motor of less than 750 watts that may
provide assistance regardless of whether the rider is pedaling and is not
capable of providing assistance when the bicycle reaches the speed of 20 miles
per hour.
   (c)   “Class 3 electric bicycle.” Means a bicycle that is equipped with
fully operable pedals and an electric motor of less than 750 watts that
provides assistance only when the rider is pedaling and ceases to provide
assistance when the bicycle reaches the speed of 28 miles per hour.
(ORC 4511.01(RRR))
§ 402.14  EMERGENCY VEHICLE.
   “Emergency vehicle” means emergency vehicles of municipal, township or
county departments or public utility corporations, when identified as such as
required by law, the Director of Public Safety, or local authorities, and motor
vehicles when commandeered by a police officer.
(ORC 4511.01(D))
§ 402.15  EXPLOSIVES.
   “Explosives” means any chemical compound or mechanical mixture that is
intended for the purpose of producing an explosion that contains any oxidizing
and combustible units or other ingredients in such proportions, quantities, or
packing that an ignition by fire, by friction, by concussion, by percussion, or
by a detonator of any part of the compound or mixture may cause a sudden
generation of highly heated gases, such that the resultant gaseous pressures
are capable of producing destructive effects on contiguous objects, or of
destroying life or limb. Manufactured articles shall not be held to be
explosives when the individual units contain explosives in limited quantities
of such nature or in such packing that it is impossible to procure a
simultaneous or a destructive explosion of the units, to the injury of life,
limb, or property by fire, friction, concussion, percussion, or by a detonator,
such as fixed ammunition for small arms, firecrackers, or safety fuse matches.
(ORC 4511.01(T))
§ 402.16  EXPRESSWAY.
   “Expressway” means a divided arterial highway for through traffic with full
or partial control of access with an excess of 50% of all crossroads separated
in grade.
(ORC 4511.01(ZZ))
§ 402.17  FLAMMABLE LIQUID.
   “Flammable liquid” means any liquid which has a flash point of 70°F or less,
as determined by a tagliabue or equivalent closed cup test device.
(ORC 4511.01(U))
§ 402.18  FREEWAY.
   “Freeway” means a divided multi-lane highway for through traffic with
crossroads separated in grade and with full control of access.
(ORC 4511.01(YY))
§ 402.185  FUNERAL ESCORT VEHICLE.
   “Funeral escort vehicle” means any motor vehicle, including a funeral
hearse, while used to facilitate the movement of a funeral procession.
(ORC 4511.01(WW))
§ 402.19  GROSS WEIGHT.
   “Gross weight” means the weight of a vehicle plus the weight of any load
thereon.
(ORC 4511.01(V))
§ 402.193  HIGHWAY MAINTENANCE VEHICLE.
   “Highway maintenance vehicle” means a vehicle used in snow and ice removal
or road surface maintenance, including a snow plow, traffic line striper, road
sweeper, mowing machine, asphalt distributing vehicle, or other such vehicle
designed for use in specific highway maintenance activities.
(ORC 4511.01(QQQ))
§ 402.195  HIGHWAY TRAFFIC SIGNAL.
   “Highway traffic signal” means a power-operated traffic control device by
which traffic is warned or directed to take some specific action. The term does
not include a power-operated sign, steadily illuminated pavement marker,
warning light, or steady burning electric lamp.
(ORC 4511.01(MMM))
§ 402.196  HYBRID BEACON.
   “Hybrid beacon” means a type of beacon that is intentionally placed in a
dark mode between periods of operation where no indications are displayed and,
when in operation, displays both steady and flashing traffic control signal
indications.
(ORC 4511.01(LLL))
§ 402.20  INTERSECTION.
   “Intersection” means:
      (1)   The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the
lateral curb lines, or, if none, the lateral boundary lines of the roadways of
two highways that join one another at, or approximately at, right angles, or
the area within which vehicles traveling upon different highways that join at
any other angle might come into conflict. The junction of an alley or driveway
with a roadway or highway does not constitute an intersection unless the
roadway or highway at the junction is controlled by a traffic control device.
      (2)   If a highway includes two roadways that are 30 feet or more apart,
then every crossing of each roadway of such divided highway by an intersecting
highway constitutes a separate intersection. If both intersecting highways
include two roadways 30 feet or more apart, then every crossing of any two
roadways of such highways constitutes a separate intersection.
      (3)   At a location controlled by a traffic control signal, regardless of
the distance between the separate intersections as described in division (2) of
this definition:
         A.   If a stop line, yield line, or crosswalk has not been designated
on the roadway within the median between the separate intersections, the two
intersections and the roadway and median constitute one intersection.
         B.   Where a stop line, yield line, or crosswalk line is designated on
the roadway on the intersection approach, the area within the crosswalk and any
area beyond the designated stop line or yield line constitute part of the
intersection.
         C.   Where a crosswalk is designated on a roadway on the departure
from the intersection, the intersection includes the area that extends to the
far side of the crosswalk.
(ORC 4511.01(KK))
§ 402.21  LANED HIGHWAY.
   “Laned highway” means a highway the roadway of which is divided into two or
more clearly marked lanes for vehicular traffic.
(ORC 4511.01(GG))
§ 402.215  LOCAL AUTHORITIES.
   “Local authorities” means every county, municipal, and other local board or
body having authority to adopt police regulations under the Constitution and
laws of this state.
(ORC 4511.01(AA))
§ 402.216  MEDIAN.
   “Median” means the area between two roadways of a divided highway, measured
from edge of traveled way to edge of traveled way, but excluding turn lanes.
The width of a median may be different between intersections, between
interchanges, and at opposite approaches of the same intersection.
(ORC 4511.01(NNN))
§ 402.22  MOTOR VEHICLE.
   “Motor vehicle” means every vehicle propelled or drawn by power other than
muscular power or power collected from overhead electric trolley wires, except
motorized bicycles, electric bicycles, road rollers, traction engines, power
shovels, power cranes and other equipment used in construction work, and not
designed for or employed in general highway transportation, hole-digging
machinery, well-drilling machinery, ditch-digging machinery, farm machinery,
and trailers designed and used exclusively to transport a boat between a place
of storage and a marina, or in and around a marina, when drawn or towed on a
street or highway for a distance of no more than ten miles and at a speed of 25
miles per hour or less.
(ORC 4511.01(B))
§ 402.23  MOTORCYCLE.
   “Motorcycle” means every motor vehicle, other than a tractor, having a seat
or saddle for the use of the operator and designed to travel on not more than
three wheels in contact with the ground, including, but not limited to, motor
vehicles known as “motor-driven cycle,” “motor scooter,” “autocycle,” “cab-
enclosed motorcycle,” or “motorcycle” without regard to weight or brake
horsepower.
(ORC 4511.01(C))
§ 402.24  MOTORIZED BICYCLE OR MOPED.
   “Motorized bicycle or moped” means any vehicle having either two tandem
wheels or one wheel in the front and two wheels in the rear, that may be
capable of being pedaled, and that is equipped with a helper motor of not more
than 50 cubic centimeters piston displacement that produces not more than one
brake horsepower, and is capable of propelling the vehicle at a speed of not
greater than 20 miles per hour on a level surface. The terms do not include an
electric bicycle.
(ORC 4511.01(H))
§ 402.25  MOTORIZED WHEELCHAIR.
   “Motorized wheelchair” means any self-propelled vehicle designed for, and
used by, a person with a disability and that is incapable of a speed in excess
of eight miles per hour.
(ORC 4511.01(EEE))
§ 402.255  OPERATE.
   “Operate” means to cause or have caused movement of a vehicle.
(ORC 4511.01(HHH))
§ 402.26  PARKING.
   “Parking,” when prohibited, means the standing of a vehicle, whether
occupied or not, otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while
actually engaged in loading or unloading merchandise or passengers.
§ 402.27  PEDESTRIAN.
   “Pedestrian” means any natural person afoot.
(ORC 4511.01(X))
§ 402.28  PERSON.
   “Person” means every natural person, firm, partnership, association or
corporation.
(ORC 4511.01(W))
§ 402.29  POLE TRAILER.
   “Pole trailer” means every trailer or semitrailer attached to the towing
vehicle by means of a reach, pole, or by being boomed or otherwise secured to
the towing vehicle, and ordinarily used for transporting long or irregular
shaped loads such as poles, pipes, or structural members capable, generally, of
sustaining themselves as beams between the supporting connections.
(ORC 4511.01(O))
§ 402.30  POLICE OFFICER.
   “Police officer” means every officer authorized to direct or regulate
traffic, or to make arrests for violations of traffic regulations.
(ORC 4511.01(Z))
§ 402.305  PREDICATE MOTOR VEHICLE OR TRAFFIC OFFENSE.
   “Predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense” means any of the following:
   (a)   A violation of Ohio R.C.  4511.03, 4511.051, 4511.12, 4511.132,
4511.16, 4511.20, 4511.201, 4511.21, 4511.211, 4511.213, 4511.22, 4511.23,
4511.25, 4511.26, 4511.27, 4511.28, 4511.29, 4511.30, 4511.31, 4511.32,
4511.33, 4511.34, 4511.35, 4511.36, 4511.37, 4511.38, 4511.39, 4511.40,
4511.41, 4511.42, 4511.43, 4511.431, 4511.432, 4511.44, 4511.441, 4511.451,
4511.452, 4511.46, 4511.47, 4511.48, 4511.481, 4511.49, 4511.50, 4511.511,
4511.53, 4511.54, 4511.55, 4511.56, 4511.57, 4511.58, 4511.59, 4511.60,
4511.61, 4511.64, 4511.66, 4511.661, 4511.68, 4511.70, 4511.701, 4511.71,
4511.711, 4511.712, 4511.713, 4511.72, 4511.73, 4511.763, 4511.771, 4511.78, or
4511.84;
   (b)   A violation of Ohio R.C. 4511.17(A)(2), 4511.51(A) to (D), or 4511.74
(A);
   (c)   A violation of any provision of Ohio R.C. 4511.01 to 4511.76 for which
no penalty otherwise is provided in the section that contains the provision
violated;
   (d)   A violation of Ohio R.C. 4511.214;
   (e)   A violation of a municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent
to any section or provision set forth or described in division (a), (b), (c),
or (d) of this definition.
(ORC 4511.01(III))
§ 402.306  PRIVATE ROAD OPEN TO PUBLIC TRAVEL.
   “Private road open to public travel” means a private toll road or road,
including any adjacent sidewalks that generally run parallel to the road,
within a shopping center, airport, sports arena, or other similar business or
recreation facility that is privately owned but where the public is allowed to
travel without access restrictions. The term includes a gated toll road but
does not include a road within a private gated property where access is
restricted at all times, a parking area, a driving aisle within a parking area,
or a private grade crossing.
(ORC 4511.01(OOO))
§ 402.31  PRIVATE ROAD OR DRIVEWAY.
   “Private road or driveway” means every way or place in private ownership
used for vehicular travel by the owner, and those having express or implied
permission from the owner, but not by other persons.
(ORC 4511.01(DD))
§ 402.32  PUBLIC SAFETY VEHICLE.
   “Public safety vehicle” means any of the following:
   (a)   Ambulances, including private ambulance companies under contract to a
municipality, township, or county, and private ambulances and nontransport
vehicles bearing license plates issued under Ohio R.C. 4503.49;
   (b)   Motor vehicles used by public law enforcement officers or other
persons sworn to enforce the criminal and traffic laws of the state;
   (c)   Any motor vehicle when properly identified as required by the Director
of Public Safety, when used in response to fire emergency calls or to provide
emergency medical service to ill or injured persons, and when operated by a
duly qualified person who is a member of a volunteer rescue service or a
volunteer fire department, and who is on duty pursuant to the rules or
directives of that service. The State Fire Marshal shall be designated by the
Director of Public Safety as the certifying agency for all public safety
vehicles described herein;
   (d)   Vehicles used by fire departments, including motor vehicles when used
by volunteer firefighters responding to emergency calls in the fire department
service when identified as required by the Director of Public Safety;
   (e)   Any vehicle used to transport or provide emergency medical service to
an ill or injured person, when certified as a “public safety vehicle,” shall be
considered such a vehicle when transporting an ill or injured person to a
hospital, regardless of whether such vehicle has already passed a hospital;
   (f)   Vehicles used by the Motor Carrier Enforcement Unit for the
enforcement of orders and rules of the Public Utilities Commission as specified
in Ohio R.C. 5503.34.
(ORC 4511.01(E))
§ 402.33  RAILROAD.
   “Railroad” means a carrier of persons or property operating upon rails
placed principally on a private right-of-way.
(ORC 4511.01(P))
§ 402.34  RAILROAD SIGN OR SIGNAL.
   “Railroad sign or signal” means any sign, signal, or device erected by
authority of a public body or official or by a railroad, and intended to give
notice of the presence of railroad tracks or the approach of a railroad train.
(ORC 4511.01(SS))
§ 402.35  RAILROAD TRAIN.
   “Railroad train” means a steam engine or an electric or other motor, with or
without cars coupled thereto, operated by a railroad.
(ORC 4511.01(Q))
§ 402.36  RESIDENCE DISTRICT.
   “Residence district” means the territory, not comprising a business
district, fronting on a street or highway, including the street or highway,
where, for a distance of 300 feet or more, the frontage is improved with
residences or residences and buildings in use for business.
(ORC 4511.01(OO))
§ 402.37  RIDESHARING ARRANGEMENT.
   “Ridesharing arrangement” includes the transportation of persons in a motor
vehicle where the transportation is incidental to another purpose of a
volunteer driver, and includes ridesharing arrangements known as carpools,
vanpools, and buspools.
(ORC 4511.01(DDD))
§ 402.38  RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   “Right-of-way” means either of the following, as the context requires:
   (a)   The right of a vehicle or pedestrian to proceed uninterruptedly in a
lawful manner in the direction in which it, he or she is moving, in preference
to another vehicle or pedestrian approaching from a different direction into
its, his or her path;
   (b)   A general term denoting land, property, or the interest therein,
usually in the configuration of a strip, acquired for or devoted to
transportation purposes. When used in this context, “right-of-way” includes the
roadway, shoulders or berm, ditch, and slopes extending to the right-of-way
limits under the control of the state or local authority.
(ORC 4511.01(UU))
§ 402.385  ROAD SERVICE VEHICLE.
   “Road service vehicle” means wreckers, utility repair vehicles and state,
county and municipal service vehicles equipped with visual signals by means of
flashing, rotating or oscillating lights.
(ORC 4511.01(JJJ))
§ 402.39  ROADWAY.
   “Roadway” means that portion of a highway improved, designed, or ordinarily
used for vehicular travel, except the berm or shoulder. If a highway includes
two or more separate roadways, the term “roadway” means any roadway separately,
but not all the roadways collectively.
(ORC 4511.01(EE))
§ 402.395  RURAL MAIL DELIVERY VEHICLE.
   “Rural mail delivery vehicle” means every vehicle used to deliver United
States mail on a rural mail delivery route.
(ORC 4511.01(VV))
§ 402.40  SAFETY ZONE.
   “Safety zone” means the area or space officially set apart within a roadway
for the exclusive use of pedestrians, and protected or marked or indicated by
adequate signs so as to be plainly visible at all times.
(ORC 4511.01(MM))
§ 402.41  SCHOOL BUS.
   “School bus” means every bus designed for carrying more than nine passengers
which is owned by a public, private, or governmental agency or institution of
learning, and operated for the transportation of children to or from a school
session or a school function, or owned by a private person and operated for
compensation for the transportation of children to or from a school session or
a school function; provided “school bus” does not include a bus operated by a
municipally owned transportation system, a mass transit company operating
exclusively within the territorial limits of a municipality, or within such
limits and the territorial limits of municipalities immediately contiguous to
the municipality, nor a common passenger carrier certified by the Public
Utilities Commission unless the bus is devoted exclusively to the
transportation of children to and from a school session or a school function,
and “school bus” does not include a van or bus used by a licensed child day-
care center or Type A family day-care home to transport children from the child
day-care center or Type A family day-care home to a school if the van or bus
does not have more than 15 children in the van or bus at any time.
(ORC 4511.01(F))
§ 402.42  SEMITRAILER.
   “Semitrailer” means every vehicle designed or used for carrying persons or
property with another and separate motor vehicle so that in operation a part of
its own weight or that of its load, or both, rests upon and is carried by
another vehicle.
(ORC 4511.01(N))
§ 402.425  SHARED-USE PATH.
   “Shared-use path” means a bikeway outside the traveled way and physically
separated from motorized vehicular traffic by an open space or barrier and
either within the highway right-of-way or within an independent alignment. A
shared-use path also may be used by pedestrians, including skaters, joggers,
users of manual and motorized wheelchairs, and other authorized motorized and
non-motorized users. A shared-use path does not include any trail that is
intended to be used primarily for mountain biking, hiking, equestrian use, or
other similar uses, or any other single track or natural surface trial that has
historically been reserved for non-motorized use.
(ORC 4511.01(PPP)
§ 402.43  SIDEWALK.
   “Sidewalk” means that portion of a street between the curb lines, or the
lateral line of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines, intended for the
use of pedestrians.
(ORC 4511.01(FF))
§ 402.435  STATE HIGHWAY.
   “State highway” means a highway under the jurisdiction of the Department of
Transportation, outside the limits of municipalities, provided that the
authority conferred upon the Director of Transportation in Ohio R.C. 5511.01 to
erect state highway route markers and signs directing traffic shall not be
modified by Ohio R.C. 4511.01 through 4511.79 and 4511.99.
(ORC 4511.01(II))
§ 402.44  STATE ROUTE.
   “State route” means every highway which is designated with an official state
route number and so marked.
(ORC 4511.01(JJ))
§ 402.45  STOP.
   “Stop,” when required, means a complete cessation of movement.
§ 402.46  STOP INTERSECTION.
   “Stop intersection” means any intersection at one or more entrances of which
stop signs are erected.
(ORC 4511.01(BBB))
§ 402.47  STOPPING AND STANDING.
   “Stopping” and “standing,” when prohibited, mean any halting of a vehicle,
even momentarily, whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid
conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police
officer or traffic control device.
§ 402.48  STREET OR HIGHWAY.
   “Street” or “highway” means the entire width between the boundary lines of
every way open to the use of the public as a thoroughfare for purposes of
vehicular travel.
(ORC 4511.01(BB))
§ 402.49  THROUGH STREET OR HIGHWAY.
   “Through street or highway” means every street or highway as provided in
Ohio R.C. 4511.65, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
(ORC 4511.01(HH))
§ 402.50  THRUWAY.
   “Thruway” means a through street or highway whose entire roadway is reserved
for through traffic and on which roadway parking is prohibited.
(ORC 4511.01(AAA))
§ 402.51  TRAFFIC.
   “Traffic” means pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles, streetcars,
and other devices, either singly or together, while using for purposes of
travel any highway or private road open to public travel.
(ORC 4511.01(TT))
§ 402.52  TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICE.
   “Traffic control device” means a flagger, sign, signal, marking, or other
device used to regulate, warn, or guide traffic, placed on, over, or adjacent
to a street, highway, private road open to public travel, pedestrian facility,
or shared-use path by authority of a public agency or official having
jurisdiction, or, in the case of a private road open to public travel, by
authority of the private owner or private official having jurisdiction.
(ORC 4511.01(QQ))
§ 402.53  TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNAL.
   “Traffic control signal” means any highway traffic signal by which traffic
is alternately directed to stop and permitted to proceed.
(ORC 4511.01(RR))
§ 402.54  TRAILER.
   “Trailer” means every vehicle designed or used for carrying persons or
property wholly on its own structure, and for being drawn by a motor vehicle,
including any vehicle when formed by or operated as a combination of a
semitrailer and a vehicle of the dolly type, such as that commonly known as a
trailer dolly, a vehicle used to transport agricultural produce or agricultural
production materials between a local place of storage or supply and the farm
when drawn or towed on a street or highway at a speed greater than 25 miles per
hour and a vehicle designed and used exclusively to transport a boat between a
place of storage and a marina, or in and around a marina, when drawn or towed
on a street or highway for a distance of more than ten miles or at a speed of
more than 25 miles per hour.
(ORC 4511.01(M))
§ 402.55  TRUCK.
   “Truck” means every motor vehicle, except trailers and semitrailers,
designed and used to carry property.
(ORC 4511.01(K))
§ 402.56  URBAN DISTRICT.
   “Urban district” means the territory contiguous to and including any street
or highway which is built up with structures devoted to business, industry, or
dwelling houses situated at intervals of less than 100 feet for a distance of
one-quarter of a mile or more, and the character of the territory is indicated
by official traffic-control devices.
(ORC 4511.01(PP))
§ 402.57  VEHICLE.
   “Vehicle” means every device, including a motorized bicycle and an electric
bicycle, in, upon, or by which any person or property may be transported or
drawn upon a highway, except that “vehicle” does not include any motorized
wheelchair, any electric personal assistive mobility device, any device that is
moved by power collected from overhead electric trolley wire or that is used
exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks, or any device, other than a
bicycle, that is moved by human power.
(ORC 4511.01(A))
§ 402.58  WASTE COLLECTION VEHICLE.
   “Waste collection vehicle.” A vehicle used in the collection of garbage,
refuse, trash, or recyclable materials.
(ORC 4511.01(RRR))
CHAPTER 404:  ENFORCEMENT; IMPOUNDING
Section
404.01   Police may remove ignition key.
404.02   Resisting an enforcing official.
404.03   Road workers, motor vehicles and equipment excepted.
404.04   Emergency and public safety vehicles excepted.
404.05   Application to persons riding, driving animals upon roadway.
404.06   Application to drivers of government vehicles.
404.07   Impounding of vehicles; redemption.
404.08   Traffic direction in emergencies; obedience to school guards.
404.09   Furnishing false information incident to traffic citation.
404.99   Penalty.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   See section histories for similar state law
   Disposition of unclaimed vehicles - see Ohio R.C. 737.32, 4513.61 et seq.
   Burden of proof - see Ohio R.C. 2901.05
   Arrest without warrant for misdemeanor - see Ohio R.C. 2935.03
   Right of trial by jury - see Ohio R.C. 2945.17
   Time within which hearing or trial must be held - see Ohio R.C.2945.71
   Extension of time for hearing or trial - see Ohio R.C. 2945.72
   Discharge for delay in trial - see Ohio R.C. 2945.73
   State point system suspension - see Ohio R.C. 4507.021
   Power of trial court of record to suspend or revoke license for certain
violations - see Ohio R.C. 4507.16, 4510.15
   Uniform application of Ohio Traffic Law - see Ohio R.C. 4511.06
   Use of private property for vehicular travel - see Ohio R.C. 4511.08
   Authority of arresting officer when radar, electrical or mechanical timing
device used - see Ohio R.C. 4511.091
   Marking motor vehicles used by traffic officers - see Ohio R.C. 4549.13
   Distinctive uniform required for traffic officers - see Ohio R.C. 4549.15
   Exceptions for emergency or public safety vehicles - see TRAF.
432.19,
434.07
   Suspension of riding privileges; impounding of bicycles - see TRAF.
444.10
   Parking violations waiver - see TRAF.
452.19
   Limitation on criminal prosecutions - see GEN. OFF.
606.06
   Failure to aid a law enforcement officer - see GEN. OFF.
608.05
   Obstructing official business - see GEN. OFF.
608.06
   Obstructing justice - see GEN. OFF.
608.07
   Resisting arrest - see GEN. OFF.
608.08
   Soliciting or receiving improper compensation - see GEN. OFF.
608.11
   Dereliction of duty - see GEN. OFF.
608.12
   Disposition of unclaimed or forfeited property held by Police Department -
see GEN. OFF.
608.16
§ 404.01  POLICE MAY REMOVE IGNITION KEY.
   A law enforcement officer may remove the ignition key left in the ignition
switch of an unlocked and unattended motor vehicle parked on a street or
highway. The officer removing the key shall place notification upon the vehicle
detailing his or her name and badge number, the place where the key may be
reclaimed, and the procedure for reclaiming the key. The key shall be returned
to the owner of the motor vehicle upon presentation of proof of ownership.
(ORC 4549.05)
§ 404.02  RESISTING AN ENFORCING OFFICIAL.
   (a)   No person shall resist, hinder, obstruct, or abuse any sheriff,
constable, or other official while that official is attempting to arrest
offenders under any provision of this Traffic Code. No person shall interfere
with any person charged under any provision of this Traffic Code with the
enforcement of the law relative to public highways.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4513.36)
   (c)   It is a defense to prosecution under this section that the hindrance,
obstruction, resistance, or interference alleged consisted of constitutionally
protected speech only.
§ 404.03  ROAD WORKERS, MOTOR VEHICLES AND EQUIPMENT EXCEPTED.
   (a)   The provisions of this Traffic Code, except for §
434.01, do not apply to persons, teams, motor vehicles, and other equipment
while actually engaged in work upon the surface of a highway within an area
designated by traffic-control devices, but apply to those persons and vehicles
when traveling to or from such work.
   (b)   The driver of a highway maintenance vehicle owned by this state or any
political subdivision of this state, while the driver is engaged in the
performance of official duties upon a street or highway, provided the highway
maintenance vehicle is equipped with flashing lights and such other markings as
are required by law and such lights are in operation when the driver and
vehicle are so engaged, shall be exempt from criminal prosecution for
violations of Ohio R.C. 4511.22, 4511.25, 4511.26, 4511.27, 4511.28, 4511.30,
4511.31, 4511.33, 4511.35, 4511.66, 4513.02, and 5577.01 to 5577.09, and any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (c)   (1)   This section does not exempt a driver of a highway maintenance
vehicle from civil liability arising from a violation of Ohio R.C. 4511.22,
4511.25, 4511.26, 4511.27, 4511.28, 4511.30, 4511.31, 4511.33, 4511.35,
4511.66, or 4513.02 or Ohio R.C. 5577.01 to 5577.09, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance.
      (2)   This section does not exempt a driver of a vehicle who is not a
state employee and who is engaged in the transport of highway maintenance
equipment from criminal liability for a violation of R.C. §§ 5577.01 through
5577.09, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (d)   As used in this section, “engaged in the performance of official
duties” includes driving a highway maintenance vehicle to and from the
manufacturer or vehicle maintenance provider and transporting a highway
maintenance vehicle, equipment, or materials to and from a work location.
(ORC 4511.04)
§ 404.04  EMERGENCY AND PUBLIC SAFETY VEHICLES EXCEPTED.
   (a)   The provisions of Ohio R.C. 4511.12, 4511.13, 4511.131, 4511.132,
4511.14, 4511.202, 4511.21, 4511.211, 4511.22, 4511.23, 4511.25, 4511.26,
4511.27, 4511.28, 4511.29, 4511.30, 4511.31, 4511.32, 4511.33, 4511.34,
4511.35, 4511.36, 4511.37, 4511.38, 4511.39, 4511.40, 4511.41, 4511.42,
4511.43, 4511.431, 4511.432, 4511.44, 4511.441, 4511.57, 4511.58, 4511.59,
4511.60, 4511.61, 4511.62, 4511.66, 4511.68, 4511.681, and 4511.69, and any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinances, do not apply to the driver of an
emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle if the emergency vehicle or public
safety vehicle is responding to an emergency call, is equipped with and
displaying at least one flashing, rotating, or oscillating light visible under
normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of 500 feet to the front of the
vehicle and if the driver of the vehicles is giving an audible signal by siren,
exhaust whistle, or bell. This section does not relieve the driver of an
emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle from the duty to drive with due
regard for the safety of all persons and property upon the highway.
(ORC 4511.041)
   (b)   The provisions of Ohio R.C. 4511.25, 4511.26, 4511.27, 4511.28,
4511.29, 4511.30, 4511.31, 4511.32, 4511.33, 4511.35, 4511.36, 4511.37,
4511.38, and 4511.66, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinances, do
not apply to a coroner, deputy coroner or coroner’s investigator operating a
motor vehicle in accordance with Ohio R.C. 4513.171 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance. This division does not relieve a coroner,
deputy coroner or coroner’s investigator operating a motor vehicle from the
duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons and property upon
the highway.
(ORC 4511.042)
§ 404.05  APPLICATION TO PERSONS RIDING, DRIVING ANIMALS UPON ROADWAY.
   Every person riding, driving, or leading an animal upon a roadway is subject
to the provisions of this Traffic Code, applicable to the driver of a vehicle,
except those provisions of this Traffic Code which by their nature are
inapplicable.
(ORC 4511.05)
§ 404.06  APPLICATION TO DRIVERS OF GOVERNMENT VEHICLES.
   The provisions of this Traffic Code applicable to the drivers of vehicles
shall apply to the drivers of all vehicles owned or operated by the United
States, any state or any political subdivision thereof, including this
municipality, except as may be otherwise provided by law and subject to such
specific exceptions as are set forth with reference to authorized emergency and
public safety vehicles.
§ 404.07  IMPOUNDING OF VEHICLES; REDEMPTION.
   (a)   Police officers are authorized to provide for the removal and
impounding of a vehicle under the following circumstances:
      (1)   When any vehicle is left unattended upon any street, bridge or
causeway and is so illegally parked so as to constitute a hazard or obstruction
to the normal movement of traffic, or so as to unreasonably interfere with
street cleaning or snow removal operations;
      (2)   When any motor vehicle, including an abandoned junk motor vehicle,
as defined in Ohio R.C. 4513.63, is left on private residential property, as
defined in Ohio R.C. 4513.60, or on private agricultural property, for at least
four consecutive hours without the permission of the person having the right to
the possession of the property, or on a public street or other property open to
the public for purposes of vehicular travel, or upon or within the right-of-way
of any road or highway, for 48 consecutive hours or longer, without
notification to the Police Chief of the reasons for leaving such vehicle in
such place, except that when such a motor vehicle constitutes an obstruction to
traffic, it may be ordered into storage immediately;
      (3)   When any vehicle has been stolen or operated without the consent of
the owner;
      (4)   When any vehicle displays illegal license plates or fails to
display the current lawfully required license plates;
      (5)   When any vehicle has been used in or connected with the commission
of a felony;
      (6)   When any vehicle has been damaged or wrecked so as to be inoperable
or violates equipment provisions of this Traffic Code whereby its continued
operation would constitute a condition hazardous to life, limb or property;
      (7)   When any vehicle is left unattended due to the removal of an ill,
injured or arrested operator;
      (8)   When any vehicle has been operated by any person who has failed to
stop in case of an accident or collision;
      (9)   When any vehicle has been operated by any person who is driving
without a lawful license or while his or her license has been suspended or
revoked;
      (10)   When any vehicle is found for which two or more citation tags for
violations of this Traffic Code have been issued and the owner or operator
thereof has failed to respond to such citation tags as lawfully required.
   (b)   Any vehicle removed under authority of division (a)(2) of this section
shall be ordered into storage and/or disposed of as provided under Ohio R.C.
4513.60 et seq. Any other vehicle removed under authority of this section shall
be ordered into storage and the Police Department shall forthwith notify the
registered vehicle owner of the fact of such removal and impounding, reasons
therefor and the place of storage. Any person desiring to redeem an impounded
vehicle shall appear at the Police Department to furnish satisfactory evidence
of identity and ownership or right to possession. Prior to issuance of a
release form, the claimant, owner or operator shall either pay the amount due
for any fines for violations on account of which such vehicle was impounded or,
as the court may require, post a bond in an amount set by the court, to appear
to answer to such violations. The pound operator shall release such vehicle
upon the receipt of the release form and payment of all towage and storage
charges.
   (c)   No owner or operator shall remove an impounded vehicle from the place
of storage without complying with the above procedure. Possession of a vehicle
which has been impounded and unlawfully taken from the place of storage, by the
owner or operator, shall constitute prima facie evidence that it was so removed
by the owner or operator.
§ 404.08  TRAFFIC DIRECTION IN EMERGENCIES; OBEDIENCE TO SCHOOL GUARDS.
   (a)   Police officers shall direct or regulate traffic in accordance with
the provisions of this Traffic Code, provided that in the event of fire or
other emergency or to expedite traffic or safeguard pedestrians, they are
authorized to direct traffic as conditions may require notwithstanding the
provisions of this Traffic Code. Firefighters, when at the scene of a fire, may
direct or assist the police in directing traffic thereat or in the immediate
vicinity. The direction of traffic may be by word or audible signal, by gesture
or visible signal or by any combination thereof. No person shall fail to comply
with any lawful order or direction of any police officer or firefighter issued
pursuant to this section.
   (b)   No person shall fail to comply with any lawful order or direction of
any school crossing guard invested with authority to direct, control or
regulate traffic in the vicinity of the school to which such guard may be
assigned.
§ 404.09  FURNISHING FALSE INFORMATION INCIDENT TO TRAFFIC CITATION.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly present, display, or orally communicate a
false name, social security number, or date of birth to a law enforcement
officer who is in the process of issuing to the person a traffic ticket or
complaint.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(ORC 4513.361)
§ 404.99  PENALTY.
   (EDITOR’S NOTE:  See §§
408.01 and
408.02 for general Traffic Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.)
CHAPTER 406:  TRAFFIC CONTROL
Section
406.01   Authority and considerations for placement of devices.
406.02   Conformity with State Manual.
406.03   Powers of designated person.
406.04   Posting of signs and signals required.
406.05   Designated person’s powers not limited.
406.06   Records of designated person.
406.07   Reservation of power to Council.
406.08   Violations subject to general Code penalty.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Power to designate highway as included in a freeway, expressway or thruway -
see Ohio R.C. 4511.011
   Uniform system of traffic control devices - see Ohio R.C. 4511.09, 4511.11
(D)
   Placing and maintaining local traffic control devices- see Ohio R.C.
4511.10, 4511.11
   Alteration of prima-facie speed limits - see Ohio R.C. 4511.21, 4511.22(A),
4511.23
   Power to erect stop signs at grade crossings - see Ohio R.C. 4511.61
   Designation of through streets and erection of stop or yield signs - see
Ohio R.C. 4511.65; TRAF.
414.02
   Traffic control devices defined - see TRAF.
402.52
§ 406.01  AUTHORITY AND CONSIDERATIONS FOR PLACEMENT OF DEVICES.
   Council may designate a person to place and maintain traffic control devices
upon any street or highway under municipal jurisdiction as are necessary to
effectuate the provisions of this Traffic Code, or to regulate, warn or guide
traffic, and such other traffic control devices as such person shall deem
necessary for the proper control of traffic. Such designated person shall
determine the location, timing and coordination of such traffic control devices
upon the basis of an applicable engineering or traffic investigation and shall
consider the following:
   (a)   The maximum safety and protection of vehicular and pedestrian traffic
from physical injury or property damage;
   (b)   The existing and potential traffic movement, volume and conditions;
   (c)   The location and frequency of accidents, including studies of remedial
measures;
   (d)   The recommendations of the Chief of Police and Fire Chief;
   (e)   The acceleration of transportation of persons and property by vehicles
so as to expedite travel and promote public safety;
   (f)   The convenience and welfare of the general public in parking,
standing, loading and unloading, and the use of the streets as affecting
business concerns and places of assembly; and
   (g)   Economy in the expenditure of money.
§ 406.02  CONFORMITY WITH STATE MANUAL.
   All traffic control devices placed pursuant to the provisions of this
Traffic Code shall conform to the Ohio Manual and Specifications for a Uniform
System of Traffic-Control Devices, as set forth in Ohio Revised Code.
§ 406.03  POWERS OF DESIGNATED PERSON.
   The person designated by Council pursuant to §
406.01 is hereby authorized to:
   (a)   Designate any street or highway as a through street or highway and
require that all vehicles stop or yield the right-of-way as may be required
before entering the same;
   (b)   Designate any intersection as a stop intersection and require all
vehicles to stop at one or more entrances to such intersection;
   (c)   Designate any intersection as a yield intersection and require all
vehicles to yield the right-of-way as required;
   (d)   Designate any street as a one-way street and require that all vehicles
thereon be moved in one specific direction;
   (e)   Designate and mark lanes to be used by traffic moving in a particular
direction regardless of the centerline of the roadway;
   (f)   Erect signs directing slow-moving traffic to use a designated lane or
allocating specified lanes to traffic moving in the same direction;
   (g)   Designate those portions of any street, where overtaking and passing
other traffic or driving to the left of the center or centerline of the roadway
would be especially hazardous, by appropriate signs or markings on the street
to indicate the beginning and end of such zones. Such zones may be marked by an
auxiliary yellow line placed parallel and to the right of the normal centerline
or offset marked lane line;
   (h)   Place markers, buttons or signs within or adjacent to intersections
and require that a specific course of direction be traveled by vehicles
proceeding in lanes by either permitting, prohibiting or requiring turns at
such intersections;
   (i)   Install traffic control devices, signals and signs at any location to
regulate traffic;
   (j)   Establish safety zones, crosswalks, zones of quiet and play streets;
   (k)   Close any street or portion thereof to vehicular traffic which is in
the process of construction, reconstruction or repair;
   (l)   Determine the location of any necessary bus stops and taxicab stands;
   (m)   Determine the location and limiting hours of truck loading zones;
   (n)   Designate dangerous railroad crossings and erect stop signs thereat;
   (o)   Erect “No U Turn” signs at any location to prohibit a vehicle from
being turned so as to proceed in the opposite direction;
   (p)   Regulate or prohibit the stopping, standing and parking of vehicles on
streets, alleys or public property by erecting signs plainly indicating the
prohibitions, restrictions or limitations;
   (q)   Designate individual parking spaces by markings, which may either be
parallel or at a prescribed angle to the curb or edge of the roadway.
§ 406.04  POSTING OF SIGNS AND SIGNALS REQUIRED.
   No provision of this chapter shall be effective until signs, signals,
markings or other devices giving notice of such local traffic regulations are
posted upon or at the entrance to the street or part thereof affected, as may
be most appropriate, so that in a proper position they are sufficiently legible
to be seen by an ordinarily observant person.
§ 406.05  DESIGNATED PERSON’S POWERS NOT LIMITED.
   The powers of the person designated by Council pursuant to §
406.01 shall not be limited by the specific enumeration of subjects contained
in this chapter.
§ 406.06  RECORDS OF DESIGNATED PERSON.
   The person designated by Council pursuant to §
406.01 shall keep a record of all rules, regulations and proceedings
promulgated in connection with this chapter.
§ 406.07  RESERVATION OF POWER TO COUNCIL.
   Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, Council may override any
decision of the person designated by Council pursuant to §
406.01 and may assume any of the powers delegated to such person, by a
resolution adopted by a vote of a majority of the members duly elected thereto.
Upon the adoption of any such resolution, the same may be changed only by an
amending or repealing resolution adopted by Council.
§ 406.08  VIOLATIONS SUBJECT TO GENERAL CODE PENALTY.
   Any person violating the rules and regulations promulgated in connection
with this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction
thereof shall be subject to the penalties provided for in §§
408.01 and
408.02.
CHAPTER 408:  PENALTIES
Section
408.01   Penalties for misdemeanor.
408.02   General Code penalty.
408.03   Suspension or revocation of driver’s license.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   See section histories for similar state law
   Definition of “imprisoned” - see Ohio R.C. 1.05
   Satisfaction of fine; credit for time served - see Ohio R.C. 2947.14
   Criteria for probation; conditions for probation - see Ohio R.C. 2951.02
   Definition of “dangerous offender” - see GEN. OFF.
698.01(a)
   Definition of “repeat offender” - see GEN. OFF.
698.01(b)
   Imposing sentence for misdemeanor - see GEN. OFF.
698.03
   Organizational penalties - see GEN. OFF.
698.04
   Multiple sentences - see GEN. OFF.
698.05
§ 408.01  PENALTIES FOR MISDEMEANOR.
   Whoever is convicted of or pleads guilty to a misdemeanor, or minor
misdemeanor shall be sentenced in accordance with §
698.02.
§ 408.02  GENERAL CODE PENALTY.
   (a)   Whoever violates any provision of this Traffic Code for which no
penalty otherwise is provided in the section violated is guilty of one of the
following:
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (a)(2) or (a)(3) of this
section, a minor misdemeanor;
      (2)   If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic
offense, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree;
      (3)   If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more predicate motor vehicle or
traffic offenses, a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(ORC 4511.99)
   (b)   Violations committed while distracted.
      (1)   As used in this section and each section referenced in division (b)
(2) of this section, all of the following apply:
         A.   “Distracted” means doing either of the following while operating
a vehicle:
            1.   Using a handheld electronic wireless communications device, as
defined in Ohio R.C. 4511.204, except when utilizing any of the following:
               a.   The device’s speakerphone function;
               b.   A wireless technology standard for exchanging data over
short distances;
               c.   A “voice-operated or hands-free” device that allows the
person to use the electronic wireless communications device without the use of
either hand except to activate, deactivate, or initiate a feature or function;
               d.   Any device that is physically or electronically integrated
into the motor vehicle.
            2.   Engaging in any activity that is not necessary to the
operation of a vehicle and impairs, or reasonably would be expected to impair,
the ability of the operator to drive the vehicle safely.
         B.   “Distracted” does not include operating a motor vehicle while
wearing an earphone or earplug over or in both ears at the same time. A person
who so wears earphones or earplugs may be charged with a violation of Ohio R.C.
4511.84, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
         C.   “Distracted” does not include conducting any activity while
operating a utility service vehicle or a vehicle for or on behalf of a utility,
provided that the driver of the vehicle is acting in response to an emergency,
power outage, or a circumstance affecting the health or safety of individuals.
As used in this division (b)(1)C.:
            1.   “Utility” means an entity specified in Ohio R.C. 4905.03(A),
(C), (D), (E), or (G).
            2.   “Utility service vehicle” means a vehicle owned or operated by
a utility.
      (2)   If an offender violates Ohio R.C. 4511.03, 4511.051, 4511.12,
4511.121, 4511.132, 4511.21, 4511.211, 4511.213, 4511.22, 4511.23, 4511.25,
4511.26, 4511.27, 4511.28, 4511.29, 4511.30, 4511.31, 4511.32, 4511.33,
4511.34, 4511.35, 4511.36, 4511.37, 4511.38, 4511.39, 4511.40, 4511.41,
4511.42, 4511.43, 4511.431, 4511.44, 4511.441, 4511.451, 4511.46, 4511.47,
4511.54, 4511.55, 4511.57, 4511.58, 4511.59, 4511.60, 4511.61, 4511.64,
4511.71, 4511.711, 4511.712, 4511.713, 4511.72, or 4511.73, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the
violation, the offender is subject to the applicable penalty for the violation
and, notwithstanding Ohio R.C. 2929.28, is subject to an additional fine of not
more than one hundred dollars ($100) as follows:
         A.   1.   Subject to Traffic Rule 13, if a law enforcement officer
issues an offender a ticket, citation, or summons for a violation of any of the
aforementioned sections of the Ohio Revised Code, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, that indicates that the offender was distracted
while committing the violation and that the distracting activity was a
contributing factor to the commission of the violation, the offender may enter
a written plea of guilty and waive the offender’s right to contest the ticket,
citation, or summons in a trial provided that the offender pays the total
amount of the fine established for the violation and pays the additional fine
of one hundred dollars ($100).
            2.   In lieu of payment of the additional fine of one hundred
dollars ($100), the offender instead may elect to attend a distracted driving
safety course, the duration and contents of which shall be established by the
Ohio Director of Public Safety. If the offender attends and successfully
completes the course, the offender shall be issued written evidence that the
offender successfully completed the course. The offender shall be required to
pay the total amount of the fine established for the violation, but shall not
be required to pay the additional fine of one hundred dollars ($100), so long
as the offender submits to the court both the offender’s payment in full and
such written evidence.
         B.   1.   If the offender appears in person to contest the ticket,
citation, or summons in a trial and the offender pleads guilty to or is
convicted of the violation, the court, in addition to all other penalties
provided by law, may impose the applicable penalty for the violation and may
impose the additional fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100).
            2.   If the court imposes upon the offender the applicable penalty
for the violation and an additional fine of not more than one hundred dollars
($100), the court shall inform the offender that, in lieu of payment of the
additional fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100), the offender
instead may elect to attend the distracted driving safety course described in
division (b)(2)A. of this section. If the offender elects the course option and
attends and successfully completes the course, the offender shall be issued
written evidence that the offender successfully completed the course. The
offender shall be required to pay the total amount of the fine established for
the violation, but shall not be required to pay the additional fine of not more
than one hundred dollars ($100), so long as the offender submits to the court
the offender’s payment and such written evidence.
(ORC 4511.991)
§ 408.03  SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF DRIVER’S LICENSE.
   Except as otherwise provided in Ohio R.C. 4510.07 or in any other provision
of the Revised Code, whenever an offender is convicted of or pleads guilty to a
violation of any provision of this Traffic Code that is substantially
equivalent to a provision of the Revised Code, and a court is permitted or
required to suspend a person’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or
permit for a violation of that provision, a court, in addition to any other
penalties authorized by law, may suspend the offender’s driver’s or commercial
driver’s license or permit or nonresident operating privilege for the period of
time the court determines appropriate, but the period of suspension imposed for
the violation of the provision of this Traffic Code shall not exceed the period
of suspension that is permitted or required to be imposed for the violation of
the provision of the Revised Code to which the provision of this Traffic Code
is substantially equivalent.
(ORC 4510.05)
TITLE FOUR:  PUBLIC WAYS AND TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES
CHAPTER 412:  OBSTRUCTION AND SPECIAL USES OF PUBLIC WAYS
Section
412.01   Placing injurious material or obstruction in street.
412.02   Zones of quiet.
412.03   Play streets.
412.04   Toy vehicles on roadway.
412.05   Freeway use prohibited by pedestrians, bicycles and animals.
412.06   Skateboards.
412.07   Parades and assemblages.
412.99   Penalty.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   See section histories for similar state law
   Power to regulate processions or assemblages - see Ohio R.C. 4511.07(C)
   Loads dropping or leaking; tracking mud; removal required - see TRAF.
440.06
   Selling, washing or repairing vehicle upon roadway - see TRAF.
452.09
   Parking in alleys or narrow streets; exceptions - see TRAF.
452.12
   Sidewalk obstructions; damage or injury - see GEN. OFF.
660.10
§ 412.01  PLACING INJURIOUS MATERIAL OR OBSTRUCTION IN STREET.
   (a)   (1)   No person shall place or knowingly drop upon any part of a
highway, lane, road, street, or alley any tacks, bottles, wire, glass, nails,
or other articles which may damage or injure any person, vehicle, or animal
traveling along or upon the highway, except such substances that may be placed
upon the roadway by proper authority for the repair or construction thereof.
      (2)   Any person who drops or permits to be dropped or thrown upon any
highway any destructive or injurious material shall immediately remove the
same.
      (3)   Any person authorized to remove a wrecked or damaged vehicle from a
highway shall remove any glass or other injurious substance dropped upon the
highway from such vehicle.
      (4)   No person shall place any obstruction in or upon a highway without
proper authority.
   (b)   No person, with intent to cause physical harm to a person or a
vehicle, shall place or knowingly drop upon any part of a highway, lane, road,
street, or alley any tacks, bottles, wire, glass, nails, or other articles
which may damage or injure any person, vehicle, or animal traveling along or
upon such highway, except such substances that may be placed upon the roadway
by proper authority for the repair or construction thereof.
   (c)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (a) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
division (a) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted
of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates
division (a) is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(ORC 4511.74)
§ 412.02  ZONES OF QUIET.
   Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating a zone of quiet, no person
operating a vehicle within any such zone shall sound the horn or other warning
device of such vehicle except in an emergency.
§ 412.03  PLAY STREETS.
   Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that any street or part
thereof is a play street, no person shall drive a vehicle upon any such street
or portion thereof except drivers of vehicles having business or whose
residences are within such closed area and then such drivers shall exercise the
greatest care in driving upon any such street or portion thereof.
§ 412.04  TOY VEHICLES ON ROADWAY.
   No person riding upon any coaster, roller skates, sled, toy vehicle or other
similar device shall go upon any roadway except while crossing a street on a
crosswalk and when so crossing such person shall be granted all of the rights
and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to pedestrians. This
section shall not apply to any street set aside as a play street.
§ 412.05  FREEWAY USE PROHIBITED BY PEDESTRIANS, BICYCLES AND ANIMALS.
   (a)   No person, unless otherwise directed by a police officer, shall:
      (1)   As a pedestrian, occupy any space within the limits of the right-
of-way of a freeway, except: in a rest area; on a facility that is separated
from the roadway and shoulders of the freeway and is designed and appropriately
marked for pedestrian use; in the performance of public works or official
duties; as a result of an emergency caused by an accident or breakdown of a
motor vehicle; or to obtain assistance.
      (2)   Occupy any space within the limits of the right-of-way of a
freeway, with: an animal-drawn vehicle; a ridden or led animal; herded animals;
a pushcart; a bicycle, except on a facility that is separated from the roadway
and shoulders of the freeway and is designed and appropriately marked for
bicycle use; an electric bicycle; a bicycle with motor attached; a motor-
driven cycle with a motor which produces not to exceed five brake horsepower;
an agricultural tractor; farm machinery; except in the performance of public
works or official duties.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within on year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (c)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(ORC 4511.051)
§ 412.06  SKATEBOARDS.
   (a)   As used in this section, “skateboard” shall include, without
limitation, any vehicle or device consisting basically of a board or platform
mounted on wheels or rollers, whether powered by gravity, muscle power or
mechanical or motorized means, which is not equipped with a positive mechanical
means of steering such vehicle or device.
   (b)   No person shall ride or operate a skateboard on any roadway.
   (c)   No person shall ride a skateboard upon a sidewalk within a
commercially zoned district, upon a sidewalk within a shopping center or upon a
sidewalk where signs are erected prohibiting such operation.
   (d)   No person shall operate a skateboard at a speed greater than is
reasonable and prudent under the conditions then existing.  For the purposes of
this section, any speed above fifteen miles per hour shall be prima-facie
unreasonable and imprudent.
   (e)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor and
shall be subject to the penalty provided in §
408.01.
(Ord. 91-O-1267, passed 12-17-1991)
§ 412.07  PARADES AND ASSEMBLAGES.
   (a)   No person, group of persons or organization shall conduct or
participate in any parade, procession or assemblage upon any street or highway,
or block off any street or highway area, without first obtaining a permit from
the Director of Public Safety.
   (b)   Applications for such permits shall be made on such forms as may be
prescribed and shall contain such information as is reasonably necessary to a
fair determination of whether a permit should be issued.  Applications shall be
filed not less than five days before the time intended for such parade,
procession or assemblage.
   (c)   The permit may be refused or canceled if:
      (1)   The time, place, size or conduct of the parade, including the
assembly areas and route of march, would unreasonably interfere with the public
convenience and safe use of the streets and highways.
      (2)   The parade would require the diversion of so great a number of
police officers to properly police the line of movement, assembly area and
areas contiguous thereto so as to deny normal police protection to the
municipality.
      (3)   The parade route of march or assembly areas would unreasonably
interfere with the movement of police vehicles, fire-fighting equipment or
ambulance service to other areas of the municipality.
      (4)   The parade would unreasonably interfere with another parade for
which a permit has been issued.
      (5)   The information contained in the application is found to be false
or nonexistent in any material detail.
      (6)   An emergency such as a fire or storm would prevent the proper
conduct of the parade.
   (d)   The permit or any order accompanying it may limit or prescribe
reasonable conditions, including the hours, the places of assembly and of
dispersal, the route of march or travel and the streets, highways or portions
thereof which may be used or occupied.
(1974 Code, § 311.02)
§ 412.99  PENALTY.
   (EDITOR’S NOTE:  See §§
408.01 and
408.02 for general Traffic Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.)
CHAPTER 414:  TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES
Section
414.01   Obedience to traffic control devices.
414.02   Through streets; stop and yield right-of-way signs.
414.03   Traffic control signal terms and lights.
414.04   Signal to control lane direction of travel.
414.05   Pedestrian control signals.
414.06   (Reserved)
414.07   Unauthorized signs and signals, hiding from view, advertising.
414.08   Alteration, injury, removal of traffic control devices.
414.09   Unauthorized possession or sale of devices.
414.10   Signal preemption devices; prohibitions.
414.99   Penalty.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   See section histories for similar state law
   Designation of through streets or stop intersections - see Ohio R.C.
4511.07, 4511.65
   Uniform system of traffic control devices - see Ohio R.C. 4511.09, 4511.11
(D); TRAF.
406.02
   Traffic law photo-monitoring devices, state regulations - see Ohio R.C.
4511.092 et seq.
   Placing and maintaining local traffic control devices - see Ohio R.C.
4511.10, 4511.11
   Traffic control devices defined - see TRAF.
402.52
   Authority and considerations for placing of devices - see TRAF.
406.01
   Posting of signs and signals required - see TRAF.
406.04
   Intersections at which traffic control signals fail or malfunction - see
TRAF.
432.16
   Criminal mischief (tampering) - see GEN. OFF.
642.09
§ 414.01  OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES.
   (a)   (1)   No pedestrian or driver of a vehicle shall disobey the
instructions of any traffic-control device placed in accordance with the
provisions of this Traffic Code, unless at the time otherwise directed by a
police officer.
      (2)   No provision of this Traffic Code for which signs are required
shall be enforced against an alleged violator if, at the time and place of the
alleged violation, an official sign is not in proper position and sufficiently
legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person. Whenever a particular
section of this Traffic Code does not state that signs are required, that
section shall be effective even though no signs are erected or in place.
(ORC 4511.12(A))
   (b)   (1)   Except as provided in division (c) of this section, any operator
of a commercial motor vehicle, upon approaching a scale location established
for the purpose of determining the weight of the vehicle and its load, shall
comply with any traffic control device or the order of a peace officer
directing the vehicle to proceed to be weighed or otherwise inspected.
      (2)   Any operator of a commercial motor vehicle, upon bypassing a scale
location in accordance with division (c) of this section, shall comply with an
order of a peace officer to stop the vehicle to verify the use and operation of
an electronic clearance device.
   (c)   Any operator of a commercial motor vehicle that is equipped with an
electronic clearance device authorized by the Superintendent of the State
Highway Patrol under Ohio R.C. 4549.081 may bypass a scale location, regardless
of the instruction of a traffic control device to enter the scale facility, if
either of the following apply:
      (1)   The in-cab transponder displays a green light or other affirmative
visual signal and also sounds an affirmative audible signal;
      (2)   Any other criterion established by the Superintendent of the State
Highway Patrol is met.
   (d)   Any peace officer may order the operator of a commercial motor vehicle
that bypasses a scale location to stop the vehicle to verify the use and
operation of an electronic clearance device.
   (e)   As used in this section, “commercial motor vehicle” means any
combination of vehicles with a gross vehicle weight rating or an actual gross
vehicle weight of more than 10,000 pounds if the vehicle is used in interstate
or intrastate commerce to transport property and also means any vehicle that is
transporting hazardous materials for which placarding is required pursuant to
49 C.F.R. Parts 100 to 180.
(ORC 4511.121(A)-(C), (E))
   (f)   No person shall use an electronic clearance device if the device or
its use is not in compliance with rules of the Superintendent of the State
Highway Patrol.
(ORC 4549.081(B))
   (g)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (a) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
division (a) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted
of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates
division (a) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. If
the offender commits the offense while distracted and the distracting activity
is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense, the offender is
subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(ORC 4511.12(B))
      (2)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of division (b) of this
section or any substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance,
whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations of division (b)
of this section or any substantially equivalent state law or municipal
ordinance, whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree. If the offender commits the offense while
distracted and the distracting activity is a contributing factor to the
commission of the offense, the offender is subject to the additional fine
established under §
408.02(b).
(ORC 4511.121(D))
      (3)   Whoever violates division (f) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree on a first offense and a misdemeanor of the
third degree on each subsequent offense.
(ORC 4549.081(C))
§ 414.02  THROUGH STREETS; STOP AND YIELD RIGHT-OF-WAY SIGNS.
   (a)   All state routes are hereby designated as through highways, provided
that stop signs, yield signs, or traffic-control signals shall be erected at
all intersections with such through highways by the Department of
Transportation as to highways under its jurisdiction and by local authorities
as to highways under their jurisdiction, except as otherwise provided in this
section. Where two or more state routes that are through highways intersect,
and no traffic-control signal is in operation, stop signs or yield signs shall
be erected at one or more entrances thereto by the Department or by local
authorities having jurisdiction, except as otherwise provided in this section.
Whenever the Director of Transportation determines on the basis of an
engineering and traffic investigation that stop signs are necessary to stop
traffic on a through highway for safe and efficient operation, nothing in this
section shall be construed to prevent such installations. When circumstances
warrant, the Director also may omit stop signs on roadways intersecting through
highways under his or her jurisdiction. Before the Director either installs or
removes a stop sign under this division, he or she shall give notice, in
writing, of that proposed action to the affected local authority at least 30
days before installing or removing the stop sign.
   (b)   Other streets or highways, or portions thereof, are hereby designated
as through highways if they are within the municipality, if they have a
continuous length of more than one mile between the limits of the street or
highway or portion thereof, and if they have stop or yield signs or traffic-
control signals at the entrances of the majority of intersecting streets or
highways. For purposes of this section, the limits of the street or highway, or
portion thereof, shall be the municipal corporation line, the physical terminus
of the street or highway, or any point on the streets or highway at which
vehicular traffic thereon is required by regulatory signs to stop or yield to
traffic on the intersecting street, provided, that in residence districts, the
municipality may by ordinance designate such street or highway, or portion
thereof, not to be a through highway and thereafter the affected residence
district shall be indicated by official traffic-control devices. Where two or
more through highways designated under this division intersect and no traffic-
control signal is in operation, stop signs or yield signs shall be erected at
one or more entrances thereto by the Department or by local authorities having
jurisdiction, except as otherwise provided in this section.
   (c)   The Department or local authorities having jurisdiction need not erect
stop signs at intersections they find to be so constructed as to permit traffic
to safely enter a through highway without coming to a stop. Signs shall be
erected at such intersections indicating that the operator of a vehicle shall
yield the right-of-way to or merge with all traffic proceeding on the through
highway.
   (d)   Local authorities, with reference to highways under their
jurisdiction, may designate additional through highways, and shall erect stop
signs, yield signs, or traffic-control signals at all streets and highways
intersecting such through highways, or may designate any intersection as a stop
or yield intersection, and shall erect like signs at one or more entrances to
the intersection.
(ORC 4511.65)
§ 414.03  TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNAL TERMS AND LIGHTS.
   Highway traffic signal indications for vehicles and pedestrians shall have
the following meanings:
   (a)   Steady green signal indication.
      (1)   A.   Vehicular traffic facing a circular green signal indication
are permitted to proceed straight through or turn right or left or make a u-
turn movement except as such movement is modified by a lane-use sign, turn
prohibition sign, lane marking, roadway design, separate turn signal
indication, or other traffic control device. Such vehicular traffic, including
vehicles turning right or left or making a u-turn movement, shall yield the
right-of-way to both of the following:
            1.   Pedestrians lawfully within an associated crosswalk;
            2.   Other vehicles lawfully within the intersection.
         B.   In addition, vehicular traffic turning left or making a u-turn
movement to the left shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles approaching
from the opposite direction so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard
during the time when such turning vehicle is moving across or within the
intersection.
      (2)   Vehicular traffic facing a green arrow signal indication, displayed
alone or in combination with another signal indication, are permitted to
cautiously enter the intersection only to make the movement indicated by such
arrow, or such other movement as is permitted by other indications displayed at
the same time. Such vehicular traffic, including vehicles turning right or left
or making a u-turn movement, shall yield the right-of-way to both of the
following:
         A.   Pedestrians lawfully within an associated crosswalk;
         B.   Other traffic lawfully using the intersection.
      (3)   A.   Unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian signal indication,
as provided in Ohio R.C. 4511.14, pedestrians facing a circular green signal
indication are permitted to proceed across the roadway within any marked or
unmarked associated crosswalk. The pedestrian shall yield the right-of-way to
vehicles lawfully within the intersection or so close as to create an immediate
hazard at the time that the green signal indication is first displayed.
         B.   Pedestrians facing a green arrow signal indication, unless
otherwise directed by a pedestrian signal indication or other traffic control
device, shall not cross the roadway.
   (b)   Steady yellow signal indication.
      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing a steady circular yellow signal indication
are thereby warned that the related green movement or the related flashing
arrow movement is being terminated or that a steady red signal indication will
be exhibited immediately thereafter when vehicular traffic shall not enter the
intersection. The provisions governing vehicular operation under the movement
being terminated shall continue to apply while the steady circular yellow
signal indication is displayed.
      (2)   Vehicular traffic facing a steady yellow arrow signal indication is
thereby warned that the related green arrow movement or the related flashing
arrow movement is being terminated. The provisions governing vehicular
operation under the movement being terminated shall continue to apply while the
steady yellow arrow signal indication is displayed.
      (3)   Pedestrians facing a steady circular yellow or yellow arrow signal
indication, unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian signal indication as
provided in Ohio R.C. 4511.14 or other traffic control device, shall not start
to cross the roadway.
   (c)   Steady red signal indication.
      (1)   A.   Vehicular traffic facing a steady circular red signal
indication, unless entering the intersection to make another movement permitted
by another signal indication, shall stop at a clearly marked stop line; but if
there is no stop line, traffic shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the
near side of the intersection; or if there is no crosswalk, then before
entering the intersection; and shall remain stopped until a signal indication
to proceed is displayed except as provided in divisions (c)(1), (c)(2), and (c)
(3) of this section.
         B.   Except when a traffic control device is in place prohibiting a
turn on red or a steady red arrow signal indication is displayed, vehicular
traffic facing a steady circular red signal indication is permitted, after
stopping, to enter the intersection to turn right, or to turn left from a one-
way street into a one-way street. The right to proceed with the turn shall be
subject to the provisions that are applicable after making a stop at a stop
sign.
      (2)   A.   Vehicular traffic facing a steady red arrow signal indication
shall not enter the intersection to make the movement indicated by the arrow
and, unless entering the intersection to make another movement permitted by
another signal indication, shall stop at a clearly marked stop line; but if
there is no stop line, before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the
intersection; or if there is no crosswalk, then before entering the
intersection; and shall remain stopped until a signal indication or other
traffic control device permitting the movement indicated by such red arrow is
displayed.
         B.   When a traffic control device is in place permitting a turn on a
steady red arrow signal indication, vehicular traffic facing a steady red arrow
indication is permitted, after stopping, to enter the intersection to turn
right, or to turn left from a one-way street into a one-way street.  The right
to proceed with the turn shall be limited to the direction indicated by the
arrow and shall be subject to the provisions that are applicable after making a
stop at a stop sign.
      (3)   Unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian signal indication as
provided in Ohio R.C. 4511.14 or other traffic control device, pedestrians
facing a steady circular red or steady red arrow signal indication shall not
enter the roadway.
      (4)   Local authorities by ordinance, or the Director of Transportation
on state highways, may prohibit a right or a left turn against a steady red
signal at any intersection, which shall be effective when signs giving notice
thereof are posted at the intersection.
   (d)   Flashing green signal indication.  A flashing green signal indication
has no meaning and shall not be used.
   (e)   Flashing yellow signal indication.
      (1)   A.   Vehicular traffic, on an approach to an intersection, facing a
flashing circular yellow signal indication, is permitted to cautiously enter
the intersection to proceed straight through or turn right or left or make a u-
turn movement except as such movement is modified by lane-use signs, turn
prohibition signs, lane markings, roadway design, separate turn signal
indications, or other traffic control devices. Such vehicular traffic,
including vehicles turning right or left or making a u-turn movement, shall
yield the right-of-way to both of the following:
            1.   Pedestrians lawfully within an associated crosswalk;
            2.   Other vehicles lawfully within the intersection.
         B.   In addition, vehicular traffic turning left or making a u-turn to
the left shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles approaching from the
opposite direction so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard during the
time when such turning vehicle is moving across or within the intersection.
      (2)   A.   Vehicular traffic, on an approach to an intersection, facing a
flashing yellow arrow signal indication, displayed alone or in combination with
another signal indication, is permitted to cautiously enter the intersection
only to make the movement indicated by such arrow, or other such movement as is
permitted by other signal indications displayed at the same time. Such
vehicular traffic, including vehicles turning right or left or making a u-turn,
shall yield the right-of-way to both of the following:
            1.   Pedestrians lawfully within an associated crosswalk;
            2.   Other vehicles lawfully within the intersection.
         B.   In addition, vehicular traffic turning left or making a u-turn to
the left shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles approaching from the
opposite direction so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard during the
time when such turning vehicle is moving across or within the intersection.
      (3)   Pedestrians facing any flashing yellow signal indication at an
intersection, unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian signal indication or
other traffic control device, are permitted to proceed across the roadway
within any marked or unmarked associated crosswalk. Pedestrians shall yield the
right-of-way to vehicles lawfully within the intersection at the time that the
flashing yellow signal indication is first displayed.
      (4)   When a flashing circular yellow signal indication is displayed as a
beacon to supplement another traffic control device, road users are notified
that there is a need to pay additional attention to the message contained
thereon or that the regulatory or warning requirements of the other traffic
control device, which might not be applicable at all times, are currently
applicable.
   (f)   Flashing red signal indication.
      (1)   Vehicular traffic, on an approach to an intersection, facing a
flashing circular red signal indication, shall stop at a clearly marked stop
line; but if there is no stop line, before entering the crosswalk on the near
side of the intersection; or if there is no crosswalk, at the point nearest the
intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the
intersecting roadway before entering the intersection. The right to proceed
shall be subject to the provisions that are applicable after making a stop at a
stop sign.
      (2)   Pedestrians facing any flashing red signal indication at an
intersection, unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian signal indication or
other traffic control device, are permitted to proceed across the roadway
within any marked or unmarked associated crosswalk. Pedestrians shall yield the
right-of-way to vehicles lawfully within the intersection at the time that the
flashing red signal indication is first displayed.
      (3)   When a flashing circular red signal indication is displayed as a
beacon to supplement another traffic control device, road users are notified
that there is a need to pay additional attention to the message contained
thereon or that the regulatory requirements of the other traffic control
device, which might not be applicable at all times, are currently applicable.
Use of this signal indication shall be limited to supplementing stop, do not
enter, or wrong way signs, and to applications where compliance with the
supplemented traffic control device requires a stop at a designated point.
   (g)   In the event an official traffic-control signal is erected and
maintained at a place other than an intersection, the provisions of this
section shall be applicable except as to those provisions which by their nature
can have no application. Any stop required shall be made at a sign or marking
on the pavement indicating where the stop shall be made, but in the absence of
any such sign or marking the stop shall be made at the signal.
   (h)   This section does not apply at railroad grade crossings. Conduct of
drivers of vehicles approaching railroad grade crossings shall be governed by
Ohio R.C. 4511.61 and 4511.62.
(ORC 4511.13)
§ 414.04  SIGNAL TO CONTROL LANE DIRECTION OF TRAVEL.
   The meanings of lane-use control signal indications are as follows:
   (a)   A steady downward green arrow.  A road user is permitted to drive in
the lane over which the arrow signal indication is located.
   (b)   A steady yellow “X”. A road user is to prepare to vacate the lane over
which the signal indication is located because a lane control change is being
made to a steady red “X” signal indication.
   (c)   A steady white two-way left-turn arrow.  A road user is permitted to
use a lane over which the signal indication is located for a left turn, but not
for through travel, with the understanding that common use of the lane by
oncoming road users for left turns also is permitted.
   (d)   A steady white one-way left-turn arrow. A road user is permitted to
use a lane over which the signal indication is located for a left turn, without
opposing turns in the same lane, but not for through travel.
   (e)   A steady red “X”. A road user is not permitted to use the lane over
which the signal indication is located and that this signal indication shall
modify accordingly the meaning of other traffic controls present.
(ORC 4511.131)
§ 414.05  PEDESTRIAN CONTROL SIGNALS.
   Whenever special pedestrian-control signals exhibiting the words “walk” or
“don’t walk,” or the symbol of a walking person or an upraised palm are in
place, these signals shall indicate the following instructions:
   (a)   A steady walking person signal indication, which symbolizes “walk”,
means that a pedestrian facing the signal indication is permitted to start to
cross the roadway in the direction of the signal indication, possibly in
conflict with turning vehicles. The pedestrian shall yield the right-of-way to
vehicles lawfully within the intersection at the time that the walking person
signal indication is first shown.
   (b)   A flashing upraised hand signal indication, which symbolizes “don't
walk”, means that a pedestrian shall not start to cross the roadway in the
direction of the signal indication, but that any pedestrian who has already
started to cross on a steady walking person signal indication shall proceed to
the far side of the traveled way of the street or highway, unless otherwise
directed by a traffic control device to proceed only to the median of a divided
highway or only to some other island or pedestrian refuge area.
   (c)   A steady upraised hand signal indication means that a pedestrian shall
not enter the roadway in the direction of the signal indication.
   (d)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to invalidate the continued
use of pedestrian control signals utilizing the word “wait” if those signals
were installed prior to March 28, 1985.
   (e)   A flashing walking person signal indication has no meaning and shall
not be used.
(ORC 4511.14)
§ 414.06  (RESERVED)
§ 414.07  UNAUTHORIZED SIGNS AND SIGNALS, HIDING FROM VIEW, ADVERTISING.
   (a)   (1)   No person shall place, maintain, or display upon or in view of
any highway any unauthorized sign, signal, marking, or device which purports to
be, is an imitation of, or resembles a traffic-control device or railroad sign
or signal, or which attempts to direct the movement of traffic, or hides from
view or interferes with the effectiveness of any traffic-control device or any
railroad sign or signal, and no person shall place or maintain, nor shall any
public authority permit, upon any highway any traffic sign or signal bearing
thereon any commercial advertising. This section does not prohibit either the
erection upon private property adjacent to highways of signs giving useful
directional information and of a type that cannot be mistaken for traffic-
control devices, or the erection upon private property of traffic-control
devices by the owner of real property in accordance with Ohio R.C. 4511.211 and
4511.432.
      (2)   Every prohibited sign, signal, marking, or device is a public
nuisance, and the authority having jurisdiction over the highway may remove the
same or cause it to be removed.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(ORC 4511.16)
§ 414.08  ALTERATION, INJURY, REMOVAL OF TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES.
   (a)   No person, without lawful authority, shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Knowingly move, deface, damage, destroy, or otherwise improperly
tamper with any traffic-control device, any railroad sign or signal, or any
inscription, shield, or insignia on the device, sign, or signal, or any part of
the device, sign, or signal;
      (2)   Knowingly drive upon or over any freshly applied pavement marking
material on the surface of a roadway while the marking material is in an
undried condition, and is marked by flags, markers, signs, or other devices
intended to protect it;
      (3)   Knowingly move, damage, destroy, or otherwise improperly tamper
with a manhole cover.
   (b)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (a)(1) or (3) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third
degree. If a violation of division (a)(1) or (3) of this section creates a risk
of physical harm to any person, the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
first degree. If a violation of division (a)(1) or (3) of this section causes
serious physical harm to property that is owned, leased, or controlled by a
state or local authority, the offender is guilty of a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (a)(2) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within
one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or
pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever
violates division (a)(2) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses,
whoever violates division (a)(2) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the third degree.
(ORC 4511.17)
§ 414.09  UNAUTHORIZED POSSESSION OR SALE OF DEVICES.
   (a)   As used in this section, “traffic control device” means any sign,
traffic control signal or other device conforming to and placed or erected in
accordance with the manual adopted under Ohio R.C. 4511.09 by authority of a
public body or official having jurisdiction, for the purpose of regulating,
warning or guiding traffic, including signs denoting the names of streets and
highways, but does not mean any pavement marking.
   (b)   No individual shall buy or otherwise possess, or sell, a traffic
control device, except when one of the following applies:
      (1)   In the course of the individual’s employment by the state or a
local authority for the express or implied purpose of manufacturing, providing,
erecting, moving or removing such a traffic control device;
      (2)   In the course of the individual’s employment by any manufacturer of
traffic control devices other than a state or local authority;
      (3)   For the purpose of demonstrating the design and function of a
traffic control device to state or local officials;
      (4)   When the traffic control device has been purchased from the state
or a local authority at a sale of property that is no longer needed or is unfit
for use; or
      (5)   When the traffic control device has been properly purchased from a
manufacturer for use on private property and the person possessing the device
has a sales receipt for the device or other acknowledgment of sale issued by
the manufacturer.
   (c)   This section does not preclude, and shall not be construed as
precluding, prosecution for theft in violation of Ohio R.C. 2913.02, or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, or for receiving stolen property
in violation of Ohio R.C. 2913.51, or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance.
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third
degree.
(ORC 4511.18)
§ 414.10  SIGNAL PREEMPTION DEVICES; PROHIBITIONS.
   (a)   (1)   No person shall possess a portable signal preemption device.
      (2)   No person shall use a portable signal preemption device to affect
the operation of a traffic-control device.
   (b)   Division (a)(1) of this section does not apply to any of the following
persons and division (a)(2) of this section does not apply to any of the
following persons when responding to an emergency call:
      (1)   A peace officer, as defined in Ohio R.C. 109.17(A)(1), (A)(12), (A)
(14), or (A)(19);
      (2)   A state highway patrol officer;
      (3)   A person while occupying a public safety vehicle as defined in Ohio
R.C. 4511.01(E)(1), (E)(3), or (E)(4).
   (c)   Whoever violates division (a)(1) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree. Whoever violates division (a)(2) of this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
   (d)   As used in this section, “portable signal preemption device” means a
device that, if activated by a person, is capable of changing a traffic-control
signal to green out of sequence.
(ORC 4511.031)
§ 414.99  PENALTY.
   (EDITOR’S NOTE:  See §§
408.01 and
408.02 for general Traffic Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.)
CHAPTER 416:  PEDESTRIANS
Section
416.01   Duties of pedestrians and drivers at crosswalks.
416.02   Right-of-way of blind person.
416.03   Right-of-way yielded by pedestrian; crossing roadways.
416.04   Moving in crosswalks.
416.05   Walking on sidewalks and streets.
416.06   Soliciting rides or business; riding on outside of vehicle or in cargo
storage area; entering or leaving vehicle in motion.
416.07   Passing through bridge signals or railroad barriers.
416.08   Right-of-way of public safety vehicles.
416.09   Right-of-way on sidewalks.
416.10   Intoxication.
416.11   Motorized wheelchair operators.
416.12   Operation of electric personal assistive mobility devices.
416.99   Penalty.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   See section histories for similar state law
   Pedestrians prohibited on freeways - see TRAF.
412.05
   Obedience to traffic control devices - see TRAF.
414.01
   Pedestrian control signals - see TRAF.
414.05
   Opening doors on side available to traffic - see TRAF.
452.08
§ 416.01  DUTIES OF PEDESTRIANS AND DRIVERS AT CROSSWALKS.
   (a)   When traffic-control signals are not in place, not in operation, or
are not clearly assigning the right-of-way, the driver of a vehicle shall yield
the right-of-way, slowing down or stopping if need be to so yield, or if
required by Ohio R.C. 4511.132 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, to a pedestrian crossing the roadway within a crosswalk when the
pedestrian is upon the half of the roadway upon which the vehicle is traveling,
or when the pedestrian is approaching so closely from the opposite half of the
roadway as to be in danger.
   (b)   No pedestrian shall suddenly leave a curb or other place of safety and
walk or run into the path of a vehicle which is so close as to constitute an
immediate hazard.
   (c)   Division (a) of this section does not apply under the conditions
stated in Ohio R.C. 4511.48(B), or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance.
   (d)   Whenever any vehicle is stopped at a marked crosswalk or at any
unmarked crosswalk at an intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross the
roadway, the driver of any other vehicle approaching from the rear shall not
overtake and pass the stopped vehicle.
   (e)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (f)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(ORC 4511.46)
§ 416.02  RIGHT-OF-WAY OF BLIND PERSON.
   (a)   (1)   As used in this section “blind person” or “blind pedestrian”
means a person having not more than 20/200 visual acuity in the better eye with
correcting lenses, or visual acuity greater than 20/200, but with a limitation
in the fields of vision such that the widest diameter of the visual field
subtends an angle no greater than 20 degrees.
      (2)   The driver of every vehicle shall yield the right-of-way to every
blind pedestrian guided by a guide dog, or carrying a cane which is
predominantly white or metallic in color, with or without a red tip.
   (b)   No person, other than a blind person, while on any public highway,
street, alley, or other public thoroughfare, shall carry a white or metallic
cane, with or without a red tip.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (d)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(ORC 4511.47)
§ 416.03  RIGHT-OF-WAY YIELDED BY PEDESTRIAN; CROSSING ROADWAYS.
   (a)   Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than within a
marked crosswalk or within an unmarked crosswalk at an intersection shall yield
the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway.
   (b)   Any pedestrian crossing a roadway at a point where a pedestrian tunnel
or overhead pedestrian crossing has been provided shall yield the right-of-way
to all traffic upon the roadway.
   (c)   Between adjacent intersections at which traffic-control signals are in
operation, pedestrians shall not cross at any place except in a marked
crosswalk.
   (d)   No pedestrian shall cross a roadway intersection diagonally unless
authorized by official traffic-control devices; and when authorized to cross
diagonally, pedestrians shall cross only in accordance with the official
traffic-control devices pertaining to such crossing movements.
   (e)   This section does not relieve the operator of a vehicle from
exercising due care to avoid colliding with any pedestrian upon any roadway.
   (f)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(ORC 4511.48)
§ 416.04  MOVING IN CROSSWALKS.
   (a)   Pedestrians shall move, whenever practicable, upon the right half of
crosswalks.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(ORC 4511.49)
§ 416.05  WALKING ON SIDEWALKS AND STREETS.
   (a)   Where a sidewalk is provided and its use is practicable, it shall be
unlawful for any pedestrian to walk along and upon an adjacent roadway.
   (b)   Where a sidewalk is not available, any pedestrian walking along and
upon a highway shall walk only on a shoulder, as far as practicable from the
edge of the roadway.
   (c)   Where neither a sidewalk nor a shoulder is available, any pedestrian
walking along and upon a highway shall walk as near as practicable to an
outside edge of the roadway, and, if on a two-way roadway, shall walk only on
the left side of the roadway.
   (d)   Except as otherwise provided in Ohio R.C. 4511.13 and 4511.46, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinances, any pedestrian upon a roadway
shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway.
   (e)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(ORC 4511.50)
§ 416.06  SOLICITING RIDES OR BUSINESS; RIDING ON OUTSIDE OF VEHICLE OR IN
CARGO STORAGE AREA; ENTERING OR LEAVING VEHICLE IN MOTION.
   (a)   No person while on a roadway outside a safety zone shall solicit a
ride from the driver of any vehicle.
   (b)   (1)   Except as provided in division (b)(2) of this section, no person
shall stand on a highway for the purpose of soliciting employment, business, or
contributions from the occupant of any vehicle.
      (2)   The Council, by ordinance, may authorize the issuance of a permit
to a charitable organization to allow a person acting on behalf of the
organization to solicit charitable contributions from the occupant of a vehicle
by standing on a highway, other than a freeway as provided in Ohio R.C.
4511.051(A), that is under the jurisdiction of the municipality. The permit
shall be valid for only one period of time, which shall be specified in the
permit, in any calendar year. The Council also may specify the locations where
contributions may be solicited and may impose any other restrictions on or
requirements regarding the manner in which the solicitations are to be
conducted that the Council considers advisable.
      (3)   As used in divisions (b)(2) of this section, “charitable
organization” means an organization that has received from the Internal Revenue
Service a currently valid ruling or determination letter recognizing the tax-
exempt status of the organization pursuant to IRC 501(c)(3).
   (c)   No person shall hang onto or ride on the outside of any motor vehicle
while it is moving upon a roadway, except mechanics or test engineers making
repairs or adjustments, or workers performing specialized highway or street
maintenance or construction under authority of a public agency.
   (d)   No operator shall knowingly permit any person to hang onto or ride on
the outside of any motor vehicle while it is moving upon a roadway, except
mechanics or test engineers making repairs or adjustments, or workers
performing specialized highway or street maintenance or construction under
authority of a public agency.
   (e)   No driver of a truck, trailer, or semitrailer shall knowingly permit
any person who has not attained the age of 16 years to ride in the unenclosed
or unroofed cargo storage area of the driver’s vehicle if the vehicle is
traveling faster than 25 miles per hour, unless either of the following
applies:
      (1)   The cargo storage area of the vehicle is equipped with a properly
secured seat to which is attached a seat safety belt that is in compliance with
federal standards for an occupant restraining device as defined in Ohio R.C.
4513.263(A)(2), the seat and seat safety belt were installed at the time the
vehicle was originally assembled, and the person riding in the cargo storage
area is in the seat and is wearing the seat safety belt; or
      (2)   An emergency exists that threatens the life of the driver or the
person being transported in the cargo storage area of the truck, trailer, or
semitrailer.
   (f)   No driver of a truck, trailer, or semitrailer shall permit any person,
except for those workers performing specialized highway or street maintenance
or construction under authority of a public agency, to ride in the cargo
storage area or on a tailgate of the driver’s vehicle while the tailgate is
unlatched.
   (g)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
any provision of divisions (a) to (d) of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic
offense, whoever violates any provision of divisions (a) to (d) of this section
is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates any provision of divisions
(a) to (d) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (e) or (f) of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4511.51)
§ 416.07  PASSING THROUGH BRIDGE SIGNALS OR RAILROAD BARRIERS.
   (a)   No pedestrian shall enter or remain upon any bridge or approach
thereto beyond the bridge signal, gate, or barrier after a bridge operation
signal indication has been given.
   (b)   No pedestrian shall pass through, around, over, or under any crossing
gate or barrier at a railroad grade crossing or bridge while the gate or
barrier is closed or is being opened or closed.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(ORC 4511.511)
§ 416.08  RIGHT-OF-WAY OF PUBLIC SAFETY VEHICLES.
   (a)   Upon the immediate approach of a public safety vehicle, as stated in
Ohio R.C. 4511.45 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, every
pedestrian shall yield the right-of-way to the public safety vehicle.
   (b)   This section shall not relieve the driver of a public safety vehicle
from the duty to exercise due care to avoid colliding with any pedestrian.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(ORC 4511.452)
§ 416.09  RIGHT-OF-WAY ON SIDEWALKS.
   (a)   The driver of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian
on a sidewalk.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (c)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(ORC 4511.441)
§ 416.10  INTOXICATION.
   (a)   A pedestrian who is under the influence of alcohol, any drug of abuse,
or any combination of them, to a degree that renders the pedestrian a hazard
shall not walk or be upon a highway.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(ORC 4511.481)
§ 416.11  MOTORIZED WHEELCHAIR OPERATORS.
   Every person operating a motorized wheelchair shall have all of the rights
and duties applicable to a pedestrian that are contained in this chapter,
except those provisions which by their nature can have no application.
(ORC 4511.491)
§ 416.12  OPERATION OF ELECTRIC PERSONAL ASSISTIVE MOBILITY DEVICES.
   (a)   (1)   Electric personal assistive mobility devices may be operated on
the public streets, highways, sidewalks, and paths and portions of roadways set
aside for the exclusive use of bicycles in accordance with this section.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, those sections of
this Traffic Code that by their nature are applicable to an electric personal
assistive mobility device apply to the device and the person operating it
whenever it is operated upon any public street, highway, sidewalk, or path or
upon any portion of a roadway set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles.
      (3)   The municipality may regulate or prohibit the operation of electric
personal assistive mobility devices on public streets, highways, sidewalks, and
paths, or portions of roadways set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles,
under its jurisdiction.
   (b)   No operator of an electric personal assistive mobility device shall do
any of the following:
      (1)   Fail to yield the right-of-way to all pedestrians and human-powered
vehicles at all times;
      (2)   Fail to give an audible signal before overtaking and passing a
pedestrian;
      (3)   Operate the device at night unless the device or its operator is
equipped with or wearing both of the following:
         A.   A lamp pointing to the front that emits a white light visible
from a distance of not less than 500 feet; and
         B.   A red reflector facing the rear that is visible from all
distances from 100 feet to 600 feet when directly in front of lawful lower
beams of head lamps on a motor vehicle.
      (4)   Operate the device on any portion of a street or highway that has
an established speed limit of 55 miles per hour or more;
      (5)   Operate the device upon any path set aside for the exclusive use of
pedestrians or other specialized use when an appropriate sign giving notice of
the specialized use is posted on the path;
      (6)   If under 18 years of age, operate the device unless wearing a
protective helmet on the person’s head with the chin strap properly fastened;
      (7)   If under 16 years of age, operate the device unless, during the
operation, the person is under the direct visual and audible supervision of
another person who is 18 years of age or older and is responsible for the
immediate care of the person under 16 years of age.
   (c)   No person who is under 14 years of age shall operate an electric
personal assistive mobility device.
   (d)   No person shall distribute or sell an electric personal assistive
mobility device unless the device is accompanied by a written statement that is
substantially equivalent to the following: “WARNING: TO REDUCE THE RISK OF
SERIOUS INJURY, USE ONLY WHILE WEARING FULL PROTECTIVE EQUIPMENT – HELMET,
WRIST GUARDS, ELBOW PADS, AND KNEE PADS.”
   (e)   Nothing in this section affects or shall be construed to affect any
rule of the Director of Natural Resources or a board of park district
commissioners governing the operation of vehicles on lands under the control of
the Director or board, as applicable.
   (f)   Penalty.
      (1)   Whoever violates division (b) or (c) of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor and shall be punished as follows:
         A.   The offender shall be fined ten dollars ($10.00);
         B.   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of division (b) or (c) of this section, or any
substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, the court, in
addition to imposing the fine required under division (f)(1)A. of this section,
shall do one of the following:
            1.   Order the impoundment for not less than one day but no more
than 30 days of the electric personal assistive mobility device that was
involved in the current violation of that division. The court shall order the
device to be impounded at a safe indoor location designated by the court and
may assess storage fees of not more than five dollars ($5.00) per day; provided
the total storage, processing, and release fees assessed against the offender
or the device in connection with the device’s impoundment or subsequent release
shall not exceed fifty dollars ($50.00).
            2.   If the court does not issue an impoundment order pursuant to
division (f)(1)B.1. of this section, issue an order prohibiting the offender
from operating any electric personal assistive mobility device on the public
streets, highways, sidewalks, and paths and portions of roadways set aside for
the exclusive use of bicycles for not less than one day but not more than 30
days.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (d) of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
(ORC 4511.512)
   (g)   As used in this Code, “electric personal assistive mobility device”
means a self-balancing two non-tandem wheeled device that is designed to
transport only one person, has an electric propulsion system of an average of
750 watts, and when ridden on a paved level surface by an operator who weighs
170 pounds has a maximum speed of less than 20 miles per hour.
(ORC 4501.01(TT))
§ 416.99  PENALTY.
   (EDITOR’S NOTE:  See §§
408.01 and
408.02 for general Traffic Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.)
TITLE SIX:  VEHICLES AND OPERATION
CHAPTER 432:  OPERATION GENERALLY
Section
432.01   Driving upon right side of roadway; exceptions.
432.02   Passing to right when proceeding in opposite directions.
432.03   Overtaking, passing to left; driver’s duties.
432.04   Overtaking, passing to right of vehicle.
432.05   Overtaking, passing to left of centerline.
432.06   Driving upon left side of roadway.
432.07   Hazardous or no passing zones.
432.08   Driving within lanes or continuous lines of traffic.
432.09   Following too closely.
432.10   Turning at intersections.
432.11   “U” turns restricted.
432.12   Starting and backing vehicles.
432.13   Signals before changing course, turning or stopping.
432.14   Hand and arm signals.
432.15   Right-of-way at intersections.
432.16   Intersections at which traffic control signals fail or malfunction.
432.17   Right-of-way when turning left.
432.18   Operation of vehicle at stop and yield signs.
432.19   Emergency or public safety vehicles at stop signals or signs.
432.20   Right-of-way of public safety or coroner’s vehicle.
432.205   Driving while approaching stationary public safety vehicle and
certain other vehicles with caution.
432.21   Right-of-way at private driveway, alley or building.
432.22   Stop signs on private roads and driveways.
432.23   Right-of-way of funeral procession.
432.24   Driving upon sidewalks, tree lawns or curbs.
432.25   Driver’s view and control to be unobstructed by load or persons.
432.26   Driving upon street posted as closed for repair.
432.27   Following and parking near emergency or safety vehicles.
432.28   Driving over fire hose.
432.29   Driving through safety zone.
432.30   One-way streets and rotary traffic islands.
432.31   Driving upon divided roadways.
432.32   Stopping for school bus; actuating visual signals; discharging
children.
432.33   Driving across grade crossings.
432.34   Stopping at grade crossings.
432.35   Slow-moving vehicles or equipment at grade crossings.
432.36   Obstructing intersections, crosswalks or grade crossings.
432.37   “Peeling;” cracking exhaust noises.
432.38   Shortcutting across private property.
432.39   Entering and exiting controlled-access highway.
432.40   Weaving; full time and attention.
432.41   Operation on paths set aside for bicycles.
432.42   Littering from motor vehicles.
432.43   Use of earphones while driving.
432.44   Travel through and around public square.
432.45   Texting while driving prohibited.
432.46   Use of electronic wireless communication devices by minors or
probationary drivers while driving prohibited.
432.99   Penalty.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   See section histories for similar state law
   Obedience to traffic control devices - see TRAF.
414.01
   Yielding right-of-way to pedestrians on sidewalks - see TRAF.
416.09
   Operation of bicycles and motorcycles - see TRAF.
444.01 et seq.
   Operation of snowmobiles and all purpose vehicles - see TRAF.
446.03,
446.04
§ 432.01  DRIVING UPON RIGHT SIDE OF ROADWAY; EXCEPTIONS.
   (a)   Upon all roadways of sufficient width, a vehicle shall be driven upon
the right half of the roadway, except as follows:
      (1)   When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same
direction, or when making a left turn under the rules governing such movements;
      (2)   When an obstruction exists making it necessary to drive to the left
of the center of the highway; provided, any person so doing shall yield the
right-of-way to all vehicles traveling in the proper direction upon the
unobstructed portion of the highway within such distance as to constitute an
immediate hazard;
      (3)   When driving upon a roadway divided into three or more marked lanes
for traffic under the rules applicable thereon;
      (4)   When driving upon a roadway designated and posted with signs for
one-way traffic;
      (5)   When otherwise directed by a police officer or traffic-control
device.
   (b)   (1)   Upon all roadways any vehicle proceeding at less than the
prevailing and lawful speed of traffic at the time and place and under the
conditions then existing shall be driven in the right-hand lane then available
for traffic, and far enough to the right to allow passing by faster vehicles if
such passing is safe and reasonable, except under any of the following
circumstances:
         A.   When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the
same direction;
         B.   When preparing for a left turn;
         C.   When the driver must necessarily drive in a lane other than the
right-hand lane to continue on the driver’s intended route.
      (2)   Nothing in division (b)(1) of this section requires a driver of a
slower vehicle to compromise the driver’s safety to allow overtaking by a
faster vehicle.
   (c)   Upon any roadway having four or more lanes for moving traffic and
providing for two-way movement of traffic, no vehicle shall be driven to the
left of the center line of the roadway, except when authorized by official
traffic-control devices designating certain lanes to the left of the center of
the roadway for use by traffic not otherwise permitted to use the lanes, or
except as permitted under division (a)(2) of this section. This division shall
not be construed as prohibiting the crossing of the center line in making a
left turn into or from an alley, private road, or driveway.
   (d)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (e)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(ORC 4511.25)
§ 432.02  PASSING TO RIGHT WHEN PROCEEDING IN OPPOSITE DIRECTIONS.
   (a)   Operators of vehicles proceeding in opposite directions shall pass
each other to the right, and upon roadways having width for not more than one
line of traffic in each direction, each operator shall give to the other one-
half of the main traveled portion of the roadway or as nearly one-half as is
reasonably possible.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (c)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(ORC 4511.26)
§ 432.03  OVERTAKING, PASSING TO LEFT; DRIVER’S DUTIES.
   (a)   The following rules govern the overtaking and passing of vehicles
proceeding in the same direction:
      (1)   The operator of a vehicle overtaking another vehicle proceeding in
the same direction shall, except as provided in division (a)(3) of this
section, signal to the vehicle to be overtaken, shall pass to the left thereof
at a safe distance, and shall not again drive to the right side of the roadway
until safely clear of the overtaken vehicle.  When a motor vehicle overtakes
and passes a bicycle, three feet or greater is considered a safe passing
distance.
      (2)   Except when overtaking and passing on the right is permitted, the
operator of an overtaken vehicle shall give way to the right in favor of the
overtaking vehicle at the latter’s audible signal, and the operator shall not
increase the speed of the operator’s vehicle until completely passed by the
overtaking vehicle.
      (3)   The operator of a vehicle overtaking and passing another vehicle
proceeding in the same direction on a divided highway as defined in Ohio R.C.
4511.35, a limited access highway as defined in Ohio R.C. 5511.02, or a highway
with four or more traffic lanes is not required to signal audibly to the
vehicle being overtaken and passed.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (c)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(ORC 4511.27)
§ 432.04  OVERTAKING, PASSING TO RIGHT OF VEHICLE.
   (a)   The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass on the right of another
vehicle only under the following conditions:
      (1)   When the vehicle overtaken is making or about to make a left turn;
or
      (2)   Upon a roadway with unobstructed pavement of sufficient width for
two or more lines of vehicles moving lawfully in the direction being traveled
by the overtaking vehicle.
   (b)   The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass another vehicle only
under conditions permitting the movement in safety. The movement shall not be
made by driving off the roadway.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (d)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(ORC 4511.28)
§ 432.05  OVERTAKING, PASSING TO LEFT OF CENTERLINE.
   (a)   No vehicle shall be driven to the left of the center of the roadway in
overtaking and passing traffic proceeding in the same direction, unless the
left side is clearly visible and is free of oncoming traffic for a sufficient
distance ahead to permit the overtaking and passing to be completely made
without interfering with the safe operation of any traffic approaching from the
opposite direction or any traffic overtaken. In every event, the overtaking
vehicle must return to an authorized lane of travel as soon as practicable, and
in the event the passing movement involves the use of a lane authorized for the
traffic approaching from the opposite direction, before coming within 200 feet
of any approaching vehicle.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (c)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(ORC 4511.29)
§ 432.06  DRIVING UPON LEFT SIDE OF ROADWAY.
   (a)   No vehicle shall be driven upon the left side of the roadway under the
following conditions:
      (1)   When approaching the crest of a grade or upon a curve in the
highway, where the operator’s view is obstructed within such a distance as to
create a hazard in the event traffic might approach from the opposite
direction;
      (2)   When the view is obstructed upon approaching within 100 feet of any
bridge, viaduct, or tunnel; or
      (3)   When approaching within 100 feet of or traversing any intersection
or railroad grade crossing.
   (b)   This section does not apply to vehicles upon a one-way roadway, upon a
roadway where traffic is lawfully directed to be driven to the left side, or
under the conditions described in Ohio R.C. 4511.25(A)(2) or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (d)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(ORC 4511.30)
§ 432.07  HAZARDOUS OR NO PASSING ZONES.
   (a)   The Department of Transportation may determine those portions of any
state highway where overtaking and passing other traffic or driving to the left
of the center or center line of the roadway would be especially hazardous, and
may, by appropriate signs or markings on the highway, indicate the beginning
and end of such zones. When signs or markings are in place and clearly visible,
every operator of a vehicle shall obey the directions of the signs or markings,
notwithstanding the distances set out in Ohio R.C. 4511.30.
   (b)   Division (a) of this section does not apply when all of the following
apply:
      (1)   The slower vehicle is proceeding at less than half the speed of the
speed limit applicable to that location.
      (2)   The faster vehicle is capable of overtaking and passing the slower
vehicle without exceeding the speed limit.
      (3)   There is sufficient clear sight distance to the left of the center
or center line of the roadway to meet the overtaking and passing provisions of
Ohio R.C. 4511.29, considering the speed of the slower vehicle.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (d)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(ORC 4511.31)
§ 432.08  DRIVING WITHIN LANES OR CONTINUOUS LINES OF TRAFFIC.
   (a)   Whenever any roadway has been divided into two or more clearly marked
lanes for traffic, or wherever within the municipality traffic is lawfully
moving in two or more substantially continuous lines in the same direction, the
following rules apply:
      (1)   A vehicle shall be driven, as nearly as is practicable, entirely
within a single lane or line of traffic and shall not be moved from the lane or
line until the driver has first ascertained that the movement can be made with
safety.
      (2)   Upon a roadway which is divided into three lanes and provides for
the two-way movement of traffic, a vehicle shall not be driven in the center
lane, except when overtaking and passing another vehicle where the roadway is
clearly visible and the center lane is clear of traffic within a safe distance,
or when preparing for a left turn, or where the center lane is at the time
allocated exclusively to traffic moving in the direction the vehicle is
proceeding, and is posted with signs to give notice of such allocation.
      (3)   Official signs may be erected directing specified traffic to use a
designated lane or designating those lanes to be used by traffic moving in a
particular direction, regardless of the center of the roadway, or restricting
the use of a particular lane to only buses during certain hours or during all
hours, and drivers of vehicles shall obey the directions of such signs.
      (4)   Official traffic-control devices may be installed prohibiting the
changing of lanes on sections of roadway, and drivers of vehicles shall obey
the directions of every such device.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (c)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(ORC 4511.33)
§ 432.09  FOLLOWING TOO CLOSELY.
   (a)   (1)   The operator of a motor vehicle shall not follow another vehicle
more closely than is reasonable and prudent, having due regard for the speed of
the vehicle and the traffic upon and the condition of the highway.
      (2)   The driver of any truck, or motor vehicle drawing another vehicle,
when traveling upon a roadway outside a business or residence district, shall
maintain a sufficient space, whenever conditions permit, between the vehicle
and another vehicle ahead so an overtaking motor vehicle may enter and occupy
the space without danger. This division (a) does not prevent overtaking and
passing nor does it apply to any lane specially designated for use by trucks.
      (3)   Motor vehicles being driven upon any roadway outside of a business
or residence district in a caravan or motorcade shall maintain a sufficient
space between the vehicles so an overtaking vehicle may enter and occupy the
space without danger. This division shall not apply to funeral processions.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (c)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(ORC 4511.34)
§ 432.10  TURNING AT INTERSECTIONS.
   (a)   The driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an intersection shall be
governed by the following rules:
      (1)   Approach for a right turn and a right turn shall be made as close
as practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway.
      (2)   At any intersection where traffic is permitted to move in both
directions on each roadway entering the intersection, an approach for a left
turn shall be made in that portion of the right half of the roadway nearest the
center line thereof and by passing to the right of the center line where it
enters the intersection, and, after entering the intersection, the left turn
shall be made so as to leave the intersection to the right of the center line
of the roadway being entered. Whenever practicable, the left turn shall be made
in that portion of the intersection to the left of the center of the
intersection.
      (3)   At any intersection where traffic is restricted to one direction on
one or more of the roadways, the driver of a vehicle intending to turn left at
any such intersection shall approach the intersection in the extreme left-hand
lane lawfully available to traffic moving in the direction of travel of the
vehicle, and, after entering the intersection, the left turn shall be made so
as to leave the intersection, as nearly as practicable, in the left hand lane
of the roadway being entered lawfully available to traffic moving in that lane.
   (b)   The Department of Transportation and local authorities may cause
markers, buttons, or signs to be placed within or adjacent to intersections,
and thereby require and direct that a different course from that specified in
this section be traveled by vehicles turning at an intersection, and when
markers, buttons, or signs are so placed, no operator of a vehicle shall turn
the vehicle at an intersection other than as directed and required by the
markers, buttons, or signs.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (d)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(ORC 4511.36)
§ 432.11  “U” TURNS RESTRICTED.
   (a)   Except as provided in Ohio R.C. § 4511.13 and division (b) of this
section, no vehicle shall be turned so as to proceed in the opposite direction
upon any curve, or upon the approach to or near the crest of a grade, if such
vehicle cannot be seen within 500 feet by the driver of any other vehicle
approaching from either direction.
   (b)   The driver of an emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle, when
responding to an emergency call, may turn the vehicle so as to proceed in the
opposite direction. This division applies only when the emergency vehicle or
public safety vehicle is responding to an emergency call, is equipped with and
displaying at least one flashing, rotating, or oscillating light visible under
normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of 500 feet to the front of the
vehicle, and when the driver of the vehicle is giving an audible signal by
siren, exhaust whistle, or bell. This division does not relieve the driver of
an emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle from the duty to drive with due
regard for the safety of all persons and property upon the highway.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (d)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(ORC 4511.37)
§ 432.12  STARTING AND BACKING VEHICLES.
   (a)   (1)   No person shall start a vehicle which is stopped, standing, or
parked until the movement can be made with reasonable safety.
      (2)   Before backing, operators of vehicles shall give ample warning, and
while backing they shall exercise vigilance not to injure person or property on
the street or highway.
      (3)   No person shall back a motor vehicle on a freeway, except:
         A.   In a rest area;
         B.   In the performance of public works or official duties;
         C.   As a result of an emergency caused by an accident or breakdown of
a motor vehicle.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (c)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(ORC 4511.38)
§ 432.13  SIGNALS BEFORE CHANGING COURSE, TURNING OR STOPPING.
   (a)   (1)   No person shall turn a vehicle or move right or left upon a
highway unless and until the person has exercised due care to ascertain that
the movement can be made with reasonable safety, nor without giving an
appropriate signal in the manner hereinafter provided.
      (2)   When required, a signal of intention to turn or move right or left
shall be given continuously during not less than the last 100 feet traveled by
the vehicle before turning, except that in the case of a person operating a
bicycle or electric bicycle, the signal shall be made not less than one time
but is not required to be continuous. A bicycle or electric bicycle operator is
not required to make a signal if the bicycle is in a designated turn lane, and
a signal shall not be given when the operator’s hands are needed for the safe
operation of the bicycle or electric bicycle.
      (3)   No person shall stop or suddenly decrease the speed of a vehicle
without first giving an appropriate signal in the manner provided herein to the
driver of any vehicle immediately to the rear, when there is opportunity to
give a signal.
      (4)   Any stop or turn signal required by this section shall be given
either by means of the hand and arm, or by signal lights that clearly indicate
to both approaching and following traffic the intention to turn or move right
or left, except that any motor vehicle in use on a highway shall be equipped
with, and the required signal shall be given by, signal lights when the
distance from the center of the top of the steering post to the left outside
limit of the body, cab or load of such motor vehicle exceeds 24 inches, or when
the distance from the center of the top of the steering post to the rear limit
of the body or load thereof exceeds 14 feet, whether a single vehicle or a
combination of vehicles.
      (5)   The signal lights required by this section shall not be flashed on
one side only on a disabled vehicle, flashed as a courtesy or “do pass” signal
to operators of other vehicles approaching from the rear, nor be flashed on one
side only of a parked vehicle except as may be necessary for compliance with
this section.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (c)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(ORC 4511.39)
§ 432.14  HAND AND ARM SIGNALS.
   (a)   Except as provided in division (b) of this section, all signals
required by the provisions of this Traffic Code, when given by hand and arm,
shall be given from the left side of the vehicle in the following manner, and
the signals shall indicate as follows:
      (1)   Left turn, hand and arm extended horizontally;
      (2)   Right turn, hand and arm extended upward;
      (3)   Stop or decrease speed, hand and arm extended downward.
   (b)   As an alternative to division (a)(2) of this section, a person
operating a bicycle or electric bicycle may give a right turn signal by
extending the right hand and arm horizontally and to the right side of the
bicycle or electric bicycle.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (d)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(ORC 4511.40)
§ 432.15  RIGHT-OF-WAY AT INTERSECTIONS.
   (a)   When two vehicles approach or enter an intersection from different
streets or highways at approximately the same time, the driver of the vehicle
on the left shall yield the right-of-way to the vehicle on the right.
   (b)   The right-of-way rule declared in division (a) of this section is
modified at through highways and otherwise as stated in this Traffic Code or
Ohio R.C. Chapter 4511.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (d)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(ORC 4511.41)
§ 432.16  INTERSECTIONS AT WHICH TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNALS FAIL OR MALFUNCTION.
   (a)   The driver of a vehicle who approaches an intersection where traffic
is controlled by traffic control signals shall do all of the following if the
signal facing the driver exhibits no colored lights or colored lighted arrows,
exhibits a combination of such lights or arrows that fails to clearly indicate
the assignment of right-of-way, or, if the vehicle is a bicycle or an electric
bicycle, the signals are otherwise malfunctioning due to the failure of a
vehicle detector to detect the presence of the bicycle or electric bicycle:
      (1)   Stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if none, stop before
entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or, if none, stop
before entering the intersection;
      (2)   Yield the right-of-way to all vehicles in the intersection or
approaching on an intersecting road, if the vehicles will constitute an
immediate hazard during the time the driver is moving across or within the
intersection or junction of roadways;
      (3)   Exercise ordinary care while proceeding through the intersection.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (c)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(ORC 4511.132)
§ 432.17  RIGHT-OF-WAY WHEN TURNING LEFT.
   (a)   The operator of a vehicle intending to turn to the left within an
intersection or into an alley, private road, or driveway shall yield the right-
of-way to any vehicle approaching from the opposite direction which is within
the intersection or so close thereto as to constitute an immediate hazard.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (c)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(ORC 4511.42)
§ 432.18  OPERATION OF VEHICLE AT STOP AND YIELD SIGNS.
   (a)   Except when directed to proceed by a law enforcement officer, every
driver of a vehicle approaching a stop sign shall stop at a clearly marked stop
line, but if none, before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the
intersection, or, if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway
where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway
before entering it. After having stopped, the driver shall yield the right-of-
way to any vehicle in the intersection or approaching on another roadway so
closely as to constitute an immediate hazard during the time the driver is
moving across or within the intersection or junction of roadways.
   (b)   The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign shall slow down to a
speed reasonable for the existing conditions, and if required for safety to
stop, shall stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if none, before entering
the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or if none, then at the
point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of
approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway before entering it. After
slowing, the driver shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle in the
intersection or approaching on another roadway so closely as to constitute an
immediate hazard during the time the driver is moving across or within the
intersection or junction of roadways. Whenever a driver is involved in a
collision with a vehicle in the intersection or junction of roadways, after
driving past a yield sign without stopping, the collision shall be prima facie
evidence of the driver’s failure to yield the right-of-way.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (d)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(ORC 4511.43)
§ 432.19  EMERGENCY OR PUBLIC SAFETY VEHICLES AT STOP SIGNALS OR SIGNS.
   (a)   The driver of any emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle, when
responding to an emergency call, upon approaching a red or stop signal or any
stop sign, shall slow down as necessary for safety to traffic, but may proceed
cautiously past the red or stop sign or signal with due regard for the safety
of all persons using the street or highway.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (c)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(ORC 4511.03)
§ 432.20  RIGHT-OF-WAY OF PUBLIC SAFETY OR CORONER’S VEHICLE.
   (a)   Upon the approach of a public safety vehicle or coroner’s vehicle,
equipped with at least one flashing, rotating, or oscillating light visible
under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of 500 feet to the front of
the vehicle, and the driver is giving an audible signal by siren, exhaust
whistle, or bell, no driver of any other vehicle shall fail to yield the right-
of-way, immediately drive, if practical, to a position parallel to, and as
close as possible to, the right edge or curb of the highway clear of any
intersection, and stop and remain in that position until the public safety
vehicle or coroner’s vehicle has passed, except when otherwise directed by a
police officer.
   (b)   This section does not relieve the driver of a public safety vehicle or
coroner’s vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all
persons and property upon the highway.
   (c)   This section applies to a coroner’s vehicle only when the vehicle is
operated in accordance with Ohio R.C. 4513.171, or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance. As used in this section, “coroner’s vehicle” means a
vehicle used by a coroner, deputy coroner or coroner’s investigator that is
equipped with a flashing, oscillating or rotating red or blue light and a
siren, exhaust whistle or bell capable of giving an audible signal.
   (d)   Except as otherwise provided in this division or division (e), whoever
violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree on a
first offense. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic
offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third
degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been
convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree.
(ORC 4511.45)
   (e)   (1)   When the failure of a motor vehicle operator to yield the right-
of-way to a public safety vehicle as required by division (a) of this section
impedes the ability of the public safety vehicle to respond to an emergency,
any emergency personnel in the public safety vehicle may report the license
plate number and a general description of the vehicle and the operator of the
vehicle to the law enforcement agency exercising jurisdiction over the area
where the alleged violation occurred.
      (2)   A.   Upon receipt of a report under division (e)(1) of this
section, the law enforcement agency may conduct an investigation to attempt to
determine or confirm the identity of the operator of the vehicle at the time of
the alleged violation.
         B.   If the identity of the operator at the time of an alleged
violation of division (a) of this section is established, the law enforcement
agency has probable cause to issue either a written warning or a citation for
that violation, and the agency shall issue a written warning or a citation to
the operator.
         C.   If the identity of the operator of the vehicle at the time of the
alleged violation cannot be established, the law enforcement agency may issue a
written warning to the person who owned the vehicle at the time of the alleged
violation. However, in the case of a leased or rented vehicle, the law
enforcement agency shall issue the written warning to the person who leased or
rented the vehicle at the time of the alleged violation.
      (3)   A.   Whoever violates division (a) of this section based on a
report filed under division (e)(1) of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor and shall be fined $150.
         B.   If a person who is issued a citation for a violation of division
(a) of this section based on a report filed under division (e)(1) of this
section does not enter a written plea of guilty and does not waive the person’s
right to contest the citation but instead appears in person in the proper court
to answer the charge, the trier of fact cannot find beyond a reasonable doubt
that the person committed that violation unless the emergency personnel who
filed the report appears in person in the court and testifies.
      (4)   As used in this division (e):
         A.   “License plate” includes any temporary license placard issued
under R.C. § 4503.182 or similar law of another jurisdiction.
         B.   “Public safety vehicle” does not include an unmarked public
safety vehicle or a vehicle used by a public law enforcement officer or other
person sworn to enforce the criminal and traffic laws of the state or a vehicle
used by the motor carrier enforcement unit for the enforcement of orders and
rules of the public utilities commission.
(R.C. § 4511.454)
§ 432.205  DRIVING WHILE APPROACHING STATIONARY PUBLIC SAFETY VEHICLE AND
CERTAIN OTHER VEHICLES WITH CAUTION.
   (a)   The driver of a motor vehicle, upon approaching a stationary public
safety vehicle, emergency vehicle, road service vehicle, waste collection
vehicle, vehicle used by the Public Utilities Commission to conduct motor
vehicle inspections in accordance with R.C. §§ 4923.04 and 4923.06, or a
highway maintenance vehicle that is displaying the appropriate visual signals
by means of flashing, oscillating or rotating lights, as prescribed in Ohio
R.C. 4513.17, shall do either of the following:
      (1)   If the driver of the motor vehicle is traveling on a highway that
consists of at least two lanes that carry traffic in the same direction of
travel as that of the driver’s motor vehicle, the driver shall proceed with due
caution and, if possible and with due regard to the road, weather, and traffic
conditions, shall change lanes into a lane this is not adjacent to that of the
stationary public safety vehicle, emergency vehicle, road service vehicle,
waste collection vehicle, vehicle used by the Public Utilities Commission to
conduct motor vehicle inspections in accordance with R.C. §§ 4923.04 and
4923.06, or a highway maintenance vehicle.
      (2)   If the driver is not traveling on a highway of a type described in
division (a)(1) of this section, or if the driver is traveling on a highway of
that type but it is not possible to change lanes or if to do so would be
unsafe, the driver shall proceed with due caution, reduce the speed of the
motor vehicle, and maintain a safe speed for the road, weather, and traffic
conditions.
   (b)   This section does not relieve the driver of a public safety vehicle,
emergency vehicle, road service vehicle, waste collection vehicle, vehicle used
by the Public Utilities Commission to conduct motor vehicle inspections in
accordance with R.C. §§ 4923.04 and 4923.06, or a highway maintenance vehicle
from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons and
property upon the highway.
   (c)   No person shall fail to drive a motor vehicle in compliance with
divisions (a)(1) or (a)(2) of this section when so required by division (a) of
this section.
   (d)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (2)   Notwithstanding §
698.02 or Ohio R.C. 2929.28, upon a finding that a person operated a motor
vehicle in violation of division (c) of this section, the court, in addition to
all other penalties provided by law, shall impose a fine of two times the usual
amount imposed for the violation.
      (3)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
   (e)   The offense established under this section is a strict liability
offense and Ohio R.C. 2901.20 does not apply. The designation of this offense
as a strict liability offense shall not be construed to imply that any other
offense, for which there is no specified degree of culpability, is not a strict
liability offense.
(ORC 4511.213)
§ 432.21  RIGHT-OF-WAY AT PRIVATE DRIVEWAY, ALLEY OR BUILDING.
   (a)   (1)   The operator of a vehicle about to enter or cross a highway from
any place other than another roadway shall yield the right-of-way to all
traffic approaching on the roadway to be entered or crossed.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (a) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
division (a) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted
of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates
division (a) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (3)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(ORC 4511.44)
   (b)   (1)   The driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, building,
private road, or driveway within a business or residence district shall stop
the vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or onto the sidewalk
area extending across the alley, building entrance, road, or driveway, or in
the event there is no sidewalk area, shall stop at the point nearest the street
to be entered where the driver has a view of approaching traffic thereon.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (b) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
division (b) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted
of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates
division (b) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (3)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(ORC 4511.431)
   (c)   The driver of a vehicle intending to turn into a private road or
driveway, alley or building from a public street or highway shall be governed
by the following rules:
      (1)   Approach for a right turn and a right turn shall be made as close
as practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway.
      (2)   Upon a roadway where traffic is proceeding in opposite directions,
approach for a left turn and a left turn shall be made from that portion of the
right half of the roadway nearest the centerline thereof.
      (3)   Upon a roadway where traffic is restricted to one direction,
approach for a left turn and a left turn shall be made as close as practicable
to the left-hand curb or edge of the roadway.
   (d)   It shall be the duty of the driver of any vehicle entering a private
road or driveway, alley or building to yield the right-of-way to pedestrians
lawfully using the sidewalk or sidewalk area extending across the private road
or driveway, alley or building.
§ 432.22  STOP SIGNS ON PRIVATE ROADS AND DRIVEWAYS.
   (a)   The owner of a private road or driveway located in a private
residential area containing 20 or more dwelling units may erect stop signs at
places where the road or driveway intersects with another private road or
driveway in the residential area, in compliance with all of the following
requirements:
      (1)   The stop sign is sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily
observant person and meets the specifications of and is placed in accordance
with the manual adopted by the Department of Transportation pursuant to Ohio
R.C. 4511.09.
      (2)   The owner has posted a sign at the entrance of the private road or
driveway that is in plain view and clearly informs persons entering the road or
driveway that they are entering private property, stop signs have been posted
and must be obeyed, and the signs are enforceable by law enforcement officers
under state law. The sign required by this division, where appropriate, may be
incorporated with the sign required by Ohio R.C. 4511.211(A)(2), or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (b)   Ohio R.C. 4511.43(A) and Ohio R.C. 4511.46, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, shall be deemed to apply to the driver of a
vehicle on a private road or driveway where a stop sign is placed in accordance
with division (a) of this section and to a pedestrian crossing such a road or
driveway at an intersection where a stop sign is in place.
   (c)   When a stop sign is placed in accordance with division (a) of this
section, any law enforcement officer may apprehend a person found violating the
stop sign and may stop and charge the person with violating the stop sign.
   (d)   As used in this section, and for the purpose of applying Ohio R.C.
4511.43(A) and Ohio R.C. 4511.46, or any substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, to conduct under this section:
      (1)   “Intersection” means:
         A.   The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the
lateral curb lines, or, if none, then the lateral boundary lines of the
roadways of two private roads or driveways which join one another at, or
approximately at, right angles, or the area within which vehicles traveling
upon different private roads or driveways joining at any other angle may come
in conflict.
         B.   Where a private road or driveway includes two roadways 30 feet or
more apart, then every crossing of two roadways of such private roads or
driveways shall be regarded as a separate intersection.
      (2)   “Owner” and “private residential area containing 20 or more
dwelling units” have the same meanings as in Ohio R.C. 4511.211.
      (3)   “Roadway” means that portion of a private road or driveway
improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular travel, except the berm or
shoulder. If a private road or driveway includes two or more separate roadways,
the term “roadway” means any such roadway separately but not all such roadways
collectively.
   (e)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(ORC 4511.432)
§ 432.23  RIGHT-OF-WAY OF FUNERAL PROCESSION.
   (a)   As used in this section, “funeral procession” means two or more
vehicles accompanying the cremated remains or the body of a deceased person in
the daytime when each of the vehicles has its headlights lighted and is
displaying a purple and white or an orange and white pennant attached to each
vehicle in such a manner as to be clearly visible to traffic approaching from
any direction.
   (b)   Excepting public safety vehicles proceeding in accordance with Ohio
R.C. 4511.45 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, or when
directed otherwise by a police officer, pedestrians and the operators of all
vehicles shall yield the right-of-way to each vehicle that is a part of a
funeral procession. Whenever the lead vehicle in a funeral procession lawfully
enters an intersection, the remainder of the vehicles in the procession may
continue to follow the lead vehicle through the intersection, notwithstanding
any traffic-control devices or right-of-way provisions of the Revised Code,
provided that the operator of each vehicle exercises due care to avoid
colliding with any other vehicle or pedestrian.
   (c)   No person shall operate any vehicle as a part of a funeral procession
without having the headlights of the vehicle lighted and without displaying a
purple and white or an orange and white pennant in such a manner as to be
clearly visible to traffic approaching from any direction.
   (d)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (e)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(ORC 4511.451)
§ 432.24  DRIVING UPON SIDEWALKS, TREE LAWNS OR CURBS.
   (a)   (1)   No person shall drive any vehicle, other than a bicycle or an
electric bicycle if the motor is not engaged, upon a sidewalk or sidewalk area,
except upon a permanent or duly authorized temporary driveway.
      (2)   Nothing in this section shall be construed as prohibiting local
authorities from regulating the operation of bicycles or electric bicycles,
except that no local authority may require that bicycles or electric bicycles
be operated on sidewalks.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (c)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(ORC 4511.711)
   (d)   No person shall drive a vehicle on a tree lawn area or the curb of a
street, except upon a permanent or duly authorized temporary driveway or when
otherwise lawfully authorized.
§ 432.25  DRIVER’S VIEW AND CONTROL TO BE UNOBSTRUCTED BY LOAD OR PERSONS.
   (a)   No person shall drive a vehicle when it is so loaded, or when there
are in the front seat such number of persons, as to obstruct the view of the
driver to the front or sides of the vehicle, or to interfere with the driver’s
control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle.
   (b)   No passenger in a vehicle shall ride in a position as to interfere
with the driver’s view ahead or to the sides, or to interfere with the driver’s
control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle.
   (c)   No person shall open the door of a vehicle on the side available to
moving traffic unless and until it is reasonably safe to do so, and can be done
without interfering with the movement of other traffic, nor shall any person
leave a door open on the side of a vehicle available to moving traffic for a
period of time longer than necessary to load or unload passengers.
   (d)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(ORC 4511.70)
§ 432.26  DRIVING UPON STREET POSTED AS CLOSED FOR REPAIR.
   (a)   No person shall drive upon, along, or across a street or highway, or
any part of a street or highway that has been closed in the process of its
construction, reconstruction, or repair, and posted with appropriate signs by
the authority having jurisdiction to close the highway.
   (b)   (1)   No person shall operate a vehicle on or onto a public street or
highway that is temporarily covered by a rise in water level, including
groundwater or an overflow of water, and that is clearly marked by a sign that
specifies that the road is closed due to the rise in water level and that any
person who uses the closed portion of the road may be fined up to two thousand
dollars ($2,000).
      (2)   A person who is issued a citation for a violation of division (b)
(1) of this section is not permitted to enter a written plea of guilty and
waive the person’s right to contest the citation in court, but instead must
appear in person in the proper court to answer the charge.
(ORC 4511.714(A), (B))
   (c)   (1)   A.   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates division (a) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If,
within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of
or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever
violates division (a) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been
convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever
violates division (a) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third
degree.
         B.   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(ORC 4511.71(B))
      (2)   A.   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.
         B.   In addition to the financial sanctions authorized or required
under Ohio R.C. 2929.28 and to any costs otherwise authorized or required under
any provision of law, the court imposing the sentence upon an offender who is
convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of division (b) of this section
shall order the offender to reimburse one or more rescuers for the cost any
such rescuer incurred in rescuing the person, excluding any cost of
transporting the rescued person to a hospital or other facility for treatment
of injuries, up to a cumulative maximum of two thousand dollars ($2,000). If
more than one rescuer was involved in the emergency response, the court shall
allocate the reimbursement proportionately, according to the cost each rescuer
incurred. A financial sanction imposed under this section is a judgment in
favor of the rescuer and, subject to a determination of indigency under Ohio
R.C. 2929.28(B), a rescuer may collect the financial sanction in the same
manner as provided in Ohio R.C. 2929.28.
(ORC 4511.714(C))
   (d)   As used in this section:
      (1)   “Emergency medical service organization.” Has the same meanings as
in Ohio R.C. 9.60.
      (2)   “Firefighting agency.” Has the same meanings as in Ohio R.C. 9.60.
      (3)   “Private fire company.” Has the same meanings as in Ohio R.C. 9.60.
      (4)   “Rescuer.” Means a state agency, political subdivision,
firefighting agency, private fire company, or emergency medical service
organization.
(ORC 4511.714(D)
§ 432.27  FOLLOWING AND PARKING NEAR EMERGENCY OR SAFETY VEHICLES.
   (a)   The driver of any vehicle, other than an emergency vehicle or public
safety vehicle on official business, shall not follow any emergency vehicle or
public safety vehicle traveling in response to an alarm closer than 500 feet,
or drive into or park the vehicle within the block where the fire apparatus has
stopped in answer to a fire alarm, unless directed to do so by a police officer
or a firefighter.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (c)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(ORC 4511.72)
§ 432.28  DRIVING OVER FIRE HOSE.
   (a)   No vehicle shall, without the consent of the fire department official
in command, be driven over any unprotected hose of a fire department that is
laid down on any street or private driveway to be used at any fire or alarm of
fire.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (c)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(ORC 4511.73)
§ 432.29  DRIVING THROUGH SAFETY ZONE.
   (a)   No vehicle shall at any time be driven through or within a safety
zone.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (c)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(ORC 4511.60)
§ 432.30  ONE-WAY STREETS AND ROTARY TRAFFIC ISLANDS.
   (a)   (1)   Upon a roadway designated and posted with signs for one-way
traffic, a vehicle shall be driven only in the direction designated.
      (2)   A vehicle passing around a rotary traffic island shall be driven
only to the right of the rotary traffic island.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (c)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(ORC 4511.32)
§ 432.31  DRIVING UPON DIVIDED ROADWAYS.
   (a)   Whenever any highway has been divided into two roadways by an
intervening space, or by a physical barrier, or a clearly indicated dividing
section so constructed as to impede vehicular traffic, every vehicle shall be
driven only upon the right-hand roadway, and no vehicle shall be driven over,
across, or within any dividing space, barrier, or section, except through an
opening, crossover, or intersection established by public authority. This
section does not prohibit the occupancy of the dividing space, barrier, or
section for the purpose of an emergency stop, or in compliance with an order of
a police officer.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (c)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(ORC 4511.35)
§ 432.32  STOPPING FOR SCHOOL BUS; ACTUATING VISUAL SIGNALS; DISCHARGING
CHILDREN.
   (a)   The driver of a vehicle, upon meeting or overtaking from either
direction any school bus stopped for the purpose of receiving or discharging
any school child, person attending programs offered by community boards of
mental health and county boards of developmental disabilities, or child
attending a program offered by a head start agency, shall stop at least ten
feet from the front or rear of the school bus and shall not proceed until such
school bus resumes motion, or until signaled by the school bus driver to
proceed. It is no defense to a charge under this division that the school bus
involved failed to display or be equipped with an automatically extended stop
warning sign as required by division (b) of this section.
   (b)   Every school bus shall be equipped with amber and red visual signals
meeting the requirements of Ohio R.C. 4511.771 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, and an automatically extended stop warning sign of a type
approved by the State Board of Education, which shall be actuated by the driver
of the bus whenever but only whenever the bus is stopped or stopping on the
roadway for the purpose of receiving or discharging school children, persons
attending programs offered by community boards of mental health and county
boards of developmental disabilities, or children attending programs offered by
head start agencies. A school bus driver shall not actuate the visual signals
or the stop warning sign in designated school bus loading areas where the bus
is entirely off the roadway or at school buildings when children or persons
attending programs offered by community boards of mental health and county
boards of developmental disabilities are loading or unloading at curbside or at
buildings when children attending programs offered by head start agencies are
loading or unloading at curbside. The visual signals and stop warning sign
shall be synchronized or otherwise operated as required by rule of the Board.
   (c)   Where a highway has been divided into four or more traffic lanes, a
driver of a vehicle need not stop for a school bus approaching from the
opposite direction which has stopped for the purpose of receiving or
discharging any school child, persons attending programs offered by community
boards of mental health and county boards of developmental disabilities, or
children attending programs offered by head start agencies. The driver of any
vehicle overtaking the school bus shall comply with division (a) above.
   (d)   School buses operating on divided highways or on highways with four or
more traffic lanes shall receive and discharge all school children, persons
attending programs offered by community boards of mental health and county
boards of developmental disabilities, and children attending programs offered
by head start agencies on their residence side of the highway.
   (e)   No school bus driver shall start the driver’s bus until after any
child, person attending programs offered by community boards of mental health
and county boards of developmental disabilities, or child attending a program
offered by a head start agency who may have alighted therefrom has reached a
place of safety on the child’s or person’s residence side of the road.
   (f)   (1)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section may be fined an
amount not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). A person who is issued a
citation for a violation of division (a) of this section is not permitted to
enter a written plea of guilty and waive the person’s right to contest the
citation in a trial but instead must appear in person in the proper court to
answer the charge.
      (2)   In addition to and independent of any other penalty provided by
law, the court or Mayor may impose upon an offender who violates this section a
class seven suspension of the offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s
license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license or nonresident
operating privilege from the range specified in Ohio R.C. 4510.02(A)(7). When a
license is suspended under this section, the court or Mayor shall cause the
offender to deliver the license to the court, and the court or Clerk of the
Court immediately shall forward the license to the Registrar of Motor Vehicles,
together with notice of the court’s action.
   (g)   As used in this section:
      (1)   “Head start agency” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 3301.32.
      (2)   “School bus” as used in relation to children who attend a program
offered by a head start agency, means a bus that is owned and operated by a
head start agency, is equipped with an automatically extended stop warning sign
of a type approved by the State Board of Education, is painted the color and
displays the markings described in Ohio R.C. 4511.77, and is equipped with
amber and red visual signals meeting the requirements of Ohio R.C. 4511.77,
irrespective of whether or not the bus has 15 or more children aboard at any
time. The term does not include a van owned and operated by a head start
agency, irrespective of its color, lights or markings.
(ORC 4511.75)
§ 432.33  DRIVING ACROSS GRADE CROSSINGS.
   (a)   (1)   Whenever any person driving a vehicle approaches a railroad
grade crossing, the person shall stop within 50 feet but not less than 15 feet
from the nearest rail of the railroad if any of the following circumstances
exist at the crossing:
         A.   A clearly visible electric or mechanical signal device gives
warning of the immediate approach of a train.
         B.   A crossing gate is lowered.
         C.   A flagperson gives or continues to give a signal of the approach
or passage of a train.
         D.   There is insufficient space on the other side of the railroad
grade crossing to accommodate the vehicle the person is operating without
obstructing the passage of other vehicles, pedestrians or railroad trains,
notwithstanding any traffic control signal indication to proceed.
         E.   An approaching train is emitting an audible signal or is plainly
visible, and is in hazardous proximity to the crossing.
         F.   There is insufficient undercarriage clearance to safely negotiate
the crossing.
      (2)   A person who is driving a vehicle and who approaches a railroad
grade crossing shall not proceed as long as any of the circumstances described
in divisions (a)(1)A. through (a)(1)F. of this section exist at the crossing.
   (b)   No person shall drive any vehicle through, around, or under any
crossing gate or barrier at a railroad crossing while the gate or barrier is
closed, or is being opened or closed unless the person is signaled by a law
enforcement officer or flagperson that it is permissible to do so.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.
(ORC 4511.62)
§ 432.34  STOPPING AT GRADE CROSSINGS.
   (a)   (1)   Except as provided in division (a)(2) of this section, the
operator of any bus, any school vehicle, or any vehicle transporting material
required to be placarded under 49 C.F.R. Parts 100 to 185, before crossing at
grade any track of a railroad, shall stop the vehicle, and while so stopped,
shall listen through an open door or open window, and look in both directions
along the track for any approaching train and for signals indicating the
approach of a train, and shall proceed only upon exercising due care after
stopping, looking, and listening as required by this section. Upon proceeding,
the operator of such a vehicle shall cross only in a gear that will ensure
there will be no necessity for changing gears while traversing the crossing,
and shall not shift gears while crossing the tracks.
      (2)   Division (a) of this section does not apply at grade crossings when
any local authority has filed an application with the Public Utilities
Commission requesting the approval of an exempt crossing, and the Public
Utilities Commission has authorized and approved an exempt crossing as provided
in Ohio R.C. 4511.63(B).
      (3)   As used in division (a) of this section:
         A.   “Bus” means any vehicle originally designed by its manufacturer
to transport 16 or more passengers, including the driver, or carries 16 or more
passengers, including the driver.
         B.   “Exempt crossing” means a highway rail grade crossing authorized
and approved by the Public Utilities Commission under Ohio R.C. 4511.63(B) at
which vehicles may cross without making the stop otherwise required by this
section.
         C.   “School vehicle” means any vehicle used for the transportation of
pupils to and from a school or school-related function if the vehicle is owned
or operated by, or operated under contract with, a public or nonpublic school.
      (4)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (a) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If the offender
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one or more violations of
division (a) of this section or Ohio R.C. 4511.63, 4511.76, 4511.761, 4511.762,
4511.764, 4511.77, or 4511.79, or a municipal ordinance that is substantially
equivalent to any of those sections, whoever violates division (a) of this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(ORC 4511.63)
   (b)   (1)   As used in this section, “active grade crossing warning device”
means signs, signals, gates, or other protective devices erected or installed
at a public highway-railway crossing at common grade and activated by an
electrical circuit.
      (2)   The Department of Transportation and local authorities, with the
approval of the Department, may designate dangerous highway crossings over
railroad tracks and erect stop signs thereat.
      (3)   A.   The Department and local authorities shall erect stop signs at
a railroad highway grade crossing in either of the following circumstances:
            1.   New warning devices that are not active grade crossing warning
devices are being installed at the grade crossing, and railroad crossbucks were
the only warning devices at the grade crossing prior to the installation of the
new warning devices.
            2.   The grade crossing is constructed after July 1, 2013 and only
warning devices that are not active grade crossing warning devices are
installed at the grade crossing.
         B.   Division (b)(3)A. of this section does not apply to a railroad
highway grade crossing that the Director of Transportation has exempted from
that division because of traffic flow or other considerations or factors.
      (4)   When stop signs are erected pursuant to division (b)(2) or (b)(3)
of this section, the operator of any vehicle shall stop within 50, but not less
than 15, feet from the nearest rail of the railroad tracks and shall exercise
due care before proceeding across such grade crossing.
      (5)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (b)(4) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within
one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or
pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If,
within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of
two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (6)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(ORC 4511.61)
§ 432.35  SLOW-MOVING VEHICLES OR EQUIPMENT AT GRADE CROSSINGS.
   (a)   No person shall operate or move any crawler-type tractor, steam
shovel, derrick, roller, or any equipment or structure having a normal
operating speed of six or less miles per hour or a vertical body or load
clearance of less than nine inches above the level surface of a roadway, upon
or across any tracks at a railroad grade crossing without first complying with
divisions (a)(1) and (2) of this section.
      (1)   Before making any such crossing, the person operating or moving any
such vehicle or equipment shall first stop the same, and while stopped, the
person shall listen and look in both directions along the track for any
approaching train and for signals indicating the approach of a train, and shall
proceed only upon exercising due care.
      (2)   No such crossing shall be made when warning is given by automatic
signal, crossing gates, or a flagperson, or otherwise of the immediate approach
of a railroad train or car.
   (b)   If the normal sustained speed of the vehicle, equipment, or structure
is not more than three miles per hour, the person owning, operating, or moving
the same shall also give notice of the intended crossing to a station agent or
superintendent of the railroad, and a reasonable time shall be given to the
railroad to provide proper protection for the crossing. Where the vehicles or
equipment are being used in constructing or repairing a section of highway
lying on both sides of a railroad grade crossing, and in this construction or
repair it is necessary to repeatedly move the vehicles or equipment over the
crossing, one daily notice specifying when the work will start and stating the
hours during which it will be prosecuted is sufficient.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (d)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(ORC 4511.64)
§ 432.36  OBSTRUCTING INTERSECTIONS, CROSSWALKS OR GRADE CROSSINGS.
   (a)   No driver shall enter an intersection or marked crosswalk, or drive
onto any railroad grade crossing, unless there is sufficient space on the other
side of the intersection, crosswalk, or grade crossing to accommodate the
vehicle the driver is operating without obstructing the passage of other
vehicles, pedestrians, or railroad trains, notwithstanding any traffic-control
signal indication to proceed.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (c)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(ORC 4511.712)
§ 432.37  “PEELING;” CRACKING EXHAUST NOISES.
   No person shall operate any motor vehicle, except when necessary for safe
operation, or in compliance with law, in such a manner that the vehicle is so
rapidly accelerated or started from a stopped position, or in the shifting of
gears while in motion, that the exhaust system emits a loud, cracking or
chattering noise unusual to its normal operation, or that the rubber tires of
such vehicle squeal or leave tire marks on the roadway, commonly known as
“peeling.”
§ 432.38  SHORTCUTTING ACROSS PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   No operator of a motor vehicle shall enter upon private property for the
sole purpose of driving across such property, between abutting streets or other
public ways thereof. The failure to stop on such property in connection with or
in furtherance of the enterprise or activities being conducted on the property
shall constitute prima facie evidence of the violation.
§ 432.39  ENTERING AND EXITING CONTROLLED-ACCESS HIGHWAY.
   No person shall drive a vehicle onto or from any controlled-access highway
except at such entrances and exits as are established by public authority.
§ 432.40  WEAVING; FULL TIME AND ATTENTION.
   (a)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle or motorcycle upon any street
or highway in a weaving or zigzag course unless such irregular course is
necessary for safe operation or in compliance with law.
   (b)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle or motorcycle without giving
his or her full time and attention to the operation of such vehicle.
§ 432.41  OPERATION ON PATHS SET ASIDE FOR BICYCLES.
   (a)   (1)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle, snowmobile, or all-
purpose vehicle upon any path set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles, when
an appropriate sign giving notice of such use is posted on the path.
      (2)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to affect any rule of
the Director of Natural Resources governing the operation of motor vehicles,
snowmobiles, all-purpose vehicles, and bicycles on lands under the Director’s
jurisdiction.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (c)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(ORC 4511.713)
§ 432.42  LITTERING FROM MOTOR VEHICLES.
   (a)   No operator or occupant of a motor vehicle shall, regardless of
intent, throw, drop, discard, or deposit litter from any motor vehicle in
operation upon any street, road, or highway, except into a litter receptacle in
a manner that prevents its being carried away or deposited by the elements.
   (b)   No operator of a motor vehicle in operation upon any street, road, or
highway shall allow litter to be thrown, dropped, discarded, or deposited from
the motor vehicle, except into a litter receptacle in a manner that prevents
its being carried away or deposited by the elements.
   (c)   As used in this section, “litter” means garbage, trash, waste,
rubbish, ashes, cans, bottles, wire, paper, cartons, boxes, automobile parts,
furniture, glass, or anything else of an unsightly or unsanitary nature.
(ORC 4511.82)  (Ord. 88-O-1011, passed 1-19-1988)
   (d)   Whoever violates division (a) or (b) of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4511.82)
§ 432.43  USE OF EARPHONES WHILE DRIVING.
   (a)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle while wearing earphones over,
or earplugs in, both ears. As used in this section, “earphones” means any
headset, radio, tape player, or other similar device that provides the listener
with radio programs, music, or other recorded information through a device
attached to the head and that covers all or a portion of both ears. “Earphones”
does not include speakers or other listening devices that are built into
protective headgear.
   (b)   This section does not apply to:
      (1)   Any person wearing a hearing aid;
      (2)   Law enforcement personnel while on duty;
      (3)   Fire department personnel and emergency medical service personnel
while on duty;
      (4)   Any person operating equipment for use in the maintenance or repair
of any highway;
      (5)   Any person engaged in the operation of refuse collection equipment.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(ORC 4511.84)
§ 432.44  TRAVEL THROUGH AND AROUND PUBLIC SQUARE.
   (a)   A vehicle passing around the rotary traffic island presently located
in the public square at the intersection of Main Street and Park Avenue shall
be driven only to the right of such island.
(Ord. 1420, passed 8-17-1965)
   (b)   All vehicles where passing through or turning in the public square
shall keep to the right of the circle and no left hand turns shall be permitted
until after the vehicle has passed the circle on the right side thereof.
(Ord. 406, passed 5-29-1923)
§ 432.45  TEXTING WHILE DRIVING PROHIBITED.
   (a)   No person shall drive a motor vehicle on any street, highway, or
property open to the public for vehicular traffic while using a handheld
electronic wireless communications device to write, send, or read a text-based
communication.
   (b)   Division (a) of this section does not apply to any of the following:
      (1)   A person using a handheld electronic wireless communications device
in that manner for emergency purposes, including an emergency contact with a
law enforcement agency, hospital or health care provider, fire department, or
other similar emergency agency or entity;
      (2)   A person driving a public safety vehicle who uses a handheld
electronic wireless communications device in that manner in the course of the
person's duties;
      (3)   A person using a handheld electronic wireless communications device
in that manner whose motor vehicle is in a stationary position and who is
outside a lane of travel;
      (4)   A person reading, selecting, or entering a name or telephone number
in a handheld electronic wireless communications device for the purpose of
making or receiving a telephone call;
      (5)   A person receiving wireless messages on a device regarding the
operation or navigation of a motor vehicle; safety-related information,
including emergency, traffic, or weather alerts; or data used primarily by the
motor vehicle;
      (6)   A person receiving wireless messages via radio waves;
      (7)   A person using a device for navigation purposes;
      (8)   A person conducting wireless interpersonal communication with a
device that does not require manually entering letters, numbers, or symbols or
reading text messages, except to activate, deactivate, or initiate the device
or a feature or function of the device;
      (9)   A person operating a commercial truck while using a mobile data
terminal that transmits and receives data;
      (10)   A person using a handheld electronic wireless communications
device in conjunction with a voice-operated or hands-free device feature or
function of the vehicle.
   (c)   Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, no law
enforcement officer shall cause an operator of an automobile being operated on
any street or highway to stop the automobile for the sole purpose of
determining whether a violation of division (a) of this section has been or is
being committed or for the sole purpose of issuing a ticket, citation, or
summons for a violation of that nature or causing the arrest of or commencing a
prosecution of a person for a violation of that nature, and no law enforcement
officer shall view the interior or visually inspect any automobile being
operated on any street or highway for the sole purpose of determining whether a
violation of that nature has been or is being committed.
   (d)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
   (e)   A prosecution for a violation of this section does not preclude a
prosecution for a violation of Ohio R.C. 4511.204 based on the same conduct.
However, if an offender is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of this
section and is also convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of Ohio R.C.
4511.204 based on the same conduct, the two offenses are allied offenses of
similar import under Ohio R.C. 2941.25.
   (f)   As used in this section:
      (1)   “Electronic wireless communications device.”  Includes any of the
following:
         A.   A wireless telephone;
         B.   A text-messaging device;
         C.   A personal digital assistant;
         D.   A computer, including a laptop computer and a computer tablet;
         E.   Any other substantially similar wireless device that is designed
or used to communicate text.
      (2)   “Voice-operated or hands-free device.”  A device that allows the
user to vocally compose or send, or to listen to a text-based communication
without the use of either hand except to activate or deactivate a feature or
function.
      (3)   “Write, send, or read a text-based communication.”  To manually
write or send, or read a text-based communication using an electronic wireless
communications device, including manually writing or sending, or reading
communications referred to as text messages, instant messages, or electronic
mail.
(ORC 4511.204)
Statutory reference:
   No preemption for local regulations imposing greater penalties, see Ohio
R.C. 4511.204(E)
§ 432.46  USE OF ELECTRONIC WIRELESS COMMUNICATION DEVICES BY MINORS OR
PROBATIONARY DRIVERS WHILE DRIVING PROHIBITED.
   (a)   No holder of a temporary instruction permit who has not attained the
age of 18 years and no holder of a probationary driver's license shall drive a
motor vehicle on any street, highway, or property used by the public for
purposes of vehicular traffic or parking while using in any manner an
electronic wireless communications device.
   (b)   Division (a) of this section does not apply to either of the
following:
      (1)   A person using an electronic wireless communications device for
emergency purposes, including an emergency contact with a law enforcement
agency, hospital or health care provider, fire department, or other similar
emergency agency or entity;
      (2)   A person using an electronic wireless communications device whose
motor vehicle is in a stationary position and the motor vehicle is outside a
lane of travel;
      (3)   A person using a navigation device in a voice-operated or hands-
free manner who does not manipulate the device while driving.
   (c)   (1)   Except as provided in division (c)(2) of this section, whoever
violates division (a) of this section shall be fined one hundred fifty dollars
($150.00).  In addition, the court shall impose a class seven suspension of the
offender's driver's license or permit for a definite period of 60 days.
      (2)   If the person previously has been adjudicated a delinquent child or
a juvenile traffic offender for a violation of this section, whoever violates
this section shall be fined three hundred dollars ($300.00). In addition, the
court shall impose a class seven suspension of the person’s driver’s license or
permit for a definite period of one year.
   (d)   The filing of a sworn complaint against a person for a violation of
this section does not preclude the filing of a sworn complaint for a violation
of Ohio R.C. 4511.205 for the same conduct. However, if a person is adjudicated
a delinquent child or a juvenile traffic offender for a violation of this
section and is also adjudicated a delinquent child or a juvenile traffic
offender for a violation of Ohio R.C. 4511.205 for the same conduct, the two
offenses are allied offenses of similar import under Ohio R.C. 2941.25.
   (e)   As used in this section, “electronic wireless communications device”
includes any of the following:
      (1)   A wireless telephone;
      (2)   A personal digital assistant;
      (3)   A computer, including a laptop computer and a computer tablet;
      (4)   A text-messaging device;
      (5)   Any other substantially similar electronic wireless device that is
designed or used to communicate via voice, image, or written word.
(ORC 4511.205)
§ 432.99  PENALTY.
   (EDITOR’S NOTE:  See §§
408.01 and
408.02 for general Traffic Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.)
CHAPTER 434:  O.V.I.; RECKLESS OPERATION; SPEED
Section
434.01   Driving or physical control while under the influence.
434.011   Immobilizing or disabling device violation.
434.02   Reckless operation on streets, public or private property.
434.03   Maximum speed limits; assured clear distance ahead.
434.04   Speed limits on private roads and driveways.
434.05   Slow speed; posted minimum speeds.
434.06   Speed limitations over bridges.
434.07   Speed exceptions for emergency or safety vehicles.
434.08   Reasonable control.
434.09   Street racing prohibited.
434.10   Vehicular homicide; vehicular manslaughter; vehicular assault.
434.11   Operation restricted for mini-trucks and low-speed, under-speed, or
utility vehicles.
434.99   Penalty.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   See section histories for similar state law
   Drug of abuse defined - see Ohio R.C. 3719.011(A)
   Alcohol defined - see Ohio R.C. 4301.01(B)(1)
   Alteration of prima-facie speed limits - see Ohio R.C. 4511.21, 4511.22(B),
4511.23
   Intoxicated pedestrians - see TRAF.
416.10
   Driving upon sidewalks, tree lawns or curbs - see TRAF.
432.24
   “Peeling” - see TRAF.
432.37
   Weaving; full time and attention - see TRAF.
432.40
   D.U.I. by drivers of commercial vehicles - see TRAF.
442.05,
442.08
   Liquor consumption in motor vehicle - see GEN. OFF.
612.04
§ 434.01  DRIVING OR PHYSICAL CONTROL WHILE UNDER THE INFLUENCE.
   (a)   Driving under the influence.
      (1)   No person shall operate any vehicle within this municipality, if,
at the time of the operation, any of the following apply:
         A.   The person is under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or
a combination of them.
         B.   The person has a concentration of 0.08% or more but less than
0.17% by weight per unit volume of alcohol in the person’s whole blood.
         C.   The person has a concentration of 0.096% or more but less than
0.204% by weight per unit volume of alcohol in the person’s blood serum or
plasma.
         D.   The person has a concentration of 0.08 grams or more but less
than 0.17 grams by weight of alcohol per 210 liters of the person’s breath.
         E.   The person has a concentration of 0.11 grams or more but less
than 0.238 grams by weight of alcohol per 100 milliliters of the person’s
urine.
         F.   The person has a concentration of 0.17% or more by weight per
unit volume of alcohol in the person’s whole blood.
         G.   The person has a concentration of 0.204% or more by weight per
unit volume of alcohol in the person’s blood serum or plasma.
         H.   The person has a concentration of 0.17 grams or more by weight of
alcohol per 210 liters of the person’s breath.
         I.   The person has a concentration of 0.238 grams or more by weight
of alcohol per 100 milliliters of the person’s urine.
         J.   Except as provided in division (k) of this section, the person
has a concentration of any of the following controlled substances or
metabolites of a controlled substance in the person’s whole blood, blood serum
or plasma, or urine that equals or exceeds any of the following:
            1.   The person has a concentration of amphetamine in the person’s
urine of at least 500 nanograms of amphetamine per milliliter of the person’s
urine or has a concentration of amphetamine in the person’s whole blood or
blood serum or plasma of at least 100 nanograms of amphetamine per milliliter
of the person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma.
            2.   The person has a concentration of cocaine in the person’s
urine of at least 150 nanograms of cocaine per milliliter of the person’s urine
or has a concentration of cocaine in the person’s whole blood or blood serum or
plasma of at least 50 nanograms of cocaine per milliliter of the person’s whole
blood or blood serum or plasma.
            3.   The person has a concentration of cocaine metabolite in the
person’s urine of at least 150 nanograms of cocaine metabolite per milliliter
of the person’s urine or has a concentration of cocaine metabolite in the
person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at least 50 nanograms of
cocaine metabolite per milliliter of the person’s whole blood or blood serum or
plasma.
            4.   The person has a concentration of heroin in the person’s urine
of at least 2,000 nanograms of heroin per milliliter of the person’s urine or
has a concentration of heroin in the person’s whole blood or blood serum or
plasma of at least 50 nanograms of heroin per milliliter of the person’s whole
blood or blood serum or plasma.
            5.   The person has a concentration of heroin metabolite (6-
monoacetyl morphine) in the person’s urine of at least ten nanograms of heroin
metabolite (6-monoacetyl morphine) per milliliter of the person’s urine or has
a concentration of heroin metabolite (6-monoacetyl morphine) in the person’s
whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at least ten nanograms of heroin
metabolite (6-monoacetyl morphine) per milliliter of the person’s whole blood
or blood serum or plasma.
            6.   The person has a concentration of L.S.D. in the person’s urine
of at least 25 nanograms of L.S.D. per milliliter of the person’s urine or a
concentration of L.S.D. in the person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma of
at least ten nanograms of L.S.D. per milliliter of the person’s whole blood or
blood serum or plasma.
            7.   The person has a concentration of marihuana in the person’s
urine of at least ten nanograms of marihuana per milliliter of the person’s
urine or has a concentration of marihuana in the person’s whole blood or blood
serum or plasma of at least two nanograms of marihuana per milliliter of the
person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma.
            8.   Either of the following applies:
               a.   The person is under the influence of alcohol, a drug of
abuse, or a combination of them, and, as measured by gas chromatography mass
spectrometry, the person has a concentration of marihuana metabolite in the
person’s urine of at least 15 nanograms of marihuana metabolite per milliliter
of the person’s urine or has a concentration of marihuana metabolite in the
person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at least five nanograms of
marihuana metabolite per milliliter of the person’s whole blood or blood serum
or plasma.
               b.   As measured by gas chromatography mass spectrometry, the
person has a concentration of marihuana metabolite in the person’s urine of at
least 35 nanograms of marihuana metabolite per milliliter of the person’s urine
or has a concentration of marihuana metabolite in the person’s whole blood or
blood serum or plasma of at least 50 nanograms of marihuana metabolite per
milliliter of the person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma.
            9.   The person has a concentration of methamphetamine in the
person’s urine of at least 500 nanograms of methamphetamine per milliliter of
the person’s urine or has a concentration of methamphetamine in the person’s
whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at least 100 nanograms of
methamphetamine per milliliter of the person’s whole blood or blood serum or
plasma.
            10.   The person has a concentration of phencyclidine in the
person’s urine of at least 25 nanograms of phencyclidine per milliliter of the
person’s urine or has a concentration of phencyclidine in the person’s whole
blood or blood serum or plasma of at least 10 nanograms of phencyclidine per
milliliter of the person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma.
            11.   The State Board of Pharmacy has adopted a rule pursuant to
Ohio R.C. 4729.041 that specifies the amount of salvia divinorum and the amount
of salvinorin A that constitute concentrations of salvia divinorum and
salvinorin A in a person’s urine, in a person’s whole blood, or in a person’s
blood serum or plasma at or above which the person is impaired for purposes of
operating any vehicle within this state, the rule is in effect, and the person
has a concentration of salvia divinorum or salvinorin A of at least that amount
so specified by rule in the person’s urine, in the person’s whole blood, or in
the person’s blood serum or plasma.
      (2)   No person who, within 20 years of the conduct described in division
(a)(2)A. of this section, previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to
a violation of this division or a substantially equivalent state law or
municipal ordinance, division (a)(1) or (b) of this section or a substantially
equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, or any other equivalent offense
shall do both of the following:
         A.   Operate any vehicle within this municipality while under the
influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a combination of them;
         B.   Subsequent to being arrested for operating the vehicle as
described in division (a)(2)A. of this section, being asked by a law
enforcement officer to submit to a chemical test or tests under Ohio R.C.
4511.191 or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, and being advised
by the officer in accordance with Ohio R.C. 4511.192 or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance of the consequences of the person’s refusal or
submission to the test or tests, refuse to submit to the test or tests.
   (b)   Underage alcohol consumption.  No person under 21 years of age shall
operate any vehicle within this municipality if, at the time of the operation,
any of the following apply:
      (1)   The person has a concentration of at least 0.02% but less than
0.08% by weight per unit volume of alcohol in the person’s whole blood;
      (2)   The person has a concentration of at least 0.03% but less than
0.096% by weight per unit volume of alcohol in the person’s blood serum or
plasma;
      (3)   The person has a concentration of at least 0.02 grams but less than
0.08 grams by weight of alcohol per 210 liters of the person’s breath;
      (4)   The person has a concentration of at least 0.028 grams but less
than 0.11 grams by weight of alcohol per 100 milliliters of the person’s urine.
   (c)   Prosecution; limitation on convictions.  In any proceeding arising out
of one incident, a person may be charged with a violation of division (a)(1)A.
or (a)(2) and a violation of division (b)(1), (2), or (3) of this section, but
the person may not be convicted of more than one violation of these divisions.
   (d)   Evidence; tests.
      (1)   A.   In any criminal prosecution or juvenile court proceeding for a
violation of division (a)(1)A. of this section or for an equivalent offense,
the result of any test of any blood or urine withdrawn and analyzed at any
health care provider, as defined in Ohio R.C. 2317.02, may be admitted with
expert testimony to be considered with any other relevant and competent
evidence in determining the guilt or innocence of the defendant.
         B.   In any criminal prosecution for a violation of division (a) or
(b) of this section or for an equivalent offense that is vehicle-related, the
court may admit evidence on the concentration of alcohol, drugs of abuse,
controlled substances, metabolites of a controlled substance, or a combination
of them in the defendant’s whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, urine,
or other bodily substance at the time of the alleged violation as shown by
chemical analysis of the substance withdrawn within three hours of the time of
the alleged violation. The three-hour time limit specified in this division
regarding the admission of evidence does not extend or affect the two-hour time
limit specified in Ohio R.C. 4511.192(A) as the maximum period of time during
which a person may consent to a chemical test or tests as described in that
section. The court may admit evidence on the concentration of alcohol, drugs of
abuse, or a combination of them as described in this division when a person
submits to a blood test at the request of a law enforcement officer under Ohio
R.C. 4511.191 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, or a blood or
urine sample is obtained pursuant to a search warrant. Only a physician, a
registered nurse, an emergency medical technician-intermediate, an emergency
medical technician-paramedic, or a qualified technician, chemist, or
phlebotomist shall withdraw a blood sample for the purpose of determining the
alcohol, drug, controlled substance, metabolite of a controlled substance, or
combination content of the whole blood, blood serum, or blood plasma. This
limitation does not apply to the taking of breath or urine specimens. A person
authorized to withdraw blood under this division may refuse to withdraw blood
under this division, if in that person’s opinion, the physical welfare of the
person would be endangered by the withdrawing of blood. The bodily substance
withdrawn under this division (d)(1)B. shall be analyzed in accordance with
methods approved by the Director of Health by an individual possessing a valid
permit issued by the Director pursuant to Ohio R.C. 3701.143.
      C.   As used in division (d)(1)B. of this section, “Emergency medical
technician-intermediate” and “Emergency medical technician-paramedic” have the
same meanings as in Ohio R.C.4765.01.
      (2)   In a criminal prosecution for a violation of division (a) of this
section or for an equivalent offense that is vehicle-related, if there was at
the time the bodily substance was withdrawn a concentration of less than the
applicable concentration of alcohol specified in divisions (a)(1)B., (a)(1)C.,
(a)(1)D. and (a)(1)E. of this section or less than the applicable concentration
of a listed controlled substance or a listed metabolite of a controlled
substance specified for a violation of division (a)(1)J. of this section, that
fact may be considered with other competent evidence in determining the guilt
or innocence of the defendant. This division does not limit or affect a
criminal prosecution for a violation of division (b) of this section.
      (3)   Upon the request of the person who was tested, the results of the
chemical test shall be made available to the person or the person’s attorney,
immediately upon the completion of the chemical test analysis. If the chemical
test was obtained pursuant to division (d)(1)B. of this section, the person
tested may have a physician, a registered nurse, or a qualified technician,
chemist, or phlebotomist of the person’s own choosing administer a chemical
test or tests, at the person’s expense, in addition to any administered at the
request of a law enforcement officer.  If the person was under arrest as
described in Ohio R.C. 4511.191(A)(5), the arresting officer shall advise the
person at the time of the arrest that the person may have an independent
chemical test taken at the person’s own expense. If the person was under arrest
other than described in Ohio R.C. 4511.191(A)(5), the form to be read to the
person to be tested, as required under division (g) of this section, shall
state that the person may have an independent test performed at the person’s
expense. The failure or inability to obtain an additional chemical test by a
person shall not preclude the admission of evidence relating to the chemical
test or tests taken at the request of a law enforcement officer.
      (4)   A.   As used in division (d)(4)B. and C. of this section, “National
Highway Traffic Safety Administration” means the National Highway Traffic
Safety Administration established as an administration of the United States
Department of Transportation under 96 Stat. 2415 (1983), 49 U.S.C. 105.
         B.   In any criminal prosecution or juvenile court proceeding for a
violation of division (a) or (b) of this section, of a municipal ordinance
relating to operating a vehicle while under the influence of alcohol, a drug of
abuse, or alcohol and a drug of abuse, or of a municipal ordinance relating to
operating a vehicle with a prohibited concentration of alcohol, a controlled
substance, or a metabolite of a controlled substance in the whole blood, blood
serum or plasma, breath, or urine, if a law enforcement officer has
administered a field sobriety test to the operator of the vehicle involved in
the violation and if it is shown by clear and convincing evidence that the
officer administered the test in substantial compliance with the testing
standards for any reliable, credible, and generally accepted field sobriety
tests that were in effect at the time the tests were administered, including,
but not limited to, any testing standards then in effect that were set by the
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, all of the following apply:
            1.   The officer may testify concerning the results of the field
sobriety test so administered.
            2.   The prosecution may introduce the results of the field
sobriety test so administered as evidence in any proceedings in the criminal
prosecution or juvenile court proceeding.
            3.   If testimony is presented or evidence is introduced under
division (d)(4)B.1. or 2. of this section and if the testimony or evidence is
admissible under the Rules of Evidence, the court shall admit the testimony or
evidence and the trier of fact shall give it whatever weight the trier of fact
considers to be appropriate.
         C.   Division (d)(4)B. of this section does not limit or preclude a
court, in its determination of whether the arrest of a person was supported by
probable cause or its determination of any other matter in a criminal
prosecution or juvenile court proceeding of a type described in that division,
from considering evidence or testimony that is not otherwise disallowed by
division (d)(4)B. of this section.
   (e)   (1)   Subject to division (e)(3) of this section, in any criminal
prosecution or juvenile court proceeding for a violation of division (a)(1)B.,
(a)(1)C., (a)(1)D., (a)(1)E., (a)(1)F., (a)(1)G., (a)(1)H., (a)(1)I. or (a)
(1)J. or (b)(1), (b)(2), (b)(3), or (b)(4) of this section or for an equivalent
offense that is substantially equivalent to any of those divisions, a
laboratory report from any laboratory personnel issued a permit by the
Department of Health authorizing an analysis as described in this division that
contains an analysis of the whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, urine,
or other bodily substance tested and that contains all of the information
specified in this division shall be admitted as prima facie evidence of the
information and statements that the report contains. The laboratory report
shall contain all of the following:
         A.   The signature, under oath, of any person who performed the
analysis;
         B.   Any findings as to the identity and quantity of alcohol, a drug
of abuse, a controlled substance, a metabolite of a controlled substance, or a
combination of them that was found;
         C.   A copy of a notarized statement by the laboratory director of a
designee of the director that contains the name of each certified analyst or
test performer involved with the report, the analyst’s or test performer’s
employment relationship with the laboratory that issued the report, and a
notation that performing an analysis of the type involved is part of the
analyst’s or test performer’s regular duties;
         D.   An outline of the analyst’s or test performer’s education,
training, and experience in performing the type of analysis involved and a
certification that the laboratory satisfies appropriate quality control
standards in general and, in this particular analysis, under rules of the
Department of Health.
      (2)   Notwithstanding any other provision of law regarding the admission
of evidence, a report of the type described in division (e)(1) of this section
is not admissible against the defendant to whom it pertains in any proceeding,
other than a preliminary hearing or a grand jury proceeding, unless the
prosecutor has served a copy of the report on the defendant’s attorney or, if
the defendant has no attorney, on the defendant.
      (3)   A report of the type described in division (e)(1) of this section
shall not be prima facie evidence of the contents, identity, or amount of any
substance if, within seven days after the defendant to whom the report pertains
or the defendant’s attorney receives a copy of the report, the defendant or the
defendant’s attorney demands the testimony of the person who signed the report.
The judge in the case may extend the seven-day time limit in the interest of
justice.
   (f)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, any physician,
registered nurse, emergency medical technician-intermediate, emergency medical
technician-paramedic, or qualified technician, chemist, or phlebotomist who
withdraws blood from a person pursuant to this section or Ohio R.C. 4511.19,
4511.191 or 4511.192, and any hospital, first-aid station, or clinic at which
blood is withdrawn from a person pursuant to this section or Ohio R.C. 4511.19,
4511.191 or 4511.192, is immune from criminal liability and civil liability
based upon a claim of assault and battery or any other claim that is not a
claim of malpractice, for any act performed in withdrawing blood from the
person. The immunity provided in this division also extends to an emergency
medical service organization that employs an emergency medical technician-
intermediate or emergency medical technician-paramedic who withdraws blood
under this section. The immunity provided in this division is not available to
a person who withdraws blood if the person engages in willful or wanton
misconduct.
      (2)   As used in division (f)(1), “Emergency medical technician-
intermediate” and “Emergency medical technician-paramedic” have the same
meanings as in Ohio R.C.4765.01.
(ORC 4511.19(A) - (F))
   (g)   Implied consent.
      (1)   Definitions.
         A.   “Alcohol monitoring device” means any device that provides for
continuous alcohol monitoring, any ignition interlock device, any immobilizing
or disabling device other than an ignition interlock device that is constantly
available to monitor the concentration of alcohol in a person’s system, or any
other device that provides for the automatic testing and periodic reporting of
alcohol consumption by a person and that the court orders a person to use as a
sanction imposed as a result of the person’s conviction of or plea of guilty to
an offense.
         B.   “Community addiction services provider” has the same meaning as
in Ohio R.C. 5119.01.
         C.   “Physical control” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 4511.194.
      (2)   Implied consent to chemical tests.  Any person who operates a
vehicle upon a highway or any public or private property used by the public for
vehicular travel or parking within this municipality or who is in physical
control of a vehicle shall be deemed to have given consent to a chemical test
or tests of the person’s whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine
to determine the alcohol, drug of abuse, controlled substance, metabolite of a
controlled substance, or combination content of the person’s whole blood, blood
serum or plasma, breath, or urine if arrested for a violation of division (a),
(b) or (o) of this section, Ohio R.C. 4511.19(A) or (B), Ohio R.C. 4511.194 or
a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, or any other municipal O.V.I.
ordinance.
      (3)   The chemical test or tests under division (g)(2) of this section
shall be administered at the request of a law enforcement officer having
reasonable grounds to believe the person was operating or in physical control
of a vehicle in violation of a division, section, or ordinance identified in
division (g)(2) of this section. The law enforcement agency by which the
officer is employed shall designate which of the tests shall be administered.
      (4)   Effect of death or unconsciousness.  Any person who is dead or
unconscious, or who otherwise is in a condition rendering the person incapable
of refusal, shall be deemed to have consented as provided in division (g)(2) of
this section and the test or tests may be administered, subject to Ohio R.C.
313.12 to 313.16.
      (5)   A.   If a law enforcement officer arrests a person for a violation
of Ohio R.C. § 4511.19(A) or (B), Ohio R.C. § 4511.194 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, or a municipal OVI ordinance and if the person
if convicted would be required to be sentenced under Ohio R.C. § 4511.19(G)(1)
(c), (d), or (e), the law enforcement officer shall request the person to
submit, and the person shall submit, to a chemical test or tests of the
person's whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine for the purpose
of determining the alcohol, drug of abuse, controlled substance, metabolite of
a controlled substance, or combination content of the person's whole blood,
blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine. A law enforcement officer who makes a
request pursuant to this division that a person submit to a chemical test or
tests is not required to advise the person of the consequences of submitting
to, or refusing to submit to, the test or tests and is not required to give the
person the form described in division (g)(7) of this section, but the officer
shall advise the person at the time of the arrest that if the person refuses to
take a chemical test the officer may employ whatever reasonable means are
necessary to ensure that the person submits to a chemical test of the person's
whole blood or blood serum or plasma. The officer shall also advise the person
at the time of the arrest that the person may have an independent chemical test
taken at the person's own expense. Divisions (A)(3) and (A)(4) of this section
apply to the administration of a chemical test or tests pursuant to this
division.
         B.   If a person refuses to submit to a chemical test upon a request
made pursuant to division (a)(5)A. of this section, the law enforcement officer
who made the request may employ whatever reasonable means are necessary to
ensure that the person submits to a chemical test of the person's whole blood
or blood serum or plasma. A law enforcement officer who acts pursuant to this
division to ensure that a person submits to a chemical test of the person's
whole blood or blood serum or plasma is immune from criminal and civil
liability based upon a claim for assault and battery or any other claim for the
acts, unless the officer so acted with malicious purpose, in bad faith, or in a
wanton or reckless manner.
(ORC 4511.191(A))
      (6)   Advice required.  Except as provided in division (g)(5) of this
section, the arresting law enforcement officer shall give advice in accordance
with this division to any person under arrest for a violation of division (a),
(b) or (o) of this section, Ohio R.C. 4511.19(A) or (B), Ohio R.C.  4511.194 or
a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, or any other municipal O.V.I.
ordinance. The officer shall give that advice in a written form that contains
the information described in division (g)(6) of this section and shall read the
advice to the person. The form shall contain a statement that the form was
shown to the person under arrest and read to the person by the arresting
officer. One or more persons shall witness the arresting officer’s reading of
the form, and the witnesses shall certify to this fact by signing the form. The
person must submit to the chemical test or tests, subsequent to the request of
the arresting officer, within two hours of the time of the alleged violation
and, if the person does not submit to the test or tests within that two-hour
time limit, the failure to submit automatically constitutes a refusal to submit
to the test or tests.
      (7)   Certification of arrest.  Except as provided in division (g)(5) of
this section, if a person is under arrest as described in division (g)(5) of
this section, before the person may be requested to submit to a chemical test
or tests to determine the alcohol, drug of abuse, controlled substance,
metabolite of a controlled substance, or combination content of the person’s
whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine, the arresting officer
shall read the following form to the person:
      “You now are under arrest for (specifically state the offense under state
law or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance for which the person was
arrested – operating a vehicle under the influence of alcohol, a drug, or a
combination of them; operating a vehicle while under the influence of a listed
controlled substance or a listed metabolite of a controlled substance;
operating a vehicle after underage alcohol consumption; or having physical
control of a vehicle while under the influence).
      “If you refuse to take any chemical test required by law, your Ohio
driving privileges will be suspended immediately, and you will have to pay a
fee to have the privileges reinstated. If you have a prior conviction of
O.V.I., O.V.U.A.C., or operating a vehicle while under the influence of a
listed controlled substance or a listed metabolite of a controlled substance
under state or municipal law within the preceding 20 years, you are now under
arrest for state O.V.I., and, if you refuse to take a chemical test, you will
face increased penalties if you subsequently are convicted of the state O.V.I.
      (Read this part unless the person is under arrest for solely having
physical control of a vehicle while under the influence.) If you take any
chemical test required by law and are found to be at or over the prohibited
amount of alcohol, a controlled substance, or a metabolite of a controlled
substance in your whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine as set
by law, your Ohio driving privileges will be suspended immediately, and you
will have to pay a fee to have the privileges reinstated.
      If you take a chemical test, you may have an independent chemical test
taken at your own expense.”
      (8)   Actions required by arresting officer.  If the arresting law
enforcement officer does not ask a person under arrest as described in division
(g)(5) or (g)(6) of this section to submit to a chemical test or tests under
Ohio R.C. 4511.191 or this section, the arresting officer shall seize the Ohio
or out-of-state driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit of the person
and immediately forward it to the court in which the arrested person is to
appear on the charge. If the arrested person is not in possession of the
person’s license or permit or it is not in the person’s vehicle, the officer
shall order the person to surrender it to the law enforcement agency that
employs the officer within 24 hours after the arrest, and, upon the surrender,
the agency immediately shall forward the license or permit to the court in
which the person is to appear on the charge. Upon receipt of the license or
permit, the court shall retain it pending the arrested person’s initial
appearance and any action taken under Ohio R.C. 4511.196.
      (9)   A.   If a law enforcement officer asks a person under arrest as
described in division (g)(5) of this section to submit to a chemical test or
tests under that division and the test results indicate a prohibited
concentration of alcohol, a controlled substance, or a metabolite of a
controlled substance in the person's whole blood, blood serum or plasma,
breath, or urine at the time of the alleged offense, or if a law enforcement
officer asks a person under arrest as described in division (g)(5) of this
section to submit to a chemical test or tests under Ohio R.C. 4511.191 or this
section, if the officer advises the person in accordance with this section of
the consequences of the person’s refusal or submission, and if either the
person refuses to submit to the test or tests or, unless the arrest was for a
violation of division (o) of this section, Ohio R.C. 4511.194 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the person submits to the test or
tests and the test results indicate a prohibited concentration of alcohol, a
controlled substance, or a metabolite of a controlled substance in the person’s
whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine at the time of the alleged
offense, the arresting officer shall do all of the following:
            1.   On behalf of the Registrar of Motor Vehicles, notify the
person that, independent of any penalties or sanctions imposed upon the person,
the person’s Ohio driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit or
nonresident operating privilege is suspended immediately, that the suspension
will last at least until the person’s initial appearance on the charge, which
will be held within five days after the date of the person’s arrest or the
issuance of a citation to the person, and that the person may appeal the
suspension at the initial appearance or during the period of time ending 30
days after that initial appearance;
            2.   Seize the driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit of
the person and immediately forward it to the Registrar. If the arrested person
is not in possession of the person’s license or permit or it is not in the
person’s vehicle, the officer shall order the person to surrender it to the law
enforcement agency that employs the officer within 24 hours after the person is
given notice of the suspension, and, upon the surrender, the officer’s
employing agency immediately shall forward the license or permit to the
Registrar;
            3.   Verify the person’s current residence and, if it differs from
that on the person’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit, notify
the Registrar of the change;
            4.   Send to the Registrar, within 48 hours after the arrest of the
person, a sworn report that includes all of the following statements:
               a.   That the officer had reasonable grounds to believe that, at
the time of the arrest, the arrested person was operating a vehicle in
violation of Ohio R.C. 4511.19(A) or (B) or a municipal O.V.I. ordinance or for
being in physical control of a stationary vehicle in violation of Ohio R.C.
4511.194 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance;
               b.   That the person was arrested and charged with a violation
of Ohio R.C. 4511.19(A) or (B), Ohio R.C. 4511.194 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, or a municipal O.V.I. ordinance;
               c.   Unless division (E)(1)(d)5. of this section applies, that
the officer asked the person to take the designated chemical test or tests,
advised the person in accordance with this section of the consequences of
submitting to, or refusing to take, the test or tests, and gave the person the
form described in division (g)(7) of this section;
               d.   Unless division (E)(1)(d)5. of this section applies, that
either the person refused to submit to the chemical test or tests or, unless
the arrest was for a violation of Ohio R.C. 4511.194 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, the person submitted to the chemical test or
tests and the test results indicate a prohibited concentration of alcohol, a
controlled substance, or a metabolite of a controlled substance in the person’s
whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine at the time of the alleged
offense.
               e.   If the person was under arrest as described in division (g)
(5) of this section and the chemical test or tests were performed in accordance
with that division, that the person was under arrest as described in that
division, that the chemical test or tests were performed in accordance with
that division, and that test results indicated a prohibited concentration of
alcohol, a controlled substance, or a metabolite of a controlled substance in
the person's whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine at the time
of the alleged offense.
         B.   Division (g)(8)A. of this section does not apply to a person who
is arrested for a violation of division (o) of this section, Ohio R.C. 4511.194
or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, or any other substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, who is asked by a law enforcement officer to
submit to a chemical test or tests under this section, and who submits to the
test or tests, regardless of the amount of alcohol, a controlled substance, or
a metabolite of a controlled substance that the test results indicate is
present in the person’s whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine.
      (10)   Sworn report of arresting officer.
         A.   The arresting officer shall give the officer’s sworn report that
is completed under this section to the arrested person at the time of the
arrest, or the Registrar of Motor Vehicles shall send the report to the person
by regular first class mail as soon as possible after receipt of the report,
but not later than 14 days after receipt of it. An arresting officer may give
an unsworn report to the arrested person at the time of the arrest provided the
report is complete when given to the arrested person and subsequently is sworn
to by the arresting officer. As soon as possible, but not later than 48 hours
after the arrest of the person, the arresting officer shall send a copy of the
sworn report to the court in which the arrested person is to appear on the
charge for which the person was arrested.
         B.   The sworn report of an arresting officer completed under this
section is prima facie proof of the information and statements that it
contains. It shall be admitted and considered as prima facie proof of the
information and statements that it contains in any appeal under Ohio R.C.
4511.197 relative to any suspension of a person’s driver’s or commercial
driver’s license or permit or nonresident operating privilege that results from
the arrest covered by the report.
(ORC 4511.192)
      (11)   Suspension effective immediately.  A suspension of a person’s
driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit or nonresident operating
privilege under this section for the time described in Ohio R.C. 4511.191(B) or
(C) is effective immediately from the time at which the arresting officer
serves the notice of suspension upon the arrested person. Any subsequent
finding that the person is not guilty of the charge that resulted in the
person’s being requested to take the chemical test or tests under division (g)
of this section does not affect the suspension.
      (12)   Initial appearance.  If a person arrested for operating a vehicle
in violation of division (a) or (b) of this section, Ohio R.C. 4511.19(A) or
(B), or any other municipal O.V.I. ordinance, or for being in physical control
of a vehicle in violation of division (o) of this section or Ohio R.C. 4511.194
or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, regardless of whether the
person’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit or nonresident
operating privilege is or is not suspended under Ohio R.C. 4511.191(B) or (C)
or Ohio R.C. Chapter 4510, the person’s initial appearance on the charge
resulting from the arrest shall be held within five days of the persons’ arrest
or the issuance of the citation to him or her, subject to any continuance
granted by the court pursuant to Ohio R.C. 4511.197 regarding the issues
specified in that section.
(ORC 4511.191(D))
   (h)   Penalty for driving under the influence.
      (1)   Whoever violates any provisions of divisions (a)(1)A. through (a)
(1)I. or (a)(2) of this section is guilty of operating a vehicle under the
influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a combination of them. Whoever
violates division (a)(1)J. of this section is guilty of operating a vehicle
while under the influence of a listed controlled substance or a listed
metabolite of a controlled substance. The court shall sentence the offender for
either offense under Ohio R.C. Chapter 2929, except as otherwise authorized or
required by divisions (h)(1)A. through (h)(1)E. of this section:
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in division (h)(1)B., C., D., or E.
of this section, the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree
and the court shall sentence the offender to all of the penalties and sanctions
provided in Ohio R.C. 4511.19(G)(1)(a)(i) to (iv).
         B.   Except as otherwise provided in division (h)(1)E. of this
section, an offender who, within ten years of the offense previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to one violation of division (a) or (b) of this
section, or one other equivalent offense is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
first degree. The court shall sentence the offender to all of the penalties and
sanctions provided in Ohio R.C. 4511.19(G)(1)(b)(i) to (v).
         C.   Except as otherwise provided in division (h)(1)E. of this
section, an offender who, within ten years of the offense, previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to two violations of division (a) or (b) of this
section or other equivalent offenses is guilty of a misdemeanor. The court
shall sentence the offender to all of the penalties and sanctions provided in
Ohio R.C. 4511.19(G)(1)(c)(i) to (vi).
         D.   Except as otherwise provided in division (h)(1)E. of this
section, an offender who, within ten years of the offense, previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to three or more violations of division (a) or
(b) of this section or other equivalent offenses or an offender who, within 20
years of the offense, previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to
five or more violations of that nature is guilty of a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.
         E.   An offender who previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of Ohio R.C. 4511.19(A) that was a felony, regardless of
when the violation and the conviction or guilty plea occurred, is guilty of a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   An offender who is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of
division (a) of this section and who subsequently seeks reinstatement of the
driver’s or occupational driver’s license or permit or nonresident operating
privilege suspended under this section or Ohio R.C. 4511.19 as a result of the
conviction or guilty plea shall pay a reinstatement fee as provided in Ohio
R.C. 4511.191(F)(2).
      (3)   A.   If an offender is sentenced to a jail term under Ohio R.C.
4511.19(G)(1)(b)(i) or (ii) or (G)(1)(c)(i) or (ii) and if, within 60 days of
sentencing of the offender, the court issues a written finding on the record
that, due to the unavailability of space at the jail where the offender is
required to serve the term, the offender will not be able to begin serving that
term within the 60-day period following the date of sentencing, the court may
impose an alternative sentence as specified in Ohio R.C. 4511.19(G)(3) that
includes a term of house arrest with electronic monitoring, with continuous
alcohol monitoring, or with both electronic monitoring and continuous alcohol
monitoring.
         B.   As an alternative to the mandatory jail terms as required by Ohio
R.C. 4511.19(G)(1), the court may sentence the offender as provided in Ohio
R.C. 4511.19(G)(3).
      (4)   If an offender’s driver’s or occupational driver’s license or
permit or nonresident operating privilege is suspended under division (h) of
this section or Ohio R.C. 4511.19(G) and if Ohio R.C. 4510.13 permits the court
to grant limited driving privileges, the court may grant the limited driving
privileges in accordance with that section. If division (A)(7) of that section
requires the court impose as a condition of the privileges that the offender
must display on the vehicle that is driven subject to the privileges restricted
license plates that are issued under Ohio R.C. 4503.231, except as provided in
division (B) of that section, the court shall impose that condition as one of
the conditions of the limited driving privileges granted to the offender,
except as provided in Ohio R.C. 4503.231(B).
      (5)   Fines imposed under this section for a violation of division (a) of
this section shall be distributed as provided in Ohio R.C. 4511.19(G)(5).
      (6)   If title to a motor vehicle that is subject to an order of criminal
forfeiture under division (h)(1)C., D., or E. of this section is assigned or
transferred and Ohio R.C. 4503.234(B)(2) or (3) applies, in addition to or
independent of any other penalty established by law, the court may fine the
offender the value of the vehicle as determined by publications of the National
Automobile Dealers Association. The proceeds of any fine so imposed shall be
distributed in accordance with division (C)(2) of that section.
      (7)   In all cases in which an offender is sentenced under division (h)
of this section, the offender shall provide the court with proof of financial
responsibility as defined in Ohio R.C. 4509.01. If the offender fails to
provide that proof of financial responsibility, the court, in addition to any
other penalties provided by law, may order restitution pursuant to §
698.02(f) or Ohio R.C. 2929.18 or 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding five
thousand dollars ($5,000) for any economic loss arising from an accident or
collision that was the direct and proximate result of the offender’s operation
of the vehicle before, during, or after committing the offense for which the
offender is sentenced under division (h) of this section.
      (8)   As used in division (g) of this section, “electronic monitoring”
has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2929.01.
   (i)   Penalty for operating a vehicle after underage alcohol consumption. 
Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of operating a motor
vehicle after underage alcohol consumption and shall be punished as follows:
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (i)(2) of this section,
the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. In addition to
any other sanction imposed for the offense, the court shall impose a class six
suspension of the offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s license,
temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating
privilege from the range specified in Ohio R.C. 4510.02(A)(6). The court may
grant limited driving privileges relative to the suspension under R.C. §§
4510.021 and 4510.13. The court may grant unlimited driving privileges with an
ignition interlock device relative to the suspension and may reduce the period
of suspension as authorized under R.C. § 4510.022. If the court grants
unlimited driving privileges under R.C. § 4510.022, the court shall suspend any
jail term imposed under division (i)(1) of this section as required under that
section.
      (2)   If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one or more violations of division (a)
or (b) of this section or other equivalent offense or offenses, the offender is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. In addition to any other sanction
imposed for the offense, the court shall impose a class four suspension of the
offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction
permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege from the range
specified in Ohio R.C. 4510.02(A)(4).  The court may grant limited driving
privileges relative to the suspension under R.C. §§ 4510.021 and 4510.13.
      (3)   If the offender also is convicted of or also pleads guilty to a
specification of the type described in Ohio R.C. 2941.1414 and if the court
imposes a jail term for the violation of division (b) of this section, the
court shall impose upon the offender an additional definite jail term pursuant
to Ohio R.C. 2929.24(E).
      (4)   The offender shall provide the court with proof of financial
responsibility as defined in Ohio R.C. 4509.01. If the offender fails to
provide that proof of financial responsibility, then, in addition to any other
penalties provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to §
698.02(f) or Ohio R.C. 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding five thousand dollars
($5,000) for any economic loss arising from an accident or collision that was
the direct and proximate result of the offender’s operation of the vehicle
before, during, or after committing the violation of division (b) of this
section.
   (j)   (1)   No court shall sentence an offender to an alcohol treatment
program under this section unless the treatment program complies with the
minimum standards for alcohol treatment programs adopted under Ohio R.C.
Chapter 5119 by the Director of Mental Health and Addiction Services.
      (2)   An offender who stays in a drivers’ intervention program or in an
alcohol treatment program under an order issued under this section shall pay
the cost of the stay in the program. However, if the court determines that an
offender who stays in an alcohol treatment program under an order issued under
this section is unable to pay the cost of the stay in the program, the court
may order that the cost be paid from the court’s indigent drivers’ alcohol
treatment fund.
   (k)   If a person whose driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit or
nonresident operating privilege is suspended under this section or Ohio R.C.
4511.19 files an appeal regarding any aspect of the person’s trial or sentence,
the appeal itself does not stay the operation of the suspension.
   (l)   Division (a)(1)J. of this section does not apply to a person who
operates a vehicle while the person has a concentration of a listed controlled
substance or a listed metabolite of a controlled substance in the person’s
whole blood, blood serum or plasma, or urine that equals or exceeds the amount
specified in that division, if both of the following apply:
      (1)   The person obtained the controlled substance pursuant to a
prescription issued by a licensed health professional authorized to prescribe
drugs.
      (2)   The person injected, ingested, or inhaled the controlled substance
in accordance with the health professional’s directions.
   (m)   The prohibited concentrations of a controlled substance or a
metabolite of a controlled substance listed in division (a)(1)J. of this
section also apply in a prosecution of a violation of Ohio R.C. 2923.16(D) in
the same manner as if the offender is being prosecuted for a prohibited
concentration of alcohol.
   (n)   All terms defined in Ohio R.C. 4510.01 apply to this section. If the
meaning of a term defined in Ohio R.C. 4510.01 conflicts with the meaning of
the same term as defined in Ohio R.C. 4501.01 or 4511.01, the term as defined
in Ohio R.C. 4510.01 applies to this section.
(ORC 4511.19(G) - (M))
   (o)   Physical control of vehicle while under the influence.
      (1)   Definition.  As used in this division, “physical control” means
being in the driver’s position of the front seat of a vehicle and having
possession of the vehicle’s ignition key or other ignition device.
      (2)   Generally.  No person shall be in physical control of a vehicle if,
at the time of the physical control, any of the following apply:
         A.   The person is under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or
a combination of them.
         B.   The person’s whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine
contains at least the concentration of alcohol specified in divisions (a)(1)B.,
(a)(1)C., (a)(1)D., or (a)(1)E. of this section.
         C.   Except as provided in division (o)(5) of this section, the person
has a concentration of a listed controlled substance or a listed metabolite of
a controlled substance in the person’s whole blood, blood serum or plasma, or
urine that equals or exceeds the concentration specified in division (a)(1)J.
of this section.
      (3)   A.   In any criminal prosecution or juvenile court proceeding for a
violation of this section, if a law enforcement officer has administered a
field sobriety test to the person in physical control of the vehicle involved
in the violation and if it is shown by clear and convincing evidence that the
officer administered the test in substantial compliance with the testing
standards for any reliable, credible, and generally acceptable field sobriety
tests that were in effect at the time the tests were administered, including
but not limited to any testing standards then in effect what were set by the
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, all of the following apply:
            1.   The officer may testify concerning the results of the field
sobriety test so administered.
            2.   The prosecution may introduce the results of the field
sobriety test so administered as evidence in any proceedings in the criminal
prosecution or juvenile court proceeding.
            3.   If testimony is presented or evidence is introduced under
division (o)(3)A.1. or 2. of this section and if the testimony or evidence is
admissible under the Rules of Evidence, the court shall admit the testimony or
evidence, and the trier of fact shall give it whatever weight the trier of fact
considers to be appropriate.
         B.   Division (o)(3)A. of this section does not limit or preclude a
court, in its determination of whether the arrest of a person was supported by
probable cause or its determination of any other matter in a criminal
prosecution or juvenile court proceeding of a type described in that division,
from considering evidence or testimony that is not otherwise disallowed by
division (o)(3)A. of this section.
      (4)   Penalty.  Whoever violates this division (o) is guilty of having
physical control of a vehicle while under the influence, a misdemeanor of the
first degree. In addition to other sanctions imposed, the court may impose on
the offender a class seven suspension of the offender’s driver’s license,
commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction permit, probationary
license, or nonresident operating privilege from the range specified in Ohio
R.C. 4510.02(A)(7).
      (5)   Exception.  Division (o)(2)C. of this section does not apply to a
person who is in physical control of a vehicle while the person has a
concentration of a listed controlled substance or a listed metabolite of a
controlled substance in the person’s whole blood, blood serum or plasma, or
urine that equals or exceeds the amount specified in division (a)(1)J. of this
section if both of the following apply:
         A.   The person obtained the controlled substance pursuant to a
prescription issued by a licensed health professional authorized to prescribe
drugs.
         B.   The person injected, ingested, or inhaled the controlled
substance in accordance with the health professional’s directions.
(ORC  4511.194)
   (p)   As used in this section:
      (1)   “Community residential sanction,” “continuous alcohol monitoring,”
“jail,” “mandatory prison term,” “mandatory term of local incarceration,”
“prison term,” and “sanction” have the same meanings as in Ohio R.C. 2929.01.
      (2)   “Drug of abuse” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 4506.01.
      (3)   “Equivalent offense” means any of the following:
         A.   A violation of Ohio R.C. 4511.19(A) or (B);
         B.   A violation of a municipal O.V.I. ordinance;
         C.   A violation of Ohio R.C. 2903.04 in a case in which the offender
was subject to the sanctions described in division (D) of that section;
         D.   A violation of Ohio R.C. 2903.06(A)(1) or Ohio R.C. 2903.08 or a
municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to either of those
divisions;
         E.   A violation of Ohio R.C. 2903.06(A)(2), (A)(3), or (A)(4), Ohio
R.C. 2903.08(A)(2), or former Ohio R.C. 2903.07, or a municipal ordinance that
is substantially equivalent to any of those divisions or that former section,
in a case in which a judge or jury as the trier of fact found that the offender
was under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a combination of them;
         F.   A violation of Ohio R.C. § 1547.11(A) or (B);
         G.   A violation of a municipal ordinance prohibiting a person from
operating or being in physical control of any vessel underway or from
manipulating any water skis, aquaplane, or similar device on the waters of this
state while under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a combination
of them or prohibiting a person from operating or being in physical control of
any vessel underway or from manipulating any water skis, aquaplane, or similar
device on the waters of this state with a prohibited concentration of alcohol,
a controlled substance, or a metabolite of a controlled substance in the whole
blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine.
         H.   A violation of an existing or former municipal ordinance, law of
another state, or law of the United States that is substantially equivalent to
Ohio R.C. 4511.19(A) or (B) or Ohio R.C. 1547.11(A) or (B);
         I.   A violation of a former law of this state that was substantially
equivalent to Ohio R.C. 4511.19(A) or (B) or Ohio R.C. 1547.11(A) or (B).
      (4)   “Equivalent offense that is vehicle-related” means an equivalent
offense that is any of the following:
         A.   A violation described in division A., B., C., D., or E. of the
definition for “equivalent offense” provided in this division (p);
         B.   A violation of an existing or former municipal ordinance, law of
another state, or law of the United States that is substantially equivalent to
Ohio R.C. 4511.19(A) or (B);
         C.   A violation of a former law of this state that was substantially
equivalent to Ohio R.C. 4511.19(A) or (B).
      (5)   “Mandatory jail term” means the mandatory term in jail of three,
six, ten, 20, 30, or 60 days that must be imposed under Ohio R.C. 4511.19(G)(1)
(a), (G)(1)(b), or (G)(1)(c) upon an offender convicted of a violation of
division (A) of that section and in relation to which all of the following
apply:
         A.   Except as specifically authorized under Ohio R.C. 4511.19, the
term must be served in a jail.
         B.   Except as specifically authorized under Ohio R.C. 4511.19, the
term cannot be suspended, reduced, or otherwise modified pursuant to Ohio R.C.
2929.21 through 2929.28 or any other provision of the Ohio Revised Code.
      (6)   “Municipal O.V.I. ordinance” and “municipal O.V.I. offense” mean
any municipal ordinance prohibiting a person from operating a vehicle while
under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a combination of them or
prohibiting a person from operating a vehicle with a prohibited concentration
of alcohol, a controlled substance, or a metabolite of a controlled substance
in the whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine.
(ORC 4511.181)
Statutory reference:
   Disposition of fines, immobilization of vehicle and impoundment of license
plates, criminal forfeiture for municipal ordinance conviction, see Ohio R.C.
4511.193
   Effect of refusal to submit to test, seizure of license, suspension periods,
appeal procedures, occupational driving privileges, and indigent drivers
alcohol treatment funds, see Ohio R.C. 4511.191
   Judicial pretrial suspension, initial appearance, see Ohio R.C. 4511.196
   Mayor’s Court to suspend driver’s license, see Ohio R.C. 1905.201
   Seizure of vehicles upon arrest, see Ohio R.C. 4511.195
   Trial judge to suspend driver’s license, see Ohio R.C. 4510.05
§ 434.011  IMMOBILIZING OR DISABLING DEVICE VIOLATION.
   (a)   (1)   No offender who has been granted limited or unlimited driving
privileges, during any period that the offender is required to operate only a
motor vehicle equipped with an immobilizing or disabling device, shall request
or permit any other person to breathe into the device if it is an ignition
interlock device or another type of device that monitors the concentration of
alcohol in a person’s breath or to otherwise start the motor vehicle equipped
with the device, for the purpose of providing the offender with an operable
motor vehicle.
      (2)   No person shall breathe into an immobilizing or disabling device
that is an ignition interlock device or another type of device that monitors
the concentration of alcohol in a person’s breath or otherwise start a motor
vehicle equipped with an immobilizing or disabling device, for the purpose of
providing an operable motor vehicle to another person who has been granted
limited or unlimited driving privileges under the condition that the person
operate only a motor vehicle equipped with an immobilizing or disabling device.
      (3)   No unauthorized person shall tamper with or circumvent the
operation of an immobilizing or disabling device.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of an immobilizing or
disabling device violation, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(ORC 4510.44)
§ 434.02  RECKLESS OPERATION ON STREETS, PUBLIC OR PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   (a)   No person shall operate a vehicle on any street or highway in willful
or wanton disregard of the safety of persons or property.
   (b)   (1)   No person shall operate a vehicle on any public or private
property other than streets or highways in willful or wanton disregard of the
safety of persons or property.
      (2)   Division (b)(1) of this section does not apply to the competitive
operation of vehicles on public or private property when the owner of such
property knowingly permits such operation thereon.
(Ord. 83-O-680, passed 6-21-1983)
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates any
provision of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty
to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates any
provision of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If,
within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of
two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates any
provision of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(ORC 4511.20, 4511.201)
§ 434.03  MAXIMUM SPEED LIMITS; ASSURED CLEAR DISTANCE AHEAD.
   (a)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle at a speed greater or less
than is reasonable or proper, having due regard for the traffic, surface and
width of the street or highway and any other conditions, and no person shall
drive any motor vehicle in and upon any street or highway at a greater speed
than will permit him or her to bring it to a stop within the assured clear
distance ahead.
   (b)   It is prima facie lawful, in the absence of a lower limit declared or
established pursuant to this section by the Director of Transportation or local
authorities, for the operator of a motor vehicle to operate the same at a speed
not exceeding the following:
      (1)   A.   Twenty miles per hour in school zones during school recess and
while children are going to or leaving school during the opening or closing
hours, and when 20 miles per hour school speed limit signs are erected, except
that on controlled-access highways and expressways, if the right-of-way line
fence has been erected without pedestrian opening, the speed shall be governed
by division (b)(4) of this section, and on freeways, if the right-of-way line
fence has been erected without pedestrian opening, the speed shall be governed
by divisions (b)(10) and (b)(11) of this section. The end of every school zone
may be marked by a sign indicating the end of the zone. Nothing in this section
or in the Manual and Specifications for a Uniform System of Traffic- Control
Devices shall be construed to require school zones to be indicated by signs
equipped with flashing or other lights, or giving other special notice of the
hours in which the school zone speed limit is in effect.
         B.   As used in this section, “school” means any school chartered
under R.C. § 3301.16 and any nonchartered school that during the preceding year
filed with the Department of Education in compliance with O.A.C. 3301-35-08, a
copy of the school’s report for the parents of the school’s pupils certifying
that the school meets state minimum standards for nonchartered, nontax-
supported schools and presents evidence of this filing to the jurisdiction from
which it is requesting the establishment of a school zone. “School” also
includes a special elementary school that in writing requests the County
Engineer to create a school zone at the location of the school. Upon receipt of
the written request, the County Engineer shall create a school zone at that
location by erecting appropriate signs.
         C.   As used in this section, “school zone” means that portion of a
street or highway passing a school fronting upon the street or highway that is
encompassed by projecting the school property lines to the fronting street or
highway, and also includes that portion of a state highway. Upon request from
local authorities for streets and highways under their jurisdiction and that
portion of a state highway under the jurisdiction of the Director of
Transportation or a request from a County Engineer in the case of a school zone
for a special elementary school, the Director may extend the traditional school
zone boundaries. The distances in divisions (b)(1)C.1. through (b)(1)C.3. below
shall not exceed 300 feet per approach per direction, and are bounded by
whichever of the following distances or combination thereof the Director
approves as most appropriate:
            1.   The distance encompassed by projecting the school building
lines normal to the fronting highway and extending a distance of 300 feet on
each approach direction;
            2.   The distance encompassed by projecting the school property
lines intersecting the fronting highway and extending a distance of 300 feet on
each approach direction;
            3.   The distance encompassed by the special marking of the
pavement for a principal school pupil crosswalk plus a distance of 300 feet on
each approach direction of the highway.
         D.   Nothing in this section shall be construed to invalidate the
Director’s initial action on August 9, 1976, establishing all school zones at
the traditional school zone boundaries defined by projecting school property
lines, except when those boundaries are extended as provided in divisions (b)
(1)A. and (b)(1)C. of this section.
         E.   As used in this division, “crosswalk” has the meaning given that
term in R.C. § 4511.01(LL)(2).
         F.   The Director may, upon request by resolution of the legislative
authority and upon submission by the municipality of such engineering, traffic
and other information as the Director considers necessary, designate a school
zone on any portion of a state route lying within the municipality that
includes a crosswalk customarily used by children going to or leaving a school
during recess and opening and closing hours, whenever the distance, as measured
in a straight line, from the school property line nearest the crosswalk to the
nearest point of a crosswalk is no more than 1,320 feet. Such a school zone
shall include the distance encompassed by the crosswalk and extending 300 feet
in each appropriate direction of the state route.
         G.   As used in this section, “special elementary school” means a
school that meets all of the following:
            1.   It is not chartered and does not receive tax revenue from any
source.
            2.   It does not educate children beyond the eighth grade.
            3.   It is located outside the limits of a municipal corporation.
            4.   A majority of the total number of students enrolled at the
school are not related by blood.
            5.   The principal or other person in charge of the special
elementary school annually sends a report to the superintendent of the school
district in which the special elementary school is located indicating the total
number of students enrolled at the school, but otherwise the principal or other
person in charge does not report any other information or data to the
superintendent.
      (2)   Twenty-five miles per hour in all other portions of the
municipality, except on state routes outside business districts, through
highways outside business districts and alleys;
      (3)   Thirty-five miles per hour on all state routes or through highways
within the municipality outside business districts, except as provided in
divisions (b)(4) and (b)(6) of this section;
      (4)   Fifty miles per hour on controlled-access highways and expressways
within the municipality;
      (5)   Fifty-five miles per hour on highways outside the municipality,
other than highways within island jurisdictions as provided in division (b)(8)
of this section, highways as provided in divisions (b)(9) and (b)(10) of this
section, and highways, expressways and freeways as provided in divisions (b)
(13), (b)(14), (b)(15) and (b)(17) of this section;
      (6)   Fifty miles per hour on state routes within the municipality
outside urban districts unless a lower prima facie speed is established as
further provided in this section;
      (7)   Fifteen miles per hour on all alleys within the municipality;
      (8)   Thirty-five miles per hour on highways outside the municipality
that are within an island jurisdiction;
      (9)   Thirty-five miles per hour on through highways, except state
routes, that are outside municipal corporations and that are within a national
park with boundaries extending through two or more counties;
      (10)   Sixty miles per hour on two-lane state routes outside municipal
corporations as established by the Director under R.C. § 4511.21(H)(2);
      (11)   Fifty-five miles per hour at all times on freeways with paved
shoulders inside the municipality, other than freeways as provided in divisions
(b)(15) and (b)(17) of this section;
      (12)   Fifty-five miles per hour at all times on freeways outside the
municipality, other than freeways as provided in divisions (b)(15) and (b)(17)
of this section;
      (13)   Sixty miles per hour for operators of any motor vehicle at all
times on all portions of rural divided highways;
      (14)   Sixty-five miles per hour for operators of any motor vehicle at
all times on all rural expressways without traffic control signals;
      (15)   Seventy miles per hour for operators of any motor vehicle at all
times on all rural freeways;
      (16)   Fifty-five miles per hour for operators of any motor vehicle at
all times on all portions of freeways in congested areas as determined by the
Director and that are part of the interstate system and are located within a
municipal corporation or within an interstate freeway outerbelt;
      (17)   Sixty-five miles per hour for operators of any motor vehicle at
all times on all portions of freeways in urban areas as determined by the
Director and that are part of the interstate system and are part of an
interstate freeway outerbelt.
   (c)   It is prima facie unlawful for any person to exceed any of the speed
limitations in divisions (b)(1)A., (b)(2), (b)(3), (b)(4), (b)(6), (b)(7), (b)
(8) and (b)(9) of this section or any declared or established pursuant to this
section by the Director or local authorities and it is unlawful for any person
to exceed any of the speed limitations in division (d) of this section. No
person shall be convicted of more than one violation of this section for the
same conduct, although violations of more than one provision of this section
may be charged in the alternative in a single affidavit.
   (d)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle upon a street or highway as
follows:
      (1)   At a speed exceeding 55 miles per hour, except upon a two-lane
state route as provided in division (b)(10) of this section and upon a highway,
expressway or freeway as provided in divisions (b)(13), (b)(14), (b)(15) and
(b)(17) of this section;
      (2)   At a speed exceeding 60 miles per hour upon a two-lane state route
as provided in division (b)(10) of this section and upon a highway as provided
in division (b)(13) of this section;
      (3)   At a speed exceeding 65 miles per hour upon an expressway as
provided in division (b)(14) of this section or upon a freeway as provided in
division (b)(17) of this section, except upon a freeway as provided in division
(b)(15) of this section;
      (4)   At a speed exceeding 70 miles per hour upon a freeway as provided
in division (b)(15) of this section;
      (5)   At a speed exceeding the posted speed limit upon a highway,
expressway or freeway for which the Director has determined and declared a
speed limit pursuant to R.C. § 4511.21(I)(2) or (L)(2).
   (e)   Pursuant to R.C. § 4511.21(E), in every charge of violating this
section, the affidavit and warrant shall specify the time, place and speed at
which the defendant is alleged to have driven, and in charges made in reliance
upon division (c) of this section also the speed which division (b)(1)A., (b)
(2), (b)(3), (b)(4), (b)(6), (b)(7), (b)(8) or (b)(9) of, or a limit declared
or established pursuant to, this section or R.C. § 4511.21 declares is prima
facie lawful at the time and place of the alleged violation, except that in
affidavits where a person is alleged to have driven at a greater speed than
will permit the person to bring the vehicle to stop within the assured clear
distance ahead, the affidavit and warrant need not specify the speed at which
the defendant is alleged to have driven.
   (f)   Pursuant to R.C. § 4511.21(F), when a speed in excess of both a prima
facie limitation and a limitation in division (d) of this section is alleged,
the defendant shall be charged in a single affidavit, alleging a single act,
with a violation indicated of both division (b)(1)A., (b)(2), (b)(3), (b)(4),
(b)(6), (b)(7), (b)(8) or (b)(9) of this section, or of a limit declared or
established pursuant to this section or R.C. § 4511.21 by the Director or local
authorities, and of the limitation in division (d) of this section. If the
court finds a violation of division (b)(1)A., (b)(2), (b)(3), (b)(4), (b)(6),
(b)(7), (b)(8) or (b)(9) of, or a limit declared or established pursuant to,
this section or R.C. § 4511.21 has occurred, it shall enter a judgment of
conviction under that division and dismiss the charge under division (d) of
this section. If it finds no violation of division (b)(1)A., (b)(2), (b)(3),
(b)(4), (b)(6), (b)(7), (b)(8) or (b)(9) of, or a limit declared or established
pursuant to, this section or R.C. § 4511.21, it shall then consider whether the
evidence supports a conviction under division (d) of this section.
   (g)   Pursuant to R.C. § 4511.21(G), points shall be assessed for a
violation of a limitation under division (d) of this section in accordance with
R.C. § 4510.036.
(R.C. § 4511.21(A) - (G))
   (h)   Whenever, in accordance with R.C. § 4511.21(H) through (N), the
maximum prima facie speed limitations as established herein have been altered,
either higher or lower, and the appropriate signs giving notice have been
erected as required, operators of motor vehicles shall be governed by the speed
limitations set forth on those signs. It is prima facie unlawful for any person
to exceed the speed limits posted upon the signs.
   (i)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   “Commercial bus” means a motor vehicle designed for carrying more
than nine passengers and used for the transportation of persons for
compensation.
      (2)   “Interstate system” has the same meaning as in 23 U.S.C. 101.
      (3)   “Noncommercial bus” includes but is not limited to a school bus, or
a motor vehicle operated solely for the transportation of persons associated
with a charitable or nonprofit organization.
      (4)   “Outerbelt” means a portion of a freeway that is part of the
interstate system and is located in the outer vicinity of a major municipal
corporation or group of municipal corporations, as designated by the Director.
      (5)   “Rural.”  Outside urbanized areas, as designated in accordance with
23 U.S.C. § 101, and outside of a business or urban district.
(R.C. § 4511.21(O))
   (j)   Penalty.
      (1)   A violation of any provision of this section is one of the
following:
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (j)(1)B., (j)(1)C., and
(j)(2) and (j)(3) of this section, a minor misdemeanor;
         B.   If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two violations of any provision of this
section, R.C. § 4511.21, or any provision of any other municipal ordinance that
is substantially equivalent to any provision of that section, a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree;
         C.   If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to three or more violations of any
provision of this section, R.C. § 4511.21, or any provision of any other
municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to any provision of that
section, a misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (2)   If the offender has not previously been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of any provision of this section, R.C. § 4511.21, or any
other municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to any provision of
that section, and operated a motor vehicle faster than 35 miles per hour in a
business district of the municipality, faster than 50 miles per hour in other
portions of the municipality, or faster than 35 miles per hour in a school zone
during recess or while children are going to or leaving school during the
school’s opening or closing hours, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
      (3)   Notwithstanding division (j)(1) of this section, if the offender
operated a motor vehicle in a construction zone where a sign was then posted in
accordance with R.C. § 4511.98, the court, in addition to all other penalties
provided by law, shall impose upon the offender a fine of two times the usual
amount imposed for the violation. No court shall impose a fine of two times the
usual amount imposed for the violation upon an offender if the offender
alleges, in an affidavit filed with the court prior to the offender’s
sentencing, that the offender is indigent and is unable to pay the fine imposed
pursuant to this division and if the court determines that the offender is an
indigent person and unable to pay the fine.
      (4)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(R.C. § 4511.21(P))
§ 434.04  SPEED LIMITS ON PRIVATE ROADS AND DRIVEWAYS.
   (a)   The owner of a private road or driveway located in a private
residential area containing 20 or more dwelling units may establish a speed
limit on the road or driveway by complying with all of the following
requirements:
      (1)   The speed limit is not less than 25 miles per hour and is indicated
by a sign that is in a proper position, is sufficiently legible to be seen by
an ordinarily observant person, and meets the specifications for the basic
speed limit sign included in the manual adopted by the Department of
Transportation pursuant to Ohio R.C. 4511.09;
      (2)   The owner has posted a sign at the entrance of the private road or
driveway that is in plain view and clearly informs persons entering the road or
driveway that they are entering private property, a speed limit has been
established for the road or driveway, and the speed limit is enforceable by law
enforcement officers under state law.
   (b)   No person shall operate a vehicle upon a private road or driveway as
provided in division (a) of this section at a speed exceeding any speed limit
established and posted pursuant to division (a).
   (c)   When a speed limit is established and posted in accordance with
division (a) of this section, a law enforcement officer may apprehend a person
violating the speed limit of the residential area by utilizing any of the means
described in Ohio R.C. 4511.091 or by any other accepted method of determining
the speed of a motor vehicle and may stop and charge the person with exceeding
the speed limit.
   (d)   Pursuant to Ohio R.C. 4511.211(D), points shall be assessed for
violation of a speed limit established and posted in accordance with division
(a) of this section in accordance with Ohio R.C. 4510.036.
   (e)   As used in this section:
      (1)   “Owner” includes but is not limited to a person who holds title to
the real property in fee simple, a condominium owners’ association, a property
owners’ association, a board of directors or trustees of a private community,
and a nonprofit corporation governing a private community.
      (2)   “Private residential area containing 20 or more dwelling units”
does not include a Chautauqua assembly as defined in Ohio R.C. 4511.90.
   (f)   Penalty. A violation of division (b) of this section is one of the
following:
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (f)(1)A. and (f)(1)B. of
this section, a minor misdemeanor;
         A.   If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two violations of this section, Ohio
R.C. 4511.211(B), or any other municipal ordinance that is substantially
equivalent to that division, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree;
         B.   If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to three or more violations of this
section, Ohio R.C. 4511.211(B), or any other municipal ordinance that is
substantially equivalent to that division, a misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (2)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(ORC 4511.211)
§ 434.05  SLOW SPEED; POSTED MINIMUM SPEEDS.
   (a)   No person shall stop or operate a vehicle at such an unreasonably slow
speed as to impede or block the normal and reasonable movement of traffic,
except when stopping or reduced speed is necessary for safe operation or to
comply with law.
   (b)   Whenever the Director of Transportation or local authorities determine
on the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation that slow speeds on
any part of a controlled-access highway, expressway, or freeway consistently
impede the normal and reasonable movement of traffic, the Director or such
local authority may declare a minimum speed limit below which no person shall
operate a motor vehicle, except when necessary for safe operation or in
compliance with the law. No minimum speed limit established hereunder shall be
less than 30 miles per hour, greater than 50 miles per hour, nor effective
until the provisions of Ohio R.C. 4511.21 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, relating to appropriate signs, have been fulfilled and
local authorities have obtained the approval of the Director.
   (c)   In a case involving a violation of this section, the trier of fact, in
determining whether the vehicle was being operated at an unreasonably slow
speed, shall consider the capabilities of the vehicle and its operator.
   (d)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (e)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(ORC 4511.22)
§ 434.06  SPEED LIMITATIONS OVER BRIDGES.
   (a)   (1)   No person shall operate a vehicle over any bridge or other
elevated structure constituting a part of a highway at a speed which is greater
than the maximum speed that can be maintained with safety to such bridge or
structure, when such structure is posted with signs as provided in this
section.
      (2)   The Department of Transportation upon request from any local
authority shall, or upon its own initiative may, conduct an investigation of
any bridge or other elevated structure constituting a part of a highway, and if
it finds that such structure cannot with safety withstand traffic traveling at
the speed otherwise permissible under this Traffic Code, the Department shall
determine and declare the maximum speed of traffic which such structure can
withstand, and shall cause or permit suitable signs stating such maximum speed
to be erected and maintained at a distance of a least 100 feet before each end
of the structure.
      (3)   Upon the trial of any person charged with a violation of this
section, proof of such determination of the maximum speed by the Department and
the existence of such signs shall constitute prima facie evidence of the
maximum speed which can be maintained with safety to such bridge or structure.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (c)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(ORC 4511.23)
§ 434.07  SPEED EXCEPTIONS FOR EMERGENCY OR SAFETY VEHICLES.
   The prima facie speed limitations set forth in Ohio R.C. 4511.21 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance do not apply to emergency vehicles
or public safety vehicles when they are responding to emergency calls and are
equipped with and displaying at least one flashing, rotating, or oscillating
light visible under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of 500 feet
to the front of the vehicle, and when the drivers thereof sound audible signals
by bell, siren, or exhaust whistle. This section does not relieve the driver of
an emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle from the duty to drive with due
regard for the safety of all persons using the street or highway.
(ORC 4511.24)
§ 434.08  REASONABLE CONTROL.
   (a)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle, agricultural tractor, or
agricultural tractor that is towing, pulling, or otherwise drawing a unit of
farm machinery on any street, highway, or property open to the public for
vehicular traffic without being in reasonable control of the vehicle,
agricultural tractor, or unit of farm machinery.
(Ord. 83-O-680, passed 6-21-1983)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of operating a motor vehicle
or agricultural tractor without being in control of it, a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4511.202)
§ 434.09  STREET RACING PROHIBITED.
   (a)   As used in this section, “street racing” means the operation of two or
more vehicles from a point side by side at accelerating speeds in a competitive
attempt to outdistance each other, or the operation of one or more vehicles
over a common selected course, from the same point to the same point, wherein
timing is made of the participating vehicles involving competitive
accelerations or speeds. Persons rendering assistance in any manner to such
competitive use of vehicles shall be equally charged as the participants. The
operation of two or more vehicles side by side either at speeds in excess of
prima facie lawful speeds established by Ohio R.C. 4511.21(B)(1)(a) through (B)
(9) or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, or rapidly accelerating
from a common starting point to a speed in excess of such prima facie lawful
speeds shall be prima facie evidence of street racing.
   (b)   No person shall participate in street racing upon any public road,
street, or highway in this municipality.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of street racing, a
misdemeanor of the first degree. In addition to any other sanctions, the court
shall suspend the offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s license,
temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating
privileges for not less than 30 days or more than three years. No judge shall
suspend the first 30 days of any suspension of an offender’s license, permit,
or privilege imposed under this division.
(ORC 4511.251)
§ 434.10  VEHICULAR HOMICIDE; VEHICULAR MANSLAUGHTER; VEHICULAR ASSAULT.
   (a)   No person, while operating or participating in the operation of a
motor vehicle, motorcycle, snowmobile, locomotive, watercraft, or aircraft,
shall cause the death of another or the unlawful termination of another’s
pregnancy in any of the following ways:
      (1)   A.   As the proximate result of committing a violation of Ohio R.C.
4511.19(A) or of a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance;
         B.   As the proximate result of committing a violation of Ohio R.C.
1547.11(A) or of a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance;
         C.   As the proximate result of committing a violation of Ohio R.C.
4561.15(A)(3) or of a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
      (2)   In one of the following ways:
         A.   Recklessly;
         B.   As the proximate result of committing, while operating or
participating in the operation of a motor vehicle or motorcycle in a
construction zone, a reckless operation offense, provided that this division
applies only if the person whose death is caused or whose pregnancy is
unlawfully terminated is in the construction zone at the time of the offender’s
commission of the reckless operation offense in the construction zone and does
not apply as described in division (d) of this section.
      (3)   In one of the following ways:
         A.   Negligently;
         B.   As the proximate result of committing, while operating or
participating in the operation of a motor vehicle or motorcycle in a
construction zone, a speeding offense, provided that this division applies only
if the person whose death is caused or whose pregnancy is unlawfully terminated
is in the construction zone at the time of the offender’s commission of the
speeding offense in the construction zone and does not apply as described in
division (d) of this section.
      (4)   As the proximate result of committing a violation of any provision
of any section contained in Ohio R.C. Title 45 that is a minor misdemeanor or
of a municipal ordinance that, regardless of the penalty set by ordinance for
the violation, is substantially equivalent to any provision of any section
contained in Ohio R.C. Title 45 that is a minor misdemeanor.
   (b)   (1)   Whoever violates division (a)(1) or (2) of this section is
guilty of aggravated vehicular homicide, a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
      (2)   A.   Whoever violates division (a)(3) of this section is guilty of
vehicular homicide. Except as otherwise provided in this division, vehicular
homicide is a misdemeanor of the first degree. Vehicular homicide committed in
violation of division (a)(3) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law if, at the time of the offense, the offender was driving
under a suspension or cancellation imposed under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4510 or any
other provision of the Ohio Revised Code or was operating a motor vehicle or
motorcycle, did not have a valid driver's license, commercial driver's license,
temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating
privilege, and was not eligible for renewal of the offender's driver's license
or commercial driver's license without examination under Ohio R.C. 4507.10 or
if the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a
violation of this section or any traffic-related homicide, manslaughter, or
assault offense.
         B.   In addition to any other sanctions imposed pursuant to this
division, the court shall impose upon the offender a class four suspension of
the offender's driver's license, commercial driver's license, temporary
instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege
from the range specified in Ohio R.C. 4510.02(A)(4).
      (3)   A.   Whoever violates division (a)(4) of this section is guilty of
vehicular manslaughter. Except as otherwise provided in this division,
vehicular manslaughter is a misdemeanor of the second degree. Vehicular
manslaughter is a misdemeanor of the first degree if, at the time of the
offense, the offender was driving under a suspension or cancellation imposed
under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4510 or any other provision of the Revised Code
cancellation imposed under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4510 or any other provision of the
Ohio Revised Code or was operating a motor vehicle or motorcycle, did not have
a valid driver’s license, commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction
permit, probationary license or nonresident operating privilege, and was not
eligible for renewal of the offender’s driver’s license or commercial driver’s
license without examination under Ohio R.C. 4507.10 or if the offender
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of this
section or any traffic-related homicide, manslaughter, or assault offense.
         B.   In addition to any other sanctions imposed pursuant to this
division, the court shall impose upon the offender a class six suspension of
the offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s license, temporary
instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege
from the range specified in Ohio R.C. 4510.02(A)(6) or, if the offender
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of this
section, any traffic-related homicide, manslaughter, or assault offense, or a
traffic-related murder, felonious assault, or attempted murder offense, a class
four suspension of the offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s
license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident
operating privilege from the range specified in Ohio R.C. 4510.02(A)(4).
   (c)   The court shall impose a mandatory jail term of at least 15 days on an
offender who is convicted of or pleads guilty to a misdemeanor violation of
division (a)(3)B. of this section and may impose upon the offender a longer
jail term as authorized pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2929.24.
   (d)   Divisions (a)(2)B. and (a)(3)B. of this section do not apply in a
particular construction zone unless signs of the type described in Ohio R.C.
2903.081 are erected in that construction zone in accordance with the
guidelines and design specifications established by the Director of
Transportation under Ohio R.C. 5501.27. The failure to erect signs of the type
described in Ohio R.C. 2903.081 in a particular construction zone in accordance
with those guidelines and design specifications does not limit or affect the
application of division (a)(1), (a)(2)A., (a)(3)A., or (a)(4) of this section
in that construction zone or the prosecution of any person who violates any of
those divisions in that construction zone.
   (e)   (1)   As used in this section:
         A.   “Construction zone” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 5501.27.
         B.   “Mandatory prison term” and “mandatory jail term” have the same
meanings as in Ohio R.C. 2929.01.
         C.   “Motor vehicle” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 4501.01.
         D.   “Reckless operation offense” means a violation of Ohio R.C.
4511.20 or a municipal ordinance substantially equivalent to Ohio R.C. 4511.20.
         E.   “Speeding offense” means a violation of Ohio R.C. 4511.21 or a
municipal ordinance pertaining to speed.
         F.   “Traffic-related homicide, manslaughter, or assault offense”
means a violation of Ohio R.C. 2903.04 in circumstances in which division (D)
of that section applies, a violation of Ohio R.C. 2903.06 or 2903.08, or a
violation of Ohio R.C. 2903.06, 2903.07, or 2903.08 as they existed prior to
March 23, 2000.
         G.   “Traffic-related murder, felonious assault, or attempted murder
offense” means a violation of Ohio R.C. 2903.01 or Ohio R.C. 2903.02 in
circumstances in which the offender used a motor vehicle as the means to commit
the violation, a violation of Ohio R.C. 2903.11(A)(2) in circumstances in which
the deadly weapon used in the commission of the violation is a motor vehicle,
or an attempt to commit aggravated murder or murder in violation of Ohio R.C.
2923.02 in circumstances in which the offender used a motor vehicle as the
means to attempt to commit the aggravated murder or murder.
      (2)   For the purposes of this section, when a penalty or suspension is
enhanced because of a prior or current violation of a specified law or a prior
or current specified offense, the reference to the violation of the specified
law or the specified offense includes any violation of any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, former law of this state, or current or former
law of this or another state or the United States.
(ORC 2903.06)
   (f)   Vehicular assault.
      (1)   No person, while operating or participating in the operation of a
motor vehicle or motorcycle, shall cause serious physical harm to another
person or another’s unborn as the proximate result of committing, while
operating or participating in the operation of a motor vehicle or motorcycle in
a construction zone, a speeding offense, provided that this division applies
only if the person to whom the serious physical harm is caused or to whose
unborn the serious physical harm is caused is in the construction zone at the
time of the offender’s commission of the speeding offense in the construction
zone and does not apply as described in division (f)(4) of this section.
      (2)   A.   Except as otherwise provided in this division, vehicular
assault committed in violation of division (f)(1) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the first degree. Vehicular assault committed in violation of
division (f)(1) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law if, at the time of the offense, the offender was driving under a
suspension imposed under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4510 or any other provision of the
Ohio Revised Code or if the offender previously has been convicted of or
pleaded guilty to a violation of division (f)(1) of this section, Ohio R.C.
2903.08, or any traffic-related homicide, manslaughter, or assault offense.
         B.   In addition to any other sanctions imposed, the court shall
impose upon the offender a class four suspension of the offender’s driver’s
license, commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction permit,
probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege from the range
specified in Ohio R.C. 4510.02(A)(4).
      (3)   The court shall impose a mandatory jail term of at least seven days
on an offender who is convicted of or pleads guilty to a misdemeanor violation
of division (f)(1) of this section and may impose upon the offender a longer
jail term as authorized pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2929.24.
      (4)   Division (f)(1) of this section does not apply in a particular
construction zone unless signs of the type described in Ohio R.C. 2903.081 are
erected in that construction zone in accordance with the guidelines and design
specifications established by the Director of Transportation under Ohio R.C.
5501.27.
      (5)   As used in this division (f):
         A.   “Construction zone.” Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C.
5501.27.
         B.   “Mandatory jail term.” Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C.
2929.01.
         C.   “Speeding offense.” Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2903.06.
         D.   “Traffic-related homicide, manslaughter, or assault offense.” Has
the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2903.06.
      (6)   For the purposes of this division (f), when a penalty or suspension
is enhanced because of a prior or current violation of a specified law or a
prior or current specified offense, the reference to the violation of the
specified law or the specified offense includes any violation of any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, former law of this state, or
current or former law of another state or the United States.
(ORC 2903.08(A)(3), (C)(3), (D)(3), (E) - (G))
Statutory reference:
   Vehicular assault and aggravated vehicular assault, felony offenses, see
Ohio R.C. 2903.08
   Trial court to suspend driver’s license, see Ohio R.C. 4510.05, 4510.10
§ 434.11  OPERATION RESTRICTED FOR MINI-TRUCKS AND LOW-SPEED, UNDER-SPEED, OR
UTILITY VEHICLES.
   (a)   (1)   No person shall operate a low-speed vehicle upon any street or
highway having an established speed limit greater than 35 miles per hour.
      (2)   No person shall operate an under-speed or utility vehicle or a
mini-truck upon any street or highway except as follows:
         A.   Upon a street or highway having an established speed limit not
greater than 35 miles per hour and only upon such streets or highways where the
municipality has granted permission for such operation in accordance with
division (e) of this section;
         B.   A state park or political subdivision employee or volunteer
operating a utility vehicle exclusively within the boundaries of state parks or
political subdivision parks for the operation or maintenance of state or
political subdivision park facilities.
      (3)   No person shall operate a motor-driven cycle or motor scooter upon
any street or highway having an established speed limit greater than 45 miles
per hour.
   (b)   This section does not prohibit either of the following:
      (1)   A person operating a low-speed, under-speed, or utility vehicle or
a mini-truck from proceeding across an intersection of a street or highway
having a speed limit greater than 35 miles per hour;
      (2)   A person operating a motor-driven cycle or motor scooter from
proceeding across an intersection of a street or highway having a speed limit
greater than 45 miles per hour.
   (c)   Nothing in this section shall prevent the municipality from adopting
more stringent local ordinances, resolutions, or regulations governing the
operation of a low-speed vehicle or a mini-truck, or a motor-driven cycle or
motor scooter.
   (d)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (a) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If within one year of
the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(ORC 4511.214)
   (e)   By ordinance or resolution, the municipality may authorize the
operation of under-speed or utility vehicles or mini-trucks on a public street
or highway under its jurisdiction. The municipality shall do all of the
following:
      (1)   Limit the operation of those vehicles to streets and highways
having an established speed limit not greater than 35 miles per hour;
      (2)   Require the vehicle owner who wishes to operate an under-speed or
utility vehicle or a mini-truck on the public streets or highways to submit the
vehicle to an inspection conducted by a local law enforcement agency that
complies with inspection requirements established by the Department of Public
Safety under Ohio R.C. 4513.02;
      (3)   Permit the operation on public streets or highways of only those
vehicles that successfully pass the required vehicle inspection, are registered
in accordance with Ohio R.C. Chapter 4503, and are titled in accordance with
Ohio R.C. Chapter 4505;
      (4)   Notify the Director of Public Safety, in a manner the Director
determines, of the authorization for the operation of under-speed or utility
vehicles or mini-trucks.
   (f)   The municipality may establish additional requirements for the
operation of under-speed or utility vehicles or mini-trucks on its streets and
highways.
(ORC 4511.215)
   (g)   Notwithstanding divisions (a) through (f) of this section, a person
may operate a utility vehicle on any public roads or right-of-way, other than a
freeway, when traveling from one farm field to another for agricultural
purposes if the vehicle is displaying a triangular slow-moving vehicle emblem
as described in R.C. § 4513.11.
(R.C. § 4511.216)
   (h)   (1)   Except as provided in this division (h) and divisions (e) and
(f) of this section, no person shall operate a mini-truck within this
municipality.
      (2)   A person may operate a mini-truck on a farm for agricultural
purposes only when the owner of the farm qualifies for the current agricultural
use valuation tax credit. A mini- truck may be operated by or on behalf of such
a farm owner on public roads and rights-of-way only when traveling from one
farm field to another.
      (3)   A person may operate a mini-truck on property owned or leased by a
dealer who sells mini-trucks at retail.
      (4)   Whoever violates this division (h) shall be penalized as provided
in division (d) of this section.
(ORC 4519.401)
§ 434.99  PENALTY.
   (EDITOR’S NOTE:  See §§
408.01 and
408.02 for general Traffic Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.)
CHAPTER 436:  LICENSING; ACCIDENTS
Section
436.01   Driver’s or commercial driver’s license required.
436.02   Possession of more than one license prohibited.
436.03   Driving with temporary instruction permit.
436.035   Driving with probationary license.
436.04   Certain acts prohibited.
436.05   Owner or operator allowing another to drive.
436.06   Display of license.
436.07   Driving under suspension or revocation or without proof of financial
responsibility or in violation of license restrictions. (Repealed)
436.071   Driving under suspension or in violation of license restriction.
436.072   Operating motor vehicle or motorcycle without valid license.
436.073   Driving under O.V.I. suspension.
436.074   Driving under financial responsibility law suspension or
cancellation; driving under a nonpayment of judgment suspension.
436.075   Failure to reinstate license.
436.08   Operation or sale without certificate of title.
436.09   Display of license plates; registration; obstructions.
436.10   Use of illegal license plates.
436.11   Failure to stop after accident.
436.12   Stopping after accident on other than public roads or highways.
436.13   Vehicle accident resulting in damage to realty.
436.14   Removal of vehicles after accidents.
436.99   Penalty.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   See section histories for similar state law
   Motor vehicle licensing law - see Ohio R.C. Ch. 4503
   Driver’s license law - see Ohio R.C. Ch. 4507
   State point system suspension - see Ohio R.C. 4510.037
   Power of trial court of record to suspend license for certain violations -
see Ohio R.C. 4507.16, 4510.15
   Employment of a minor to operate a taxicab prohibited - see Ohio R.C.
4507.321
   State accident reports - see Ohio R.C. 4509.01(J), 4509.06, 4509.74, 5502.11
   Suspension or revocation of driver’s license - see TRAF.
408.03; GEN. OFF.
698.07
   Glass removal from street after accident - see TRAF.
412.01
   Licensing requirements of snowmobile and all purpose vehicle operator - see
TRAF.
446.05
   Snowmobile and all purpose vehicle accident reports - see TRAF.
446.06
§ 436.01  DRIVER’S OR COMMERCIAL DRIVER’S LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (a)   No person shall permit the operation of a motor vehicle upon any
public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel
or parking, knowing the operator does not have a valid driver’s license issued
to the operator by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4507
or a valid commercial driver’s license issued under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4506. 
Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this division
is guilty of an unclassified misdemeanor. When the offense is an unclassified
misdemeanor, the offender shall be sentenced pursuant to §
698.02, §
698.03, or Ohio R.C. 2929.21 to 2929.28, except that the offender shall not be
sentenced to a jail term; the offender shall not be sentenced to a community
residential sanction pursuant to §
698.02(d) or Ohio R.C. 2929.26; notwithstanding §
698.02(f)(1)B.1. and Ohio R.C. 2929.28(A)(2)(a), the offender may be fined up
to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00); and, notwithstanding §
698.02(e)(1)C. and R.C. § 2929.27(A)(3), the offender may be ordered pursuant
to §
698.02(e)(3) or Ohio R.C. 2929.27(C) to serve a term of community service of up
to 500 hours. The failure of an offender to complete a term of community
service imposed by the court may be punished as indirect criminal contempt
under Ohio R.C. 2705.02(A) that may be filed in the underlying case. If, within
three years of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or
pleaded guilty to two or more violations of this section or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, the offense is a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(ORC 4507.02(A)(1))
   (b)   (1)   No person shall be required to obtain a driver’s or commercial
driver’s license for the purpose of temporarily driving, operating, drawing,
moving, or propelling a road roller or road machinery upon a street or highway.
      (2)   No person shall be required to obtain a driver’s or commercial
driver’s license for the purpose of temporarily driving, operating, drawing,
moving, or propelling any agricultural tractor or implement of husbandry upon a
street or highway at a speed of 25 miles per hour or less.
      (3)   No person shall drive, operate, draw, move, or propel any
agricultural tractor or implement of husbandry upon a street or highway at a
speed greater than 25 miles per hour unless the person has a current, valid
driver’s or commercial driver’s license.
      (4)   No person having a valid driver’s or commercial driver’s license
shall be required to have a motorcycle operator’s endorsement to operate a
motorcycle having three wheels with a motor of not more than 50 cubic
centimeters piston displacement.
      (5)   No person having a valid driver’s or commercial driver’s license
shall be required to have a motorcycle operator’s endorsement to operate an
autocycle or a cab-enclosed motorcycle.
      (6)   Every person on active duty in the military or naval forces of the
United States, when furnished with a driver’s permit and when operating an
official motor vehicle in connection with such duty, is exempt from the license
requirements of Ohio R.C. Chapters 4506 and 4507. Every person on active duty
in the military or naval forces of the United States or in service with the
peace corps, volunteers in service to America, or the foreign service of the
United States, is exempt from the license requirements of such sections for the
period of the person’s active duty or service and for six months thereafter,
provided such person was a licensee under such sections at the time the person
commenced the person's active duty or service. This section does not prevent
such a person or the person's spouse or dependent from making an application,
as provided in Ohio R.C. 4507.10(C), for the renewal of a driver’s license or
motorcycle operator’s endorsement or as provided in Ohio R.C. 4506.14 for the
renewal of a commercial driver’s license during the period of the person’s
active duty or service.
      (7)   Whoever violates division (b)(3) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(ORC 4507.03)
   (c)   Nonresidents, permitted to drive upon the highways of their own state,
may operate any motor vehicle upon any highway in this state without
examination or license under Ohio R.C. 4507.01 to 4507.39, inclusive, upon
condition that such nonresident may be required at any time or place to prove
lawful possession or their right to operate such motor vehicle, and to
establish proper identity.
(ORC 4507.04)
   (d)   Surrender of driver’s license from another state.
      (1)   Any person who becomes a resident of this state, within 30 days of
becoming a resident, shall surrender any driver’s license issued by another
state to the Registrar of Motor Vehicles or a deputy registrar. If such a
person intends to operate a motor vehicle upon the public roads or highways,
the person shall apply for a driver’s license in this state. If the person
fails to apply for a driver’s license within 30 days of becoming a resident,
the person shall not operate any motor vehicle in this state under a license
issued by another state.
      (2)   A.   Whoever violates division (d)(1) of this section is guilty of
a minor misdemeanor.
         B.   The offense established under division (d)(2)A. of this section
is a strict liability offense and strict liability is a culpable mental state
for purposes of Ohio R.C. 2901.20. The designation of this offense as a strict
liability offense shall not be construed to imply that any other offense, for
which there is no specified degree of culpability, is not a strict liability
offense.
      (3)   For purposes of division (d)(1) of this section, “resident” means
any person to whom any of the following applies:
         A.   The person maintains their principal residence in this state and
does not reside in this state as a result of the person’s active service in the
United States armed forces.
         B.   The person is determined by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles to be
a resident in accordance with standards adopted by the Registrar under Ohio
R.C. 4507.01.
(ORC 4507.213)
§ 436.02  POSSESSION OF MORE THAN ONE LICENSE PROHIBITED.
   (a)   No person shall receive a driver’s license, or a motorcycle operator’s
endorsement of a driver’s or commercial driver’s license, unless and until the
person surrenders to the Registrar all valid licenses issued to the person by
another jurisdiction recognized by this state. The Registrar shall report the
surrender of a license to the issuing authority, together with information that
a license is now issued in this state. The Registrar shall destroy any such
license that is not returned to the issuing authority. No person shall be
permitted to have more than one valid license at any time.
(ORC 4507.02(A)(2))
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(ORC 4507.99)
§ 436.03  DRIVING WITH TEMPORARY INSTRUCTION PERMIT.
   (a)   No holder of a temporary instruction permit issued under Ohio R.C.
4507.05(A) shall operate a motor vehicle upon a highway or any public or
private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking
in violation of the conditions established under Ohio R.C. 4507.05(A).
   (b)   Except as provided in division (c) of this section, no holder of a
temporary instruction permit that is issued under Ohio R.C. 4507.05(A) and that
is issued on or after July 1, 1998, and who has not attained the age of 18
years, shall operate a motor vehicle upon a highway or any public or private
property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking between
the hours of midnight and 6:00 a.m.
   (c)   The holder of a temporary instruction permit issued under Ohio R.C.
4507.05(A) on or after July 1, 1998, who has not attained the age of 18 years,
may operate a motor vehicle upon a highway or any public or private property
used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking between the
hours of midnight and 6:00 a.m. if, at the time of such operation, the holder
is accompanied by the holder’s parent, guardian, or custodian, and the parent,
guardian, or custodian holds a current valid driver’s or commercial driver’s
license issued by this state, is actually occupying a seat beside the permit
holder, and does not have a prohibited concentration of alcohol in the whole
blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine as provided in Ohio R.C. 4511.19
(A).
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4507.05(F), (I))
§ 436.035  DRIVING WITH PROBATIONARY LICENSE.
   (a)   (1)   A.   No holder of a probationary driver’s license who has held
the license for less than 12 months shall operate a motor vehicle upon a
highway or any public or private property used by the public for purposes of
vehicular travel or parking between the hours of midnight and 6:00 a.m. unless
the holder is accompanied by the holder’s parent or guardian.
         B.   No holder of a probationary driver’s license who has held the
license for 12 months or longer shall operate a motor vehicle upon a highway or
any public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular
travel or parking between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. unless the
holder is accompanied by the holder’s parent or guardian.
      (2)   A.   Subject to division (c)(1) of this section, division (a)(1)A.
of this section does not apply to the holder of a probationary driver’s license
who is doing either of the following:
            1.   Traveling to or from work between the hours of midnight and 6:
00 a.m., provided that the holder has in the holder’s immediate possession
written documentation from the holder’s employer.
            2.   Traveling to or from an official function sponsored by the
school the holder attends between the hours of midnight and 6:00 a.m., provided
that the holder has in the holder’s immediate possession written documentation
from an appropriate official of the school;
            3.   Traveling to or from an official religious event between the
hours of midnight and 6:00 a.m., provided that the holder has in the holder’s
immediate possession written documentation from an appropriate official
affiliated with the event.
         B.   Division (a)(1)B. of this section does not apply to the holder of
a probationary driver’s license who is doing either of the following:
            1.   Traveling to or from work between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and
5:00 a.m., provided that the holder has in the holder’s immediate possession
written documentation from the holder’s employer.
            2.   Traveling to or from an official function sponsored by the
school the holder attends between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m.,
provided that the holder has in the holder’s immediate possession written
documentation from an appropriate official of the school;
            3.   Traveling to or from an official religious event between the
hours of 1:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m., provided that the holder has in the holder’s
immediate possession written documentation from an appropriate official
affiliated with the event.
      (3)   An employer, school official, or official affiliated with a
religious event is not liable in damages in a civil action for any injury,
death, or loss to person or property that allegedly arises from, or is related
to, the fact that the employer, school official, or official affiliated with a
religious event provided the holder of a probationary driver’s license with the
written documentation described in division (a)(2) of this section. The
Registrar of Motor Vehicles shall make available at no cost a form to serve as
the written documentation described in division (a)(2) of this section, and
employers, school officials, officials affiliated with religious events, and
holders of probationary driver’s licenses may utilize that form or may choose
to utilize any other written documentation to meet the requirements of that
division.
      (4)   No holder of a probationary driver’s license who has held the
license for less than 12 months shall operate a motor vehicle upon a highway or
any public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular
travel or parking with more than one person who is not a family member
occupying the vehicle unless the probationary license holder is accompanied by
the probationary license holder’s parent, guardian, or custodian.
   (b)   It is an affirmative defense to a violation of division (a)(1)A. or
(a)(1)B. of this section if, at the time of the violation, an emergency existed
that required the holder of the probationary driver’s license to operate a
motor vehicle in violation of division (a)(1)A. or (a)(1)B. of this section or
the holder was an emancipated minor.
   (c)   (1)   If a person is issued a probationary driver’s license prior to
attaining the age of 17 years and the person pleads guilty to, is convicted of,
or is adjudicated in juvenile court of having committed a moving violation
during the six-month period commencing on the date on which the person is
issued the probationary driver’s license, the court with jurisdiction over the
violation may order that the holder must be accompanied by the holder’s parent
or guardian whenever the holder is operating a motor vehicle upon a highway or
any public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular
travel or parking for a period not to exceed six months or the date the holder
attains the age of 17 years, whichever occurs first.
      (2)   Any person who is subject to the operating restrictions established
under division (c)(1) of this section as a result of a first moving violation
may petition the court for driving privileges without being accompanied by the
holder’s parent or guardian during the period of time determined by the court
under that division. In granting the driving privileges, the court shall
specify the purposes of the privileges and shall issue the person appropriate
forms setting forth the privileges granted. If a person is convicted of, pleads
guilty to, or is adjudicated in juvenile court of having committed a second or
subsequent moving violation, the court with jurisdiction over the violation may
terminate any driving privileges previously granted under this division.
      (3)   No person shall violate any operating restriction imposed under
division (c)(1) or (c)(2) of this section.
   (d)   No holder of a probationary license shall operate a motor vehicle upon
a highway or any public or private property used by the public for purposes of
vehicular travel or parking unless the total number of occupants of the vehicle
does not exceed the total number of occupant restraining devices originally
installed in the motor vehicle by its manufacturer, and each occupant of the
vehicle is wearing all of the available elements of a properly adjusted
occupant restraining device.
   (e)   A restricted license may be issued to a person who is 14 or 15 years
of age under proof of hardship satisfactory to the Registrar of Motor Vehicles.
   (f)   Notwithstanding any other provisions of law to the contrary, no law
enforcement officer shall cause the operator of a motor vehicle being operated
on any street or highway to stop the motor vehicle for the sole purpose of
determining whether each occupant of the motor vehicle is wearing all of the
available elements of a properly adjusted occupant restraining device as
required by division (d) of this section, or for the sole purpose of issuing a
ticket, citation or summons if that requirement has been or is being violated,
or for causing the arrest of or commencing a prosecution of a person for a
violation of that requirement.
   (g)   Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, no law
enforcement officer shall cause the operator of a motor vehicle being operated
on any street or highway to stop the motor vehicle for the sole purpose of
determining whether a violation of division (a)(1)A. or (a)(1)B. of this
section has been or is being committed or for the sole purpose of issuing a
ticket, citation or summons for such a violation or for causing the arrest or
commencing a prosecution of a person for such a violation.
   (h)   As used in this section:
      (1)   “Family member” of a probationary license holder includes any of
the following:
         A.   A spouse;
         B.   A child or stepchild;
         C.   A parent, stepparent, grandparent, or parent-in-law;
         D.   An aunt or uncle;
         E.   A sibling, whether of the whole or half blood or by adoption, a
brother-in-law, or a sister-in-law;
         F.   A son or daughter of the probationary license holder’s stepparent
if the stepparent has not adopted the probationary license holder;
         G.   An eligible adult, as defined in Ohio R.C. 4507.05.
      (2)   “Moving violation” means any violation of any statute or ordinance
that regulates the operation of vehicles on the highways or streets. “Moving
violation” does not include a violation of Ohio R.C. 4513.263 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, or a violation of any statute or
ordinance regulating pedestrians or the parking of vehicles, vehicle size or
load limitations, vehicle fitness requirements, or vehicle registration.
      (3)   “Occupant restraining device” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C.
4513.263.
   (i)   Whoever violates divisions (a)(1), (a)(4), (c)(3), or (d) of this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4507.071(B) - (J))
§ 436.04  CERTAIN ACTS PROHIBITED.
   (a)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Display or cause or permit to be displayed, or possess any
identification card, driver’s or commercial driver’s license, temporary
instruction permit, or commercial driver’s license temporary instruction permit
knowing the same to be fictitious, or to have been canceled, suspended, or
altered;
      (2)   Lend to a person not entitled thereto, or knowingly permit a person
not entitled thereto to use any identification card, driver’s or commercial
driver’s license, temporary instruction permit or commercial driver’s license
temporary instruction permit issued to the person so lending or permitting the
use thereof;
      (3)   Display, or represent as one’s own, any identification card,
driver’s or commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction permit, or
commercial driver’s license temporary instruction permit not issued to the
person so displaying the same;
      (4)   Fail to surrender to the Registrar of Motor Vehicles, upon the
Registrar’s demand, any identification card, driver’s or commercial driver’s
license, temporary instruction permit, or commercial driver’s license temporary
instruction permit that has been suspended or canceled;
      (5)   In any application for an identification card, driver’s or
commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction permit, or commercial
driver’s license temporary instruction permit or any renewal or duplicate
thereof, knowingly conceal a material fact or present any physician’s statement
required under Ohio R.C. 4507.08 or 4507.081 when knowing the same to be false
or fictitious.
   (b)   Whoever violates any division of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(ORC 4507.30)
§ 436.05  OWNER OR OPERATOR ALLOWING ANOTHER TO DRIVE.
   (a)   No person shall permit a motor vehicle owned by the person or under
the person’s control to be driven by another if any of the following apply:
      (1)   The offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe that the
other person does not have a valid driver’s or commercial driver’s license or
permit or valid nonresident driving privileges.
      (2)   The offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe that the
other person’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit or nonresident
operating privileges have been suspended or canceled under Ohio R.C. Chapter
4510 or any other provision of the Revised Code.
      (3)   The offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe that the
other person’s act of driving the motor vehicle would violate any prohibition
contained in Ohio R.C. Chapter 4509.
      (4)   The offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe that the
other person’s act of driving would violate Ohio R.C. 4511.19 or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (b)   Without limiting or precluding the consideration of any other evidence
in determining whether a violation of division (a)(1), (2), (3), or (4) of this
section has occurred, it shall be prima facie evidence that the offender knows
or has reasonable cause to believe that the operator of the motor vehicle owned
by the offender or under the offender’s control is in a category described in
division (a)(1), (2), (3), or (4) of this section if any of the following
applies:
      (1)   Regarding an operator allegedly in the category described in
division (a)(1) or (3) of this section, the offender and the operator of the
motor vehicle reside in the same household and are related by consanguinity or
affinity.
      (2)   Regarding an operator allegedly in the category described in
division (a)(2) of this section, the offender and the operator of the motor
vehicle reside in the same household, and the offender knows or has reasonable
cause to believe that the operator has been charged with or convicted of any
violation of law or ordinance, or has committed any other act or omission, that
would or could result in the suspension or cancellation of the operator’s
license, permit, or privilege.
      (3)   Regarding an operator allegedly in the category described in
division (a)(4) of this section, the offender and the operator of the motor
vehicle occupied the motor vehicle together at the time of the offense.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of wrongful entrustment of a
motor vehicle, and shall be punished as provided in divisions (c) to (h) of
this section.
      (1)   Except as provided in division (c)(2) of this section, whoever
violates division (a)(1), (a)(2), or (a)(3) of this section is guilty of an
unclassified misdemeanor. When the offense is an unclassified misdemeanor, the
offender shall be sentenced pursuant to §
698.02, §
698.03 or Ohio R.C. 2929.21 to 2929.28, except that the offender shall not be
sentenced to a jail term; the offender shall not be sentenced to a community
residential sanction pursuant to §
698.02(d) or Ohio R.C. 2929.26; notwithstanding §
698.02(f)(1)B.1. and Ohio R.C. 2929.28(A)(2)(a), the offender may be fined up
to one thousand dollars ($1,000); and, notwithstanding §
698.02(e)(1)C. and Ohio R.C. 2929.27(A)(3), the offender may be ordered
pursuant to §
698.02(e)(3) or Ohio R.C. 2929.27(C) to serve a term of community service of up
to 500 hours. The failure of an offender to complete a term of community
service imposed by the court may be punished as indirect criminal contempt
under Ohio R.C. 2705.02(A) that may be filed in the underlying case.
      (2)   A.   If, within three years of a violation of division (a)(1), (a)
(2), or (a)(3) of this section, the offender previously has pleaded guilty to
or been convicted of two or more violations of division (a)(1), (a)(2), or (a)
(3) of this section, Ohio R.C. 4511.203(A)(1), (a)(2), or (a)(3), or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the offender is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
         B.   Whoever violates division (a)(4) or (a)(5) of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (3)   For any violation of this section, in addition to the penalties
imposed under this Code or Ohio R.C. Chapter 2929, the court may impose a class
seven suspension of the offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s
license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident
operating privilege from the range specified in Ohio R.C. 4510.02(A)(7), and,
if the vehicle involved in the offense is registered in the name of the
offender, the court may order one of the following:
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in division (c)(3)B. or (c)(3)C. of
this section, the court may order, for 30 days, the immobilization of the
vehicle involved in the offense and the impoundment of that vehicle’s license
plates. If issued, the order shall be issued and enforced under Ohio R.C.
4503.233.
         B.   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one violation of this section, Ohio R.C. 4511.203, or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, the court may order, for 60 days, the
immobilization of the vehicle involved in the offense and the impoundment of
that vehicle’s license plates. If issued, the order shall be issued and
enforced under Ohio R.C. 4503.233.
         C.   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to two or more violations of this section, Ohio R.C. 4511.203, or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the court may order the criminal
forfeiture to the state of the vehicle involved in the offense. If issued, the
order shall be issued and enforced under Ohio R.C. 4503.234.
      (4)   If title to a motor vehicle that is subject to an order for
criminal forfeiture under division (c)(3)C. of this section is assigned or
transferred and Ohio R.C. 4503.234(B)(2) or (B)(3) applies, in addition to or
independent of any other penalty established by law, the court may fine the
offender the value of the vehicle as determined by publications of the National
Automobile Dealers Association. The proceeds from any fine imposed under this
division shall be distributed in accordance with Ohio R.C. 4503.234(C)(2).
   (d)   If a court orders the criminal forfeiture of a vehicle under division
(c)(3)A. or (c)(3)B. of this section, the court shall not release the vehicle
from the immobilization before the termination of the period of immobilization
ordered unless the court is presented with current proof of financial
responsibility with respect to that vehicle.
   (e)   If a court orders the criminal forfeiture of a vehicle under division
(c)(3)C. of this section, upon receipt of the order from the court, neither the
Registrar of Motor Vehicles nor any deputy registrar shall accept any
application for the registration or transfer of registration of any motor
vehicle owned or leased by the person named in the order. The period of denial
shall be five years after the date the order is issued, unless, during that
five-year period, the court with jurisdiction of the offense that resulted in
the order terminates the forfeiture and notifies the Registrar of the
termination. If the court terminates the forfeiture and notifies the Registrar,
the Registrar shall take all necessary measures to permit the person to
register a vehicle owned or leased by the person or to transfer the
registration of the vehicle.
   (f)   This section does not apply to motor vehicle rental dealers or motor
vehicle leasing dealers, as defined in Ohio R.C. 4549.65.
   (g)   Evidence of a conviction of, plea of guilty to, or adjudication as a
delinquent child for a violation of this section shall not be admissible as
evidence in any civil action that involves the offender or delinquent child who
is the subject of the conviction, plea, or adjudication and that arises from
the wrongful entrustment of a motor vehicle.
   (h)   As used in this section, a vehicle is owned by a person if, at the
time of a violation of this section, the vehicle is registered in the person’s
name.
(ORC 4511.203)
§ 436.06  DISPLAY OF LICENSE.
   (a)   The operator of a motor vehicle shall display the operator’s driver’s
license, or furnish satisfactory proof that the operator has a driver’s
license, upon demand of any peace officer or of any person damaged or injured
in any collision in which the licensee may be involved. When a demand is
properly made, and the operator has the operator’s driver’s license on or about
the operator’s person, the operator shall not refuse to display the license. A
person’s failure to furnish satisfactory evidence that the person is licensed
under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4507 when the person does not have the person’s license
on or about the person’s person shall be prima facie evidence of the person’s
not having obtained a driver’s license.
   (b)   (1)   Except as provided in division (b)(2) of this section, whoever
violates this section is guilty of an unclassified misdemeanor. When the
offense is an unclassified misdemeanor, the offender shall be sentenced
pursuant to §
698.02, §
698.03 or Ohio R.C. 2929.21 to 2929.28, except that the offender shall not be
sentenced to a jail term; the offender shall not be sentenced to a community
residential sanction pursuant to §
698.02(d) or Ohio R.C. 2929.26; notwithstanding §
698.02(f)(1)B.1. and Ohio R.C. 2929.28(A)(2)(a), the offender may be fined up
to one thousand dollars ($1,000); and notwithstanding §
698.02(e)(1)C. and Ohio R.C. 2929.27(A)(3), the offender may be ordered
pursuant to §
698.02(e)(3) or Ohio R.C. 2929.27(C) to serve a term of community service of up
to 500 hours. The failure of an offender to complete a term of community
service imposed by the court may be punished as indirect criminal contempt
under Ohio R.C. 2705.02(A) that may be filed in the underlying case.
      (2)   If, within three years of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations of this section,
Ohio R.C. 4507.35, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the
offense is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(ORC 4507.35)
§ 436.07  DRIVING UNDER SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OR WITHOUT PROOF OF FINANCIAL
RESPONSIBILITY OR IN VIOLATION OF LICENSE RESTRICTIONS. (REPEALED)
   (EDITOR’S NOTE:  Section 436.07 was repealed as part of the 2004 updating
and revision of this Municipal Code because substantially equivalent state law
(Ohio R.C. 4507.02(B) - (H)) was repealed by the Ohio General Assembly. See §§
436.071 through
436.075 for current provisions.)
§ 436.071  DRIVING UNDER SUSPENSION OR IN VIOLATION OF LICENSE RESTRICTION.
   (a)   Driving under suspension or in violation of license restriction.
      (1)   Except as provided in division (a)(2) of this section, division (b)
of this section, §
436.074 and in Ohio R.C. 4510.111 and 4510.16, no person whose driver’s or
commercial driver’s license or permit or nonresident operating privilege has
been suspended under any provision of the Revised Code, other than Ohio R.C.
Chapter 4509, or under any applicable law in any other jurisdiction in which
the person’s license or permit was issued shall operate any motor vehicle upon
the public roads and highways or upon any public or private property used by
the public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking within this municipality
during the period of suspension unless the person is granted limited driving
privileges and is operating the vehicle in accordance with the terms of the
limited driving privileges.
      (2)   No person shall operate any motor vehicle upon a highway or any
public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel
or parking in this municipality in violation of any restriction of the person’s
driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit imposed under Ohio R.C.
4506.10(D) or 4507.14.
      (3)   Upon the request or motion of the prosecuting authority, a
noncertified copy of the law enforcement automated data system report or a
noncertified copy of a record of the Registrar of Motor Vehicles that shows the
name, date of birth, and social security number of a person charged with a
violation of division (a)(1) or (a)(2) of this section may be admitted into
evidence as prima facie evidence that the license of the person was under
suspension at the time of the alleged violation of division (a)(1) of this
section or the person operated a motor vehicle in violation of a restriction at
the time of the alleged violation of division (a)(2) of this section. The
person charged with a violation of division (a)(1) or (a)(2) of this section
may offer evidence to rebut this prima facie evidence.
      (4)   A.   Whoever violates division (a)(1) or (a)(2) of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. The court may impose upon the
offender a class seven suspension of the offender’s driver’s license,
commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction permit, probationary
license, or nonresident operating privilege from the range specified in Ohio
R.C. 4510.02(A)(7).
         B.   1.   Except as provided in division (a)(4)B.2. or (a)(4)B.3. of
this section, the court, in addition to any other penalty that it imposes on
the offender and if the vehicle is registered in the offender’s name and if,
within three years of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted
of or pleaded guilty to one violation of this section, Ohio R.C. 4510.11,
4510.111 or 4510.16, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the
court, in addition to or independent of any other sentence that it imposes upon
the offender, may order the immobilization of the vehicle involved in the
offense for 30 days and the impoundment of that vehicle’s license plates for 30
days in accordance with Ohio R.C. 4503.233.
            2.   If the vehicle is registered in the offender’s name and if,
within three years of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted
of or pleaded guilty to two violations of this section, or any combination of
two violations of this section, Ohio R.C. 4510.11, 4510.111 or 4510.16, or of a
substantially similar municipal ordinance, the court, in addition to any other
sentence that it imposes on the offender, may order the immobilization of the
vehicle involved in the offense for 60 days and the impoundment of that
vehicle’s license plates for 60 days in accordance with Ohio R.C. 4503.233.
            3.   If the vehicle is registered in the offender’s name and if,
within three years of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted
of or pleaded guilty to three or more violations of this section, or any
combination of three or more violations of this section or Ohio R.C. 4510.11,
4510.111 or 4510.16, or of a substantially similar municipal ordinance, the
court, in addition to any other sentence that it imposes on the offender, may
order the criminal forfeiture of the vehicle involved in the offense to the
state.
      (5)   Any order for immobilization and impoundment under this section
shall be issued and enforced under Ohio R.C. 4503.233 and 4507.02, as
applicable. The court shall not release a vehicle from immobilization ordered
under this section unless the court is presented with current proof of
financial responsibility with respect to that vehicle.
      (6)   Any order of criminal forfeiture under this section shall be issued
and enforced under Ohio R.C. 4503.234. Upon receipt of the copy of the order
from the court, neither the Registrar of Motor Vehicles nor a deputy registrar
shall accept any application for the registration or transfer of registration
of any motor vehicle owned or leased by the person named in the declaration of
forfeiture. The period of registration denial shall be five years after the
date of the order, unless, during that period, the court having jurisdiction of
the offense that led to the order terminates the forfeiture and notifies the
registrar of the termination. The registrar then shall take necessary measures
to permit the person to register a vehicle owned or leased by the person or to
transfer registration of the vehicle.
      (7)   The offender shall provide the court with proof of financial
responsibility as defined in Ohio R.C. 4509.01. If the offender fails to
provide that proof of financial responsibility, then, in addition to any other
penalties provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to §
698.02(f) or Ohio R.C. 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding five thousand dollars
($5,000) for any economic loss arising from an accident or collision that was
the direct and proximate result of the offender’s operation of the vehicle
before, during, or after committing the offense for which the offender is
sentenced under this section.
(ORC 4510.11)
   (b)   Driving under suspension in violation of other provisions.
      (1)   No person shall operate any motor vehicle upon a highway or any
public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel
or parking in this municipality whose driver’s or commercial driver’s license
has been suspended pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2151.354, 2151.87, 2935.27, 3123.58,
4301.99, 4510.032, 4510.22, or 4510.33, or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance.
      (2)   Upon the request or motion of the prosecuting authority, a
noncertified copy of the law enforcement automated data system report or a
noncertified copy of a record of the Registrar of Motor Vehicles that shows the
name, date of birth, and social security number of a person charged with a
violation of division (b)(1) of this section may be admitted into evidence as
prima facie evidence that the license of the person was under suspension at the
time of the alleged violation of division (b)(1) of this section. The person
charged with a violation of division (b)(1) of this section may offer evidence
to rebut this prima facie evidence.
      (3)   Whoever violates division (b)(1) of this section is guilty of
driving under suspension and shall be punished as provided in division (b)(3)A.
or division (b)(3)B. of this section.
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in division (b)(3)B. of this
section, the offense is an unclassified misdemeanor. The offender shall be
sentenced pursuant to §
698.02, §
698.03 or Ohio R.C. 2929.21 to 2929.28, except that the offender shall not be
sentenced to a jail term; the offender shall not be sentenced to a community
residential sanction pursuant to §
698.02(d) or Ohio R.C. 2929.26; notwithstanding §
698.02(f)(1)B.1. and Ohio R.C. 2929.28(A)(2)(a), the offender may be fined up
to one thousand dollars ($1,000); and, notwithstanding §
698.02(e)(1)C. and Ohio R.C. 2929.27(A)(3), the offender may be ordered
pursuant to §
698.02(e)(3) or Ohio R.C. 2929.27(C) to serve a term of community service of up
to 500 hours. The failure of an offender to complete a term of community
service imposed by the court may be punished as indirect criminal contempt
under Ohio R.C. 2705.02(A) that may be filed in the underlying case.
         B.   If, within three years of the offense, the offender previously
was convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations of division (b)(1)
of this section, or any combination of two or more violations of division (b)
(1) of this section, Ohio R.C. 4510.11, 4510.111 or 4510.16, or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, the offense is a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree, and the offender shall provide the court with proof of financial
responsibility as defined in R.C. § 4509.01. If the offender fails to provide
that proof of financial responsibility, then in addition to any other penalties
provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to R.C. § 2929.28 in
an amount not exceeding $5,000 for any economic loss arising from an accident
or collision that was the direct and proximate result of the offender’s
operation of the vehicle before, during, or after committing the offense for
which the offender is sentenced under this section.
(ORC 4510.111)
   (c)   Repeat traffic offender; point system suspension. Any person whose
driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit or nonresident operating
privileges are suspended as a repeat traffic offender under Ohio R.C. 4510.037
and who, during the suspension, operates any motor vehicle upon any public
roads and highways is guilty of driving under a twelve-point suspension, a
misdemeanor of the first degree. The court shall sentence the offender to a
minimum term of three days in jail. No court shall suspend the first three days
of jail time imposed pursuant to this division.
(ORC 4510.037(J))
   (d)   It is an affirmative defense to any prosecution brought under division
(a) of this section that the alleged offender drove under suspension, without a
valid permit or driver’s or commercial driver’s license, or in violation of a
restriction because of a substantial emergency, and because no other person was
reasonably available to drive in response to the emergency.
(ORC 4510.04)
§ 436.072  OPERATING MOTOR VEHICLE OR MOTORCYCLE WITHOUT VALID LICENSE.
   (a)   (1)   No person, except those expressly exempted under Ohio R.C.
4507.03, 4507.04, and 4507.05, shall operate any motor vehicle upon a public
road or highway or any public or private property used by the public for
purposes of vehicular travel or parking in this municipality unless the person
has a valid driver’s license issued under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4507 or a
commercial driver’s license issued under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4506.
      (2)   No person, except a person expressly exempted under Ohio R.C.
4507.03, 4507.04, and 4507.05, shall operate any motorcycle upon a public road
or highway or any public or private property used by the public for purposes of
vehicular travel or parking in this municipality unless the person has a valid
license as a motorcycle operator that was issued upon application by the
Registrar of Motor Vehicles under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4507. The license shall be
in the form of an endorsement, as determined by the Registrar, upon a driver’s
or commercial driver’s license, if the person has a valid license to operate a
motor vehicle or commercial motor vehicle, or in the form of a restricted
license as provided in Ohio R.C. 4507.14, if the person does not have a valid
license to operate a motor vehicle or commercial motor vehicle.
   (b)   Upon the request or motion of the prosecuting authority, a
noncertified copy of the law enforcement automated data system report or a
noncertified copy of a record of the registrar of motor vehicles that shows the
name, date of birth, and social security number of a person charged with a
violation of division (a)(1) or (a)(2) of this section may be admitted into
evidence as prima facie evidence that the person did not have either a valid
driver’s or commercial driver’s license at the time of the alleged violation of
division (a)(1) of this section or a valid license as a motorcycle operator
either in the form of an endorsement upon a driver’s or commercial driver’s
license or a restricted license at the time of the alleged violation of
division (a)(2) of this section. The person charged with a violation of
division (a)(1) or (a)(2) of this section may offer evidence to rebut this
prima facie evidence.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of operating a motor vehicle
or motorcycle without a valid license and shall be punished as follows:
      (1)   If the trier of fact finds that the offender never has held a valid
driver’s or commercial driver’s license issued by this state or any other
jurisdiction, or, in a case involving the operation of a motorcycle by the
offender, if the offender has never held a valid license as a motorcycle
operator, either in the form of an endorsement upon a driver’s or commercial
driver’s license or in the form of a restricted license, except as otherwise
provided in this division, the offense is an unclassified misdemeanor. When the
offense is an unclassified misdemeanor, the offender shall be sentenced
pursuant to §
698.02, § 698.03 or Ohio R.C. 2929.21 to 2929.28, except that the offender
shall not be sentenced to a jail term; the offender shall not be sentenced to a
community residential sanction pursuant to §
698.02(d) or Ohio R.C. 2929.26; notwithstanding §
698.02(f)(1)B.1. and Ohio R.C. 2929.28(A)(2)(a), the offender may be fined up
to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00); and, notwithstanding §
698.02(e)(1)C. and Ohio R.C. 2929.27(A)(3), the offender may be ordered
pursuant to §
698.02(e)(3) or Ohio R.C. 2929.27(C) to serve a term of community service of up
to 500 hours. The failure of an offender to complete a term of community
service imposed by the court may be punished as indirect criminal contempt
under Ohio R.C. 2705.02(A) that may be filed in the underlying case. If the
offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to any violation of
this section or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the offense is
a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (2)   If the offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit
or, in a case involving the operation of a motorcycle by the offender, the
offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license bearing the motorcycle
endorsement or the offender’s restricted license was expired at the time of the
offense, except as otherwise provided in this division, the offense is a minor
misdemeanor. If within three years of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations of this section
or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the offense is a misdemeanor
of the first degree.
   (d)   The court shall not impose a license suspension for a first violation
of this section or if more than three years have passed since the offender’s
last violation of Ohio R.C. 4510.12, this section, or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (e)   If the offender is sentenced under division (c)(2) of this section, if
within three years of the offense the offender previously  was convicted of or
pleaded guilty to one or more violations of Ohio R.C. 4510.12, this section, or
a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance within the past three years, and
if the offender’s license was expired for more than six months at the time of
the offense, the court may impose a class seven suspension of the offender’s
driver license, commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction permit,
probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege from the range
specified in Ohio R.C. 4510.02(A)(7).
(ORC 4510.12)
§ 436.073  DRIVING UNDER O.V.I. SUSPENSION.
   (a)   No person whose driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit or
nonresident operating privilege has been suspended under Ohio R.C. 4511.19,
4511.191, or 4511.196 or under Ohio R.C. 4510.07 for a conviction of a
violation of a municipal O.V.I. ordinance shall operate any motor vehicle upon
the public roads or highways within this municipality during the period of the
suspension.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of driving under O.V.I.
suspension. The court shall sentence the offender under Ohio R.C. Chapter 2929,
subject to the differences authorized or required by this section.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (b)(2) or (3) of this
section, driving under O.V.I. suspension is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
The court shall sentence the offender to all of the following:
         A.   A mandatory jail term of three consecutive days. The three-day
term shall be imposed, unless, subject to division (c) of this section, the
court instead imposes a sentence of not less than 30 consecutive days of house
arrest with electronic monitoring. A period of house arrest with electronic
monitoring imposed under this division shall not exceed six months. If the
court imposes a mandatory three-day jail term under this division, the court
may impose a jail term in addition to that term, provided that in no case shall
the cumulative jail term imposed for the offense exceed six months;
         B.   A fine of not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) and
not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00);
         C.   A license suspension under division (e) of this section;
         D.   If the vehicle the offender was operating at the time of the
offense is registered in the offender’s name, immobilization for 30 days of the
offender’s vehicle and impoundment for 30 days of the identification license
plates of that vehicle. The order for immobilization and impoundment shall be
issued and enforced in accordance with Ohio R.C. 4503.233.
      (2)   If, within six years of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one violation of this section or one
equivalent offense, driving under O.V.I. suspension is a misdemeanor of the
first degree. The court shall sentence the offender to all of the following:
         A.   A mandatory jail term of 10 consecutive days. Notwithstanding the
jail terms provided in Ohio R.C. 2929.21 to 2929.28, the court may sentence the
offender to a longer jail term of not more than one year. The 10-day mandatory
jail term shall be imposed unless, subject to division (c) of this section, the
court instead imposes a sentence of not less than 90 consecutive days of house
arrest with electronic monitoring. The period of house arrest with electronic
monitoring shall not exceed one year;
         B.   Notwithstanding the fines provided for in Ohio R.C. Chapter 2929,
a fine of not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) and not more than two
thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00);
         C.   A license suspension under division (e) of this section;
         D.   If the vehicle the offender was operating at the time of the
offense is registered in the offender’s name, immobilization of the offender’s
vehicle for 60 days and the impoundment for 60 days of the identification
license plates of that vehicle. The order for immobilization and impoundment
shall be issued and enforced in accordance with Ohio R.C. 4503.233.
      (3)   If, within six years of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations of this section
or two or more equivalent offenses, driving under O.V.I. suspension is a
misdemeanor. The court shall sentence the offender to all of the following:
         A.   A mandatory jail term of 30 consecutive days. Notwithstanding the
jail terms provided in Ohio R.C. 2929.21 to 2929.28, the court may sentence the
offender to a longer jail term of not more than one year. The court shall not
sentence the offender to a term of house arrest with electronic monitoring in
lieu of the mandatory portion of the jail term;
         B.   Notwithstanding the fines set forth in Ohio R.C. Chapter 2929, a
fine of not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) and not more than two
thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00);
         C.   A license suspension under division (e) of this section;
         D.   If the vehicle the offender was operating at the time of the
offense is registered in the offender’s name, criminal forfeiture to the state
of the offender’s vehicle. The order of criminal forfeiture shall be issued and
enforced in accordance with Ohio R.C. 4503.234. If title to a motor vehicle
that is subject to an order for criminal forfeiture under this division is
assigned or transferred and Ohio R.C. 4503.234(B)(2) or (3) applies, the court
may fine the offender the value of the vehicle as determined by publications of
the National Automobile Dealers Association. The proceeds from any fine so
imposed shall be distributed in accordance with Ohio R.C. 4503.234(C)(2).
   (c)   (1)   No court shall impose an alternative sentence of house arrest
with electronic monitoring under division (b)(1) or (2) of this section unless,
within 60 days of the date of sentencing, the court issues a written finding on
the record that, due to the unavailability of space at the jail where the
offender is required to serve the jail term imposed, the offender will not be
able to begin serving that term within the 60-day period following the date of
sentencing.
      (2)   An offender sentenced under this section to a period of house
arrest with electronic monitoring shall be permitted work release during that
period.
   (d)   Fifty percent of any fine imposed by a court under division (b)(1),
(2), or (3) of this section shall be deposited into the Municipal Indigent
Drivers’ Alcohol Treatment Fund under the control of that court, as created by
the municipality pursuant to Ohio R.C. 4511.191(H).
   (e)   In addition to or independent of all other penalties provided by law
or ordinance, the trial judge of any court of record or the mayor of a mayor’s
court shall impose on an offender who is convicted of or pleads guilty to a
violation of this section a class seven suspension of the offender’s driver’s
or commercial driver’s license or permit or nonresident operating privilege
from the range specified in Ohio R.C. 4510.02 (A)(7).
      (1)   When permitted as specified in Ohio R.C. 4510.021, if the court
grants limited driving privileges during a suspension imposed under this
section, the privileges shall be granted on the additional condition that the
offender must display restricted license plates, issued under Ohio R.C.
4503.231, on the vehicle driven subject to the privileges, except as provided
in Ohio R.C. 4503.231(B).
      (2)   A suspension of a commercial driver’s license under this section
shall be concurrent with any period of suspension or disqualification under
Ohio R.C. 3123.58 or 4506.16. No person who is disqualified for life from
holding a commercial driver’s license under Ohio R.C. 4506.16 shall be issued a
driver’s license under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4507 during the period for which the
commercial driver’s license was suspended under this section, and no person
whose commercial driver’s license is suspended under this section shall be
issued a driver’s license under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4507 during the period of the
suspension.
   (f)   The offender shall provide the court with proof of financial
responsibility as defined in Ohio R.C. 4509.01. If the offender fails to
provide that proof of financial responsibility, then, in addition to any other
penalties provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to §
698.02(f) or Ohio R.C. 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding five thousand dollars
($5,000) for any economic loss arising from an accident or collision that was
the direct and proximate result of the offender’s operation of the vehicle
before, during, or after committing the offense that is a misdemeanor of the
first degree under this section for which the offender is sentenced.
   (g)   As used in this section:
      (1)   “Electronic monitoring” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C.
2929.01.
      (2)   “Equivalent offense” means any of the following:
         A.   A violation of a municipal ordinance, law of another state, or
law of the United States that is substantially equivalent to division (a) of
this section;
         B.   A violation of a former law of this state that was substantially
equivalent to division (a) of this section.
      (3)   “Jail” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2929.01.
      (4)   “Mandatory jail term” means the mandatory term in jail of 3, 10, or
30 consecutive days that must be imposed under division (b)(1), (2), or (3) of
this section upon an offender convicted of a violation of division (a) of this
section and in relation to which all of the following apply:
         A.   Except as specifically authorized under this section, the term
must be served in a jail.
         B.   Except as specifically authorized under this section, the term
cannot be suspended, reduced, or otherwise modified pursuant to any provision
of the Ohio Revised Code.
(ORC 4510.14)
   (g)   It is an affirmative defense to any prosecution brought under this
section that the alleged offender drove under suspension, without a valid
permit or driver’s or commercial driver’s license, or in violation of a
restriction because of a substantial emergency, and because no other person was
reasonably available to drive in response to the emergency.
(ORC 4510.04)
Statutory reference:
   Immobilization of vehicle; impoundment of license plates; criminal
forfeiture of vehicle, see Ohio R.C. 4510.161
§ 436.074  DRIVING UNDER FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY LAW SUSPENSION OR
CANCELLATION; DRIVING UNDER A NONPAYMENT OF JUDGMENT SUSPENSION.
   (a)   No person, whose driver’s or commercial driver’s license or temporary
instruction permit or nonresident’s operating privilege has been suspended or
canceled pursuant to Ohio R.C. Chapter 4509, shall operate any motor vehicle
within this municipality, or knowingly permit any motor vehicle owned by the
person to be operated by another person in the municipality, during the period
of the suspension or cancellation, except as specifically authorized by Ohio
R.C. Chapter 4509. No person shall operate a motor vehicle within this
municipality, or knowingly permit any motor vehicle owned by the person to be
operated by another person in the municipality, during the period in which the
person is required by Ohio R.C. 4509.45 to file and maintain proof of financial
responsibility for a violation of Ohio R.C. 4509.101, unless proof of financial
responsibility is maintained with respect to that vehicle.
   (b)   No person shall operate any motor vehicle upon a highway or any public
or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel or
parking in this municipality if the person’s driver’s or commercial driver’s
license or temporary instruction permit or nonresident operating privilege has
been suspended pursuant to Ohio R.C. 4509.37 or 4509.40 for nonpayment of a
judgment.
   (c)   Upon the request or motion of the prosecuting authority, a
noncertified copy of the law enforcement automated data system report or a
noncertified copy of a record of the registrar of motor vehicles that shows the
name, date of birth, and social security number of a person charged with a
violation of division (a) or (b) of this section may be admitted into evidence
as prima facie evidence that the license of the person was under either a
financial responsibility law suspension at the time of the alleged violation of
division (a) of this section or a nonpayment of judgment suspension at the time
of the alleged violation of division (b) of this section. The person charged
with a violation of division (a) or (b) of this section may offer evidence to
rebut this prima facie evidence.
   (d)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of driving
under financial responsibility law suspension or cancellation and shall be
punished as provided in this division (d). Whoever violates division (b) of
this section is guilty of driving under a nonpayment of judgment suspension and
shall be punished as provided in this division (d).
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (d)(2) of this
section, the offense is an unclassified misdemeanor. When the offense is an
unclassified misdemeanor, the offender shall be sentenced pursuant to §
698.02, §
698.03 or Ohio R.C. 2929.21 to 2929.28, except that the offender shall not be
sentenced to a jail term; the offender shall not be sentenced to a community
residential sanction pursuant to §
698.02(d) or Ohio R.C. 2929.26; notwithstanding §
698.02(f)(1)B.1. and Ohio R.C. 2929.28(A)(2)(a), the offender may be fined up
to one thousand dollars ($1,000); and, notwithstanding §
698.02(e)(1)C. and Ohio R.C. 2929.27(A)(3), the offender may be ordered
pursuant to §
698.02(e)(3) or Ohio R.C. 2929.27(C) to serve a term of community service of up
to 500 hours. The failure of an offender to complete a term of community
service imposed by the court may be punished as indirect criminal contempt
under Ohio R.C. 2705.02(A) that may be filed in the underlying case.
      (2)   If, within three years of the offense, the offender previously was
convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations of this section, or
any combination of two violations of this section, Ohio R.C. 4510.11, 4510.111
or 4510.16, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the offense is a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (3)   The offender shall provide the court with proof of financial
responsibility as defined in R.C. § 4509.01. If the offender fails to provide
that proof of financial responsibility, then in addition to any other penalties
provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to R.C. § 2929.28 in
an amount not exceeding $5,000 for any economic loss arising from an accident
or collision that was the direct and proximate result of the offender’s
operation of the vehicle before, during, or after committing the offense for
which the offender is sentenced under this section.
(ORC 4510.16)
   (e)   (1)   It is an affirmative defense to any prosecution brought under
this section that the alleged offender drove under suspension, without a valid
permit or driver’s or commercial driver’s license, or in violation of a
restriction because of a substantial emergency, and because no other person was
reasonably available to drive in response to the emergency.
      (2)   It is an affirmative defense to any prosecution brought under this
section that the order of suspension resulted from the failure of the alleged
offender to respond to a financial responsibility random verification request
under Ohio R.C. 4509.101(A)(3)(c) and that, at the time of the initial
financial responsibility random verification request, the alleged offender was
in compliance with Ohio R.C. 4509.101(A)(1) as shown by proof of financial
responsibility that was in effect at the time of that request.
(ORC 4510.04)
Statutory reference:
   Immobilization of vehicle; impoundment of license plates; criminal
forfeiture of vehicle, see Ohio R.C. 4510.161
§ 436.075  FAILURE TO REINSTATE LICENSE.
   (a)   No person whose driver’s license, commercial driver’s license,
temporary instruction permit, or nonresident’s operating privilege has been
suspended shall operate any motor vehicle upon a public road or highway or any
public or private property after the suspension has expired unless the person
has complied with all license reinstatement requirements imposed by the court,
the Bureau of Motor Vehicles, or another provision of the Ohio Revised Code.
   (b)   Upon the request or motion of the prosecuting authority, a
noncertified copy of the law enforcement automated data system report or a
noncertified copy of a record of the registrar of motor vehicles that shows the
name, date of birth, and social security number of a person charged with a
violation of division (a) of this section may be admitted into evidence as
prima facie evidence that the license of the person had not been reinstated by
the person at the time of the alleged violation of division (a) of this
section. The person charged with a violation of division (a) of this section
may offer evidence to rebut this prima facie evidence.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of failure to reinstate a
license, and shall be punished as follows:
      (1)   Except as provided in division (c)(2) of this section, whoever
violates this section is guilty of an unclassified misdemeanor. When the
offense is an unclassified misdemeanor, the offender shall be sentenced
pursuant to §
698.02, §
698.03 or Ohio R.C. 2929.21 to 2929.28, except that the offender shall not be
sentenced to a jail term; the offender shall not be sentenced to a community
residential sanction pursuant to §
698.02(d) or Ohio R.C. 2929.26; notwithstanding §
698.02(f)(1)B.1. and Ohio R.C. 2929.28(A)(2)(a), the offender may be fined up
to one thousand dollars ($1,000); and, notwithstanding §
698.02(e)(1)C. and Ohio R.C. 2929.27(A)(3), the offender may be ordered
pursuant to §
698.02(e)(3) or Ohio R.C. 2929.27(C) to serve a term of community service of up
to 500 hours. The failure of an offender to complete a term of community
service imposed by the court may be punished as indirect criminal contempt
under Ohio R.C. 2705.02(A) that may be filed in the underlying case.
      (2)   If, within three years of a violation of division (a) of this
section, the offender previously has pleaded guilty to or been convicted of two
or more violations of this section, Ohio R.C. 4510.21 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
first degree.
      (3)   In all cases, the court may impose upon the offender a class seven
suspension of the offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s license,
temporary instruction permit, probationary driver's license, or nonresident
operating privilege from the range specified in Ohio R.C. 4510.02(A)(7).
(ORC 4510.21)
   (d)   It is an affirmative defense to any prosecution brought under this
section that the alleged offender drove under suspension, without a valid
permit or driver’s or commercial driver’s license, or in violation of a
restriction because of a substantial emergency, and because no other person was
reasonably available to drive in response to the emergency.
(ORC 4510.04)
§ 436.08  OPERATION OR SALE WITHOUT CERTIFICATE OF TITLE.
   (a)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Operate in this municipality a motor vehicle for which a
certificate of title is required without having that certificate in accordance
with Ohio R.C. Chapter 4505 or, if a physical certificate of title has not been
issued for a motor vehicle, operate the motor vehicle in this state knowing
that the ownership information relating to the vehicle has not been entered
into the automated title processing system by a Clerk of a Court of Common
Pleas;
      (2)   Display or display for sale or sell as a dealer or acting on behalf
of a dealer, a motor vehicle without having obtained a manufacturer’s or
importer’s certificate, a certificate of title, or an assignment of a
certificate of title for it as provided in Ohio R.C. Chapter 4505;
      (3)   Fail to surrender any certificate of title or any certificate of
registration or license plates upon cancellation of the same by the Registrar
of Motor Vehicles and notice of the cancellation as prescribed in Ohio R.C.
Chapter 4505;
      (4)   Fail to surrender the certificate of title to a Clerk of a Court of
Common Pleas as provided in Ohio R.C. Chapter 4505 in case of the destruction
or dismantling or change of a motor vehicle in such respect that it is not the
motor vehicle described in the certificate of title;
      (5)   Violate any rules adopted pursuant to Ohio R.C. Chapter 4505;
      (6)   Except as otherwise provided in Ohio R.C. Chapters 4505 and 4517,
sell at wholesale a motor vehicle ownership of which is not evidenced by an
Ohio certificate of title, or the current certificate of title issued for the
motor vehicle, or the manufacturer’s certificate of origin, and all title
assignments that evidence the seller’s ownership of the motor vehicle, and an
odometer disclosure statement that complies with Ohio R.C. 4505.06 and
subchapter IV of the “Motor Vehicle Information and Cost Savings Act,” 86 Stat.
961 (1972), 15 U.S.C. 1981;
      (7)   Operate in this state a motor vehicle knowing that the certificate
of title to the vehicle or ownership of the vehicle as otherwise reflected in
the automated title processing system has been canceled.
   (b)   This section does not apply to persons engaged in the business of
warehousing or transporting motor vehicles for the purpose of salvage
disposition.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not more than two hundred
dollars ($200.00), imprisoned not more than 90 days, or both.
(ORC 4505.18)
§ 436.09  DISPLAY OF LICENSE PLATES; REGISTRATION; OBSTRUCTIONS.
   (a)   (1)   No person who is the owner or operator of a motor vehicle shall
fail to display in plain view on the front and rear of the motor vehicle a
license plate that bears the distinctive number and registration mark assigned
to the motor vehicle by the Ohio Director of Public Safety, including any
county identification sticker and any validation sticker issued under R.C. §§
4503.19 and 4503.191, except as follows:
         A.   A manufacturer of motor vehicles or dealer therein, the holder of
an in transit permit, and the owner or operator of a motorcycle, motorized
bicycle or moped, motor-driven cycle or motor scooter, autocycle, cab-enclosed
motorcycle, manufactured home, mobile home, trailer, or semitrailer shall
display a license plate on the rear only.
         B.   A motor vehicle that is issued two license plates shall display
the validation sticker only on the rear license plate, except that a commercial
tractor that does not receive an apportioned license plate under the
international registration plan shall display the validation sticker on the
front of the commercial tractor.
         C.   An apportioned vehicle receiving an apportioned license plate
under the international registration plan shall display the license plate only
on the front of a commercial tractor and on the rear of all other vehicles.
      (2)   All license plates shall be securely fastened so as not to swing,
and shall not be covered by any material that obstructs their visibility.
      (3)   No person to whom a temporary license placard or windshield sticker
has been issued for the use of a motor vehicle under R.C. § 4503.182, and no
operator of that motor vehicle, shall fail to display the temporary license
placard in plain view from the rear of the vehicle either in the rear window or
on an external rear surface of the motor vehicle, or fail to display the
windshield sticker in plain view on the rear window of the motor vehicle. No
temporary license placard or windshield sticker shall be covered by any
material that obstructs its visibility.
      (4)   A law enforcement officer shall only issue a ticket, citation, or
summons, or cause the arrest or commence a prosecution, for the failure to
display a license plate in plain view on the front of a parked motor vehicle if
the officer first determines that another offense has occurred and either
places the operator or vehicle owner under arrest or issues a ticket, citation,
or summons to the operator or vehicle owner for the other offense.
(ORC 4503.21(A), (B))
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided by Ohio R.C. 4503.103, 4503.173, 4503.41,
4503.43, and 4503.46, no person who is the owner or chauffeur of a motor
vehicle operated or driven upon the public roads or highways shall fail to file
annually the application for registration or to pay the tax therefor.
(ORC 4503.11(A))
   (c)   (1)   Within 30 days of becoming a resident of this state, any person
who owns a motor vehicle operated or driven upon the public roads or highways
shall register the vehicle in this state. If such a person fails to register a
vehicle owned by the person, the person shall not operate any motor vehicle in
this state under a license issued by another state.
      (2)   For purposes of division (c)(1) of this section, “resident” means
any person to whom any of the following applies:
         A.   The person maintains their principal residence in this state and
does not reside in this state as a result of the person’s active service in the
United States armed forces.
         B.   The person is determined by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles to be
a resident in accordance with standards adopted by the Registrar under Ohio
R.C. 4507.01.
(ORC 4503.111(A), (C))
   (d)   Upon the transfer of ownership of a motor vehicle, the registration of
the motor vehicle expires, and the original owner immediately shall remove the
license plates from the motor vehicle, except as otherwise provided in Ohio
R.C. 4503.12.
(ORC 4503.12(A))
   (e)   No person shall operate or drive upon the highways of this
municipality a motor vehicle acquired from a former owner who has registered
the motor vehicle, while the motor vehicle displays the distinctive number or
identification mark assigned to it upon its original registration.
(ORC 4549.11(A))
   (f)   No person who is the owner of a motor vehicle and a resident of this
state shall operate or drive the motor vehicle upon the highways of this
municipality while it displays a distinctive number or identification mark
issued by or under the authority of another state, without complying with the
laws of this state relating to the registration and identification of motor
vehicles.
(ORC 4549.12(A))
   (g)   (1)   A.   Except as otherwise provided in division (g)(1)B., whoever
violates division (a) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
         B.   Whoever violates division (a) of this section by failing to
display a license plate in plain view on the front of a motor vehicle as
required under division (a) of this section while the motor vehicle is
otherwise legally parked is guilty of a minor misdemeanor and may be fined not
more than $100. A person who is subject to the penalty prescribed in this
division (i)(1)B. is not subject to the charging of points under R.C. §
4510.036.
         C.   The offense established under division (a) of this section is a
strict liability offense and R.C. § 2901.20 does not apply. The designation of
this offense as a strict liability offense shall not be construed to imply that
any other offense, for which there is no specified degree of culpability, is
not a strict liability offense.
(ORC 4503.21(C))
      (2)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
(ORC 4503.11(C))
      (3)   A.   Whoever violates division (c) of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.
         B.   The offense established under division (g)(3)A. of this section
is a strict liability offense and strict liability is a culpable mental state
for purposes of Ohio R.C. 2901.20. The designation of this offense as a strict
liability offense shall not be construed to imply that any other offense, for
which there is no specified degree of culpability, is not a strict liability
offense.
(ORC 4503.111(B))
      (4)   Whoever violates division (d) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(ORC 4503.12(D))
      (5)   Whoever violates division (e) of this section is guilty of
operation of a motor vehicle bearing license plates or an identification mark
issued to another, a minor misdemeanor on a first offense and a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree on each subsequent offense.
(ORC 4549.11(B))
      (6)   Whoever violates division (f) of this section is guilty of illegal
operation by a resident of this state of a motor vehicle bearing the
distinctive number or identification mark issued by a foreign jurisdiction, a
minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4549.12(B))
§ 436.10  USE OF ILLEGAL LICENSE PLATES.
   (a)   No person shall operate or drive a motor vehicle upon the public roads
and highways in this municipality if it displays a license plate or a
distinctive number or identification mark that meets any of the following
criteria:
      (1)   It is fictitious;
      (2)   It is a counterfeit or an unlawfully made copy of any distinctive
number or identification mark;
      (3)   It belongs to another motor vehicle, provided that this section
does not apply to a motor vehicle that is operated on the public roads and
highways in this municipality when the motor vehicle displays license plates
that originally were issued for a motor vehicle that previously was owned by
the same person who owns the motor vehicle that is operated on the public roads
and highways in this municipality during the 30-day period described in Ohio
R.C. 4503.12(A)(4).
   (b)   A person who fails to comply with the transfer of registration
provisions of Ohio R.C. 4503.12 and is charged with a violation of that section
shall not be charged with a violation of this section.
   (c)   Whoever violates division (a)(1), (2), or (3) of this section is
guilty of operating a motor vehicle bearing an invalid license plate or
identification mark, this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree on a first offense and a misdemeanor of the third degree on each
subsequent offense.
(ORC 4549.08)
§ 436.11  FAILURE TO STOP AFTER ACCIDENT.
   (a)   (1)   In the case of a motor vehicle accident or collision with
persons or property on a public road or highway, the operator of the motor
vehicle, having knowledge of the accident or collision, immediately shall stop
the operator’s motor vehicle at the scene of the accident or collision. The
operator shall remain at the scene of the accident or collision until the
operator has given the operator’s name and address and, if the operator is not
the owner, the name and address of the owner of that motor vehicle, together
with the registered number of that motor vehicle, to all of the following:
         A.   Any person injured in the accident or collision;
         B.   The operator, occupant, owner, or attendant of any motor vehicle
damaged in the accident or collision;
         C.   The police officer at the scene of the accident or collision.
      (2)   In the event an injured person is unable to comprehend and record
the information required to be given under division (a)(1) of this section, the
other operator involved in the accident or collision shall notify the nearest
police authority concerning the location of the accident or collision, and the
operator’s name, address, and the registered number of the motor vehicle the
operator was operating. The operator shall remain at the scene of the accident
or collision until a police officer arrives, unless removed from the scene by
an emergency vehicle operated by a political subdivision or an ambulance.
      (3)   If the accident or collision is with an unoccupied or unattended
motor vehicle, the operator who collides with the motor vehicle shall securely
attach the information required to be given in this section, in writing, to a
conspicuous place in or on the unoccupied or unattended motor vehicle.
   (b)   (1)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of
failure to stop after an accident. Except as otherwise provided in division (b)
(2) or (b)(3) of this section, failure to stop after an accident is a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (2)   If the accident or collision results in serious physical harm to a
person, failure to stop after an accident is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
      (3)   If the accident or collision results in the death of a person,
failure to stop after an accident is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
      (4)   In all cases, the court, in addition to any other penalties
provided by law, shall impose upon the offender a class five suspension of the
offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction
permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege from the range
specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(5). No judge shall suspend the first six months
of suspension of an offender’s license, permit, or privilege required by this
division.
      (5)   The offender shall provide the court with proof of financial
responsibility as defined in R.C. § 4509.01. If the offender fails to provide
that proof of financial responsibility, then, in addition to any other
penalties provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to R.C. §
2929.18 or 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding $5,000 for any economic loss
arising from an accident or collision that was the direct and proximate result
of the offender’s operation of the motor vehicle before, during, or after
committing the offense charged under this section.
(ORC 4549.02)
§ 436.12  STOPPING AFTER ACCIDENT ON OTHER THAN PUBLIC ROADS OR HIGHWAYS.
   (a)   (1)   In the case of a motor vehicle accident or collision resulting
in injury or damage to persons or property on any public or private property
other than a public road or highway, the operator of the motor vehicle, having
knowledge of the accident or collision, shall stop at the scene of the accident
or collision. Upon request of any person who is injured or damaged, or any
other person, the operator shall give that person the operator’s name and
address, and, if the operator is not the owner, the name and address of the
owner of that motor vehicle, together with the registered number of that motor
vehicle, and, if available, exhibit the operator’s driver’s or commercial
driver’s license.
      (2)   If the operator of the motor vehicle involved in the accident or
collision does not provide the information specified in division (a)(1) of this
section, the operator shall give that information, within 24 hours after the
accident or collision, to the police department of the city or village in which
the accident or collision occurred, or if it occurred outside the corporate
limits of a city or village, to the sheriff of the county in which the accident
or collision occurred.
      (3)   If the accident or collision is with an unoccupied or unattended
motor vehicle, the operator who collides with the motor vehicle shall securely
attach the information required under division (a)(1) of this section, in
writing, to a conspicuous place in or on the unoccupied or unattended motor
vehicle.
   (b)   (1)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of
failure to stop after a nonpublic road accident. Except as otherwise provided
in division (b)(2) or (b)(3) of this section, failure to stop after a nonpublic
road accident is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (2)   If the accident or collision results in serious physical harm to a
person, failure to stop after a nonpublic road accident is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (3)   If the accident or collision results in the death of a person,
failure to stop after a nonpublic road accident is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.
      (4)   In all cases, the court, in addition to any other penalties
provided by law, shall impose upon the offender a class five suspension of the
offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction
permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege from the range
specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(5). No judge shall suspend the first six months
of suspension of an offender’s license, permit, or privilege required by this
division.
      (5)   The offender shall provide the court with proof of financial
responsibility as defined in R.C. § 4509.01. If the offender fails to provide
that proof of financial responsibility, then, in addition to any other
penalties provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to R.C. §
2929.18 or 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding $5,000 for any economic loss
arising from an accident or collision that was the direct and proximate result
of the offender’s operation of the motor vehicle before, during, or after
committing the offense charged under this section.
(ORC 4549.021)
§ 436.13  VEHICLE ACCIDENT RESULTING IN DAMAGE TO REALTY.
   (a)   (1)   The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting in
damage to real property, or personal property attached to real property,
legally upon or adjacent to a public road or highway immediately shall stop and
take reasonable steps to locate and notify the owner or person in charge of the
property of that fact, of the driver’s name and address, and of the
registration number of vehicle the driver is driving and, upon request and if
available, shall exhibit the driver’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license.
      (2)   If the owner or person in charge of the property cannot be located
after reasonable search, the driver of the vehicle involved in the accident
resulting in damage to the property within 24 hours after the accident, shall
forward to the police department of the municipality the same information
required to be given to the owner or person in control of the property and give
the location of the accident and a description of the damage insofar as it is
known.
   (b)   (1)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of
failure to stop after an accident involving the property of others, a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (2)   The offender shall provide the court with proof of financial
responsibility as defined in Ohio R.C. 4509.01. If the offender fails to
provide that proof of financial responsibility, then, in addition to any other
penalties provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to §
698.02(f) or Ohio R.C. 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding five thousand dollars
($5,000) for any economic loss arising from an accident or collision that was
the direct and proximate result of the offender’s operation of the motor
vehicle before, during, or after committing the offense charged under this
section.
(ORC 4549.03)
§ 436.14  REMOVAL OF VEHICLES AFTER ACCIDENTS.
   (a)   If a motor vehicle accident occurs on any highway, public street, or
other property open to the public for purposes of vehicular travel and if any
motor vehicle, cargo, or personal property that has been damaged or spilled as
a result of the motor vehicle accident is blocking the highway, street, or
other property or is otherwise endangering public safety, a public safety
official may do either of the following without the consent of the owner but
with the approval of the law enforcement agency conducting any investigation of
the accident:
      (1)   Remove, or order the removal of, the motor vehicle if the motor
vehicle is unoccupied, cargo, or personal property from the portion of the
highway, public street, or property ordinarily used for vehicular travel on the
highway, public street, or other property open to the public for purposes of
vehicular travel.
      (2)   If the motor vehicle is a commercial motor vehicle, allow the owner
or operator of the vehicle the opportunity to arrange for the removal of the
motor vehicle within a period of time specified by the public safety official.
If the public safety official determines that the motor vehicle cannot be
removed within the specified period of time, the public safety official shall
remove or order the removal of the motor vehicle.
   (b)   (1)   Except as provided in division (b)(2) of this section, the
Department of Transportation, any employee of the Department of Transportation,
or a public safety official who authorizes or participates in the removal of
any unoccupied motor vehicle, cargo, or personal property as authorized by
division (a) of this section, regardless of whether the removal is executed by
a private towing service, is not liable for civil damages for any injury,
death, or loss to person or property that results from the removal of that
unoccupied motor vehicle, cargo, or personal property. Further, except as
provided in division (b)(2) of this section, if a public safety official
authorizes, employs, or arranges to have a private towing service remove any
unoccupied motor vehicle, cargo, or personal property as authorized by division
(a) of this section, that private towing service is not liable for civil
damages for any injury, death, or loss to person or property that results from
the removal of that unoccupied motor vehicle, cargo, or personal property.
      (2)   Division (b)(1) of this section does not apply to any of the
following:
         A.   Any person or entity involved in the removal of an unoccupied
motor vehicle, cargo, or personal property pursuant to division (a) of this
section if that removal causes or contributes to the release of a hazardous
material or to structural damage to the roadway;
         B.   A private towing service that was not authorized, employed, or
arranged by a public safety official to remove an unoccupied motor vehicle,
cargo, or personal property under this section;
         C.   Except as provided in division (b)(2)D. of this section, a
private towing service that was authorized, employed, or arranged by a public
safety official to perform the removal of the unoccupied motor vehicle, cargo,
or personal property but the private towing service performed the removal in a
negligent manner;
         D.   A private towing service that was authorized, employed, or
arranged by a public safety official to perform the removal of the unoccupied
motor vehicle, cargo, or personal property that was endangering public safety
but the private towing service performed the removal in a reckless manner.
   (c)   As used in divisions (a) and (b) of this section:
      (1)   “Hazardous material.” Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C.
2305.232.
      (2)   “Public safety official.” Means any of the following:
         A.   The sheriff of the county, or the chief of police in the
municipal corporation, township, or township or joint police district, in which
the accident occurred;
         B.   A state highway patrol trooper;
         C.   The chief of the fire department having jurisdiction where the
accident occurred;
         D.   A duly authorized subordinate acting on behalf of an official
specified in divisions A. to C. of this definition.
(ORC 4513.66)
   (d)   If a towing service is removing a motor vehicle, and the removal was
not authorized under Ohio R.C. 4513.60, 4513.601, 4513.61, or 4513.66, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, prior to removing the motor
vehicle, the towing service shall provide a written estimate of the price for
the removal to the operator of the motor vehicle, if requested.
   (e)   The towing service shall ensure that any estimate provided under
division (d) of this section includes the fees, services to be rendered, and
destination of the vehicle.
   (f)   If a towing service fails to provide a written estimate as required by
this section, the towing service shall not charge fees for the towing and
storage of the motor vehicle that exceed 25% of any applicable fees established
by the public utilities commission in rules adopted under R.C. § 4921.25(B)(4)
or, if the vehicle was towed within a municipal corporation that has
established vehicle removal and storage fees, 25% of the fees established by
the municipal corporation.
   (g)   Any storage facility that accepts towed vehicles shall conspicuously
post a notice at the entrance to the storage facility that states the
limitation on fees established under division (c) of this section.
(ORC 4513.68)
§ 436.99  PENALTY.
   (EDITOR’S NOTE:  See §§
408.01 and
408.02 for general Traffic Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.)
CHAPTER 438:  SAFETY AND EQUIPMENT
Section
438.01   Driving unsafe vehicles; application.
438.02   Lighted lights; measurement of distances and heights.
438.03   Headlights on motor vehicles and motorcycles.
438.04   Tail light; illumination of rear license plate.
438.05   Rear red reflectors.
438.06   Safety lighting on commercial vehicles.
438.07   Obscured lights on vehicles in combination.
438.08   Red light or red flag on extended loads
438.09   Lights on parked or stopped vehicles.
438.10   Lights on slow-moving vehicles; emblem required; lights and reflectors
on multi-wheel agricultural tractors or farm machinery.
438.11   Spotlight and auxiliary lights.
438.12   Cowl, fender and back-up lights.
438.13   Two lights displayed.
438.14   Use of headlight beams.
438.15   Lights of less intensity on slow-moving vehicles.
438.16   Number of lights permitted; red and flashing lights.
438.165   Lights and sound-producing devices on coroners’ vehicles.
438.17   Vehicles transporting preschool children.
438.18   Focus and aim of headlights.
438.19   Motor vehicle and motorcycle brakes.
438.20   Horn, siren and theft alarm signal.
438.21   Muffler; muffler cutout; excessive smoke, gas or noise.
438.22   Rear-view mirror; clear view to front, both sides and rear.
438.23   Windshield required; sign or poster upon windshield; windshield wiper.
438.24   Tinted glass; materials on glass.
438.25   Limited load extension on left side of passenger vehicle.
438.26   Motor vehicle stop lights.
438.27   Bumpers.
438.28   Air cleaner required.
438.29   Use of child restraints.
438.30   Use of occupant restraining devices.
438.31   Ignition interlock devices. (Repealed)
438.32   Air bags.
438.99   Penalty.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   See section histories for similar state law
   Warning devices for commercial vehicles disabled upon freeways - see Ohio
R.C. 4513.28
   Collector’s vehicles - see Ohio R.C. 4513.38, 4513.41
   Use of stop and turn signals - see TRAF.
432.13
   Wheel protectors for commercial vehicles - see TRAF.
440.03
   Vehicles transporting explosives - see TRAF.
440.04
   Towing requirements - see TRAF.
440.05
   Occupying travel trailers while in motion - see TRAF.
440.08
   Bicycle equipment - see TRAF.
444.05
   Snowmobile and all purpose vehicle equipment - see TRAF.
446.02
   Improperly handling firearms in a motor vehicle - see GEN. OFF.
678.04
§ 438.01  DRIVING UNSAFE VEHICLES; APPLICATION.
   (a)   No person shall drive or move, or cause or knowingly permit to be
driven or moved, on any highway any vehicle or combination of vehicles which is
in such unsafe condition as to endanger any person.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4513.02(A), (H))
§ 438.02  LIGHTED LIGHTS; MEASUREMENT OF DISTANCES AND HEIGHTS.
   (a)   Every vehicle, other than a motorized bicycle, operated upon a street
or highway within this state shall display lighted lights and illuminating
devices as required by Ohio R.C. 4513.04 through 4513.37 during all of the
following times:
      (1)   The time from sunset to sunrise;
      (2)   At any other time when, due to insufficient natural light or
unfavorable atmospheric conditions, persons, vehicles and substantial objects
on the highway are not discernible at a distance of 1,000 feet ahead;
      (3)   At any time when the windshield wipers of the vehicle are in use
because of precipitation on the windshield.
   (b)   Every motorized bicycle shall display at such times lighted lights
meeting the rules adopted by the Ohio Director of Public Safety under Ohio R.C.
4511.521. No motor vehicle, during any time specified in this section, shall be
operated upon a street or highway within this state using only parking lights
as illumination.
   (c)   Whenever in such sections a requirement is declared as to the distance
from which certain lamps and devices shall render objects visible, or within
which such lamps or devices shall be visible, such distance shall be measured
upon a straight level unlighted highway under normal atmospheric conditions
unless a different condition is expressly stated.
   (d)   Whenever in such sections a requirement is declared as to the mounted
height of lights or devices, it shall mean from the center of such light or
device to the level ground upon which the vehicle stands.
   (e)   Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, no law
enforcement officer shall cause the operator of a vehicle being operated upon a
street or highway within this state to stop the vehicle solely because the
officer observes that a violation of division (a)(3) of this section has been
or is being committed or for the sole purpose of issuing a ticket, citation, or
summons for a violation of that division, or causing the arrest of or
commencing a prosecution of a person for a violation of that division.
   (f)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4513.03)
§ 438.03  HEADLIGHTS ON MOTOR VEHICLES AND MOTORCYCLES.
   (a)   (1)   Every motor vehicle, other than a motorcycle, shall be equipped
with at least two headlights with at least one near each side of the front of
the motor vehicle.
      (2)   Every motorcycle shall be equipped with at least one and not more
than two headlights.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4513.04)
§ 438.04  TAIL LIGHT; ILLUMINATION OF REAR LICENSE PLATE.
   (a)   (1)   Every motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer, pole trailer or
vehicle which is being drawn at the end of a train of vehicles shall be
equipped with at least one tail light mounted on the rear which, when lighted,
shall emit a red light visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear,
provided that in the case of a train of vehicles only the tail light on the
rearmost vehicle need be visible from the distance specified.
      (2)   Either a tail light or a separate light shall be so constructed and
placed as to illuminate with a white light the rear registration plate, when
such registration plate is required, and render it legible from a distance of
50 feet to the rear. Any tail light, together with any separate light for
illuminating the rear registration plate, shall be so wired as to be lighted
whenever the headlights or auxiliary driving lights are lighted, except where
separate lighting systems are provided for trailers for the purpose of
illuminating such registration plate.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4513.05)
§ 438.05  REAR RED REFLECTORS.
   (a)   (1)   Every new motor vehicle sold after September 6, 1941, and
operated on a highway, other than a commercial tractor to which a trailer or
semitrailer is attached, shall carry at the rear, either as a part of the tail
lamps or separately, two red reflectors meeting the requirements of this
section, except that vehicles of the type mentioned in Ohio R.C. 4513.07 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance shall be equipped with reflectors
as required by the regulations provided for in that section.
      (2)   Every such reflector shall be of such size and characteristics and
so maintained as to be visible at night from all distances within 300 feet to
50 feet from such vehicle.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4513.06)
§ 438.06  SAFETY LIGHTING ON COMMERCIAL VEHICLES.
   (a)   (1)   When the Director of Public Safety prescribes and promulgates
regulations relating to clearance lights, marker lights, reflectors and stop
lights on buses, trucks, commercial tractors, trailers, semitrailers and pole
trailers, when operated upon any highway, these vehicles shall be equipped as
required by such regulations, and such equipment shall be lighted at all times
mentioned in Ohio R.C. 4513.03 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, except that clearance lights and side marker lights need not be
lighted on any such vehicle when it is operated within the municipality where
there is sufficient light to reveal any person or substantial object on the
highway at a distance of 500 feet.
      (2)   Such equipment shall be in addition to all other lights
specifically required by Ohio R.C. 4513.03 through 4513.16, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinances.
      (3)   Vehicles operated under the jurisdiction of the Public Utilities
Commission are not subject to this section.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4513.07)
§ 438.07  OBSCURED LIGHTS ON VEHICLES IN COMBINATION.
   Whenever motor and other vehicles are operated in combination during the
time that lights are required, any light, except tail lights, which by reason
of its location on a vehicle of the combination would be obscured by another
vehicle of the combination, need not be lighted, but this section does not
affect the requirement that lighted clearance lights be displayed on the front
of the foremost vehicle required to have clearance lights or that all lights
required on the rear of the rearmost vehicle of any combination shall be
lighted.
(ORC 4513.08)
§ 438.08  RED LIGHT OR RED FLAG ON EXTENDED LOADS.
   (a)   Whenever the load upon any vehicle extends to the rear four feet or
more beyond the bed or body of this vehicle, there shall be displayed at the
extreme rear end of the load, at the times specified in Ohio R.C. 4513.03 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, a red light or lantern plainly
visible from a distance of at least 500 feet to the sides and rear. The red
light or lantern required by this section is in addition to the red rear light
required upon every vehicle. At any other time there shall be displayed at the
extreme rear end of such load a red flag or cloth not less than 16 inches
square.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4513.09)
§ 438.09  LIGHTS ON PARKED OR STOPPED VEHICLES.
   (a)   Except in case of an emergency, whenever a vehicle is parked or
stopped upon a roadway open to traffic or a shoulder adjacent thereto, whether
attended or unattended, during the times mentioned in Ohio R.C. 4513.03 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, such vehicle shall be equipped
with one or more lights which shall exhibit a white or amber light on the
roadway side visible from a distance of 500 feet to the front of such vehicle,
and a red light visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear. No lights need
be displayed upon any such vehicle when it is stopped or parked within the
municipality where there is sufficient light to reveal any person or
substantial object within a distance of 500 feet upon such highway. Any lighted
headlights upon a parked vehicle shall be depressed or dimmed.
(ORC 4513.10)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4513.99)
§ 438.10  LIGHTS ON SLOW-MOVING VEHICLES; EMBLEM REQUIRED; LIGHTS AND
REFLECTORS ON MULTI-WHEEL AGRICULTURAL TRACTORS OR FARM MACHINERY.
   (a)   All vehicles other than bicycles, including animal-drawn vehicles and
vehicles referred to in Ohio R.C. 4513.02(G), not specifically required to be
equipped with lamps or other lighting devices by Ohio R.C. 4513.03 through
4513.10, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinances, shall, at the
times specified in Ohio R.C. 4513.03 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, be equipped with at least one lamp displaying a white light visible
from a distance of not less than 1,000 feet to the front of the vehicle and
also shall be equipped with two lamps displaying red light visible from a
distance of not less than 1,000 feet to the rear of the vehicle, or as an
alternative, one lamp displaying a red light visible from a distance of not
less than 1,000 feet to the rear and two red reflectors visible from all
distances of 600 feet to 100 feet to the rear when illuminated by the lawful
lower beams of headlamps. Lamps and reflectors required by this section shall
meet standards adopted by the Director of Public Safety.
   (b)   All boat trailers, farm machinery and other machinery, including all
road construction machinery, upon a street or highway, except when being used
in actual construction and maintenance work in an area guarded by a flagperson,
or where flares are used, or when operating or traveling within the limits of a
construction area designated by the Director of Transportation, a city or
village engineer, or the county engineer of the several counties, when such
construction area is marked in accordance with requirements of the Director and
the Manual and Specifications for a Uniform System of Traffic-Control Devices,
as set forth in Ohio R.C. 4511.09, which is designed for operation at a speed
of 25 miles per hour or less, shall be operated at a speed not exceeding 25
miles per hour, and shall display a triangular slow-moving vehicle emblem
(SMV). The emblem shall be mounted so as to be visible from a distance of not
less than 500 feet to the rear. The Director of Public Safety shall adopt
standards and specifications for the design and position of mounting the SMV
emblem. The standards and specifications for SMV emblems referred to in this
section shall correlate with and, so far as possible, conform with those
approved by the American Society of Agricultural Engineers. A unit of farm
machinery that is designed by its manufacturer to operate at a speed greater
than 25 miles per hour may be operated on a street or highway at a speed
greater than 25 miles per hour provided it is operated in accordance with this
section. As used in this division, “machinery” does not include any vehicle
designed to be drawn by an animal.
   (c)   The use of the SMV emblem shall be restricted to animal-drawn vehicles
and to the slow-moving vehicles specified in division (b) of this section
operating or traveling within the limits of the highway. Its use on slow-moving
vehicles being transported upon other types of vehicles or on any other type of
vehicle or stationary object on the highway is prohibited.
   (d)   (1)   No person shall sell, lease, rent or operate any boat trailer,
farm machinery or other machinery defined as a slow-moving vehicle in division
(b) of this section, except those units designed to be completely mounted on a
primary power unit, which is manufactured or assembled on or after April 1,
1966, unless the vehicle is equipped with a slow-moving vehicle emblem mounting
device as specified in division (b) of this section.
      (2)   No person shall sell, lease, rent, or operate on a street or
highway any unit of farm machinery that is designed by its manufacturer to
operate at a speed greater than 25 miles per hour unless the unit displays a
slow-moving vehicle emblem as specified in division (b) of this section and a
speed identification symbol that meets the specifications contained in the
American Society of Agricultural Engineers Standard ANSI/ASAE S584 JAN2005,
Agricultural Equipment: Speed Identification Symbol (SIS).
   (e)   Any boat trailer, farm machinery or other machinery defined as a slow-
moving vehicle in division (b) of this section, in addition to the use of the
slow-moving vehicle emblem, and any unit of farm machinery that is designed by
its manufacturer to operate at a speed greater than 25 miles per hour, in
addition to the display of a speed identification symbol, may be equipped with
a red flashing light that shall be visible from a distance of not less than
1,000 feet to the rear at all times specified in Ohio R.C. 4513.03 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance. When a double-faced light is
used, it shall display amber light to the front and red light to the rear. In
addition to the lights described in this division, farm machinery and motor
vehicles escorting farm machinery may display a flashing, oscillating or
rotating amber light, as permitted by Ohio R.C. 4513.17 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, and also may display simultaneously flashing
turn signals or warning lights, as permitted by that section.
   (f)   (1)   Every animal-drawn vehicle upon a street or highway shall at all
times be equipped in one of the following ways:
         A.   With a slow-moving vehicle emblem complying with division (b) of
this section;
         B.   With alternate reflective material complying with rules adopted
under division (f)(2) below;
         C.   With both a slow-moving vehicle emblem and alternate reflective
material as specified in division (f)(2) below.
      (2)   Rules adopted by the Director of Public Safety, subject to Ohio
R.C. Chapter 119, establishing standards and specifications for the position of
mounting of the alternate reflective material authorized by this division,
permit, as a minimum, the alternate reflective material to be black, gray, or
silver in color. The alternate reflective material shall be mounted on the
animal-drawn vehicle so as to be visible, at all times specified in Ohio R.C.
4513.03 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, from a distance of
not less than 500 feet to the rear when illuminated by the lawful lower beams
of headlamps.
   (g)   (1)   Every unit of farm machinery that is designed by its
manufacturer to operate at a speed greater than 25 miles per hour shall display
a slow-moving vehicle emblem and a speed identification symbol that meets the
specifications contained in the American Society of Agricultural Engineers
Standard ANSI/ASAE S584 JAN2005, Agricultural Equipment: Speed Identification
Symbol (SIS) when the unit is operated upon a street or highway, irrespective
of the speed at which the unit is operated on the street or highway. The speed
identification symbol shall indicate the maximum speed in miles per hour at
which the unit of farm machinery is designed by its manufacturer to operate.
The display of the speed identification symbol shall be in accordance with the
standard prescribed in this division.
      (2)   If an agricultural tractor that is designed by its manufacturer to
operate at a speed greater than 25 miles per hour is being operated on a street
or highway at a speed greater than 25 miles per hour and is towing, pulling, or
otherwise drawing a unit of farm machinery, the unit of farm machinery shall
display a slow-moving vehicle emblem and a speed identification symbol that is
the same as the speed identification symbol that is displayed on the
agricultural tractor.
   (h)   When an agricultural tractor that is designed by its manufacturer to
operate at a speed greater than 25 miles per hour is being operated on a street
or highway at a speed greater than 25 miles per hour, the operator shall
possess some documentation published or provided by the manufacturer indicating
the maximum speed in miles per hour at which the manufacturer designed the
agricultural tractor to operate.
   (i)   As used in this section, “boat trailer” means any vehicle designed and
used exclusively to transport a boat between a place of storage and a marina,
or in and around a marina, when drawn or towed on a street or highway for a
distance of no more than ten miles and at a speed of 25 miles per hour or less.
(ORC 4513.11)
   (j)   Lights and reflector requirements for multi-wheel agricultural
tractors or farm machinery.
      (1)   A.   Every multi-wheel agricultural tractor whose model year was
2001 or earlier, when being operated or traveling on a street or highway at the
times specified in Ohio R.C. 4513.03, or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, at a minimum shall be equipped with and display reflectors and
illuminated amber lamps so that the extreme left and right projections of the
tractor are indicated by flashing lamps displaying amber light, visible to the
front and the rear; by amber reflectors, all visible to the front; and by red
reflectors, all visible to the rear.
         B.   The lamps displaying amber light need not flash simultaneously
and need not flash in conjunction with any directional signals of the tractor.
         C.   The lamps and reflectors required by division (j)(1)A. of this
section and their placement shall meet standards and specifications contained
in rules adopted by the Director of Public Safety in accordance with Ohio R.C.
Chapter 119. The rules governing the amber lamps, amber reflectors, and red
reflectors and their placement shall correlate with and, as far as possible,
conform with paragraphs 4.1.4.1, 4.1.7.1, and 4.1.7.2, respectively, of the
American Society of Agricultural Engineers Standard ANSI/ASAE S279.10 OCT98,
Lighting and Marking of Agricultural Equipment on Highways.
      (2)   Every unit of farm machinery whose model year was 2002 or later,
when being operated or traveling on a street or highway at the times specified
in Ohio R.C. 4513.03, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, shall
be equipped with and display markings and illuminated lamps that meet or exceed
the lighting, illumination, and marking standards and specifications that are
applicable to that type of farm machinery for the unit’s model year specified
in the American Society of Agricultural Engineers Standard ANSI/ASAE S279.11
APR01, Lighting and Marking of Agricultural Equipment on Highways, or any
subsequent revisions of that standard.
      (3)   The lights and reflectors required by division (j)(1) of this
section are in addition to the slow-moving vehicle emblem and lights required
or permitted by Ohio R.C. 4513.11 or 4513.17, or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, to be displayed on farm machinery being operated or
traveling on a street or highway.
      (4)   No person shall operate any unit of farm machinery on a street or
highway or cause any unit of farm machinery to travel on a street or highway in
violation of divisions (j)(1) or (j)(2) of this section.
(ORC 4513.111)
   (k)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4513.11(I), 4513.111(E))
§ 438.11  SPOTLIGHT AND AUXILIARY LIGHTS.
   (a)   (1)   Any motor vehicle may be equipped with not more than one
spotlight and every lighted spotlight shall be so aimed and used upon
approaching another vehicle that no part of the high-intensity portion of the
beam will be directed to the left of the prolongation of the extreme left side
of the vehicle, nor more than 100 feet ahead of the vehicle.
      (2)   Any motor vehicle may be equipped with not more than three
auxiliary driving lights mounted on the front of the vehicle. Any such lights
which do not conform to the specifications for auxiliary driving lights and the
regulations for their use prescribed by the Director of Public Safety shall not
be used.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4513.12)
§ 438.12  COWL, FENDER AND BACK-UP LIGHTS.
   (a)   (1)   Any motor vehicle may be equipped with side cowl or fender
lights which shall emit a white or amber light without glare.
      (2)   Any motor vehicle may be equipped with lights on each side thereof
which shall emit a white or amber light without glare.
      (3)   Any motor vehicle may be equipped with back-up lights, either
separately or in combination with another light. No back-up lights shall be
continuously lighted when the motor vehicle is in forward motion.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4513.13)
§ 438.13  TWO LIGHTS DISPLAYED.
   (a)   At all times mentioned in Ohio R.C. 4513.03 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, at least two lighted lights shall be displayed,
one near each side of the front of every motor vehicle, except when such
vehicle is parked subject to the regulations governing lights on parked
vehicles.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4513.14)
§ 438.14  USE OF HEADLIGHT BEAMS.
   (a)   Whenever a motor vehicle is being operated on a roadway or shoulder
adjacent thereto during the times specified in Ohio R.C. 4513.03 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the driver shall use a
distribution of light, or composite beam, directed high enough and of
sufficient intensity to reveal persons, vehicles and substantial objects at a
safe distance in advance of the vehicle, subject to the following requirements:
      (1)   Whenever the driver of a vehicle approaches an oncoming vehicle,
such driver shall use a distribution of light, or composite beam, so aimed that
the glaring rays are not projected into the eyes of the oncoming driver.
      (2)   Every new motor vehicle registered in this state which has
multiple-beam road lighting equipment shall be equipped with a beam indicator,
which shall be lighted whenever the uppermost distribution of light from the
headlights is in use, and shall not otherwise be lighted. This indicator shall
be so designed and located that, when lighted, it will be readily visible
without glare to the driver of the vehicle.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4513.15)
§ 438.15  LIGHTS OF LESS INTENSITY ON SLOW-MOVING VEHICLES.
   (a)   Any motor vehicle may be operated under the conditions specified in
Ohio R.C. 4513.03 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance when it is
equipped with two lighted lights upon the front thereof capable of revealing
persons and substantial objects 75 feet ahead, in lieu of lights required in
Ohio R.C. 4513.14 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, provided
that such vehicle shall not be operated at a speed in excess of 20 miles per
hour.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4513.16)
§ 438.16  NUMBER OF LIGHTS PERMITTED; RED AND FLASHING LIGHTS.
   (a)   Whenever a motor vehicle equipped with headlights is also equipped
with any auxiliary lights or spotlight or any other light on the front thereof
projecting a beam of an intensity greater than 300 candlepower, not more than a
total of five of any such lights on the front of a vehicle shall be lighted at
any one time when the vehicle is upon a highway.
   (b)   Any lighted light or illuminating device upon a motor vehicle, other
than headlights, spotlights, signal lights, or auxiliary driving lights, that
projects a beam of light of an intensity greater than 300 candlepower shall be
so directed that no part of the beam will strike the level of the roadway on
which the vehicle stands at a distance of more than 75 feet from the vehicle.
   (c)   (1)   Flashing lights are prohibited on motor vehicles, except as a
means for indicating a right or a left turn, or in the presence of vehicular
traffic hazard requiring unusual care in approaching, or overtaking or passing.
This prohibition does not apply to emergency vehicles, road service vehicles
servicing or towing a disabled vehicle, stationary waste collection vehicles
actively collecting garbage, refuse, trash, or recyclable materials on the
roadside, rural mail delivery vehicles, vehicles as provided in Ohio R.C.
4513.182 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, highway maintenance
vehicles, funeral hearses, funeral escort vehicles, and similar equipment
operated by the Department or local authorities, which shall be equipped with
and display, when used on a street or highway for the special purpose
necessitating such lights, a flashing, oscillating or rotating amber light, but
shall not display a flashing, oscillating or rotating light of any other color,
nor to vehicles or machinery permitted by Ohio R.C. 4513.11 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance to have a flashing red light.
      (2)   When used on a street or highway, farm machinery and vehicles
escorting farm machinery may be equipped with and display a flashing,
oscillating or rotating amber light, and the prohibition contained in division
(c)(1) of this section does not apply to such machinery or vehicles. Farm
machinery may also display the lights described in Ohio R.C. 4513.11 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (d)   Except a person operating a public safety vehicle, as defined in Ohio
R.C. 4511.01(E), or a school bus, no person shall operate, move, or park upon
or permit to stand within the right-of-way of any public street or highway any
vehicle or equipment that is equipped with and displaying a flashing red or a
flashing combination red and white light, or an oscillating or rotating red
light, or a combination red and white oscillating or rotating light; and except
a public law enforcement officer, or other person sworn to enforce the criminal
and traffic laws of the state, operating a public safety vehicle when on duty,
no person shall operate, move or park upon or permit to stand within the right-
of-way of any street or highway any vehicle or equipment that is equipped with,
or upon which is mounted, and displaying a flashing blue or a flashing
combination blue and white light, or an oscillating or rotating blue light, or
a combination blue and white oscillating or rotating light.
   (e)   This section does not prohibit the use of warning lights required by
law or the simultaneous flashing of turn signals on disabled vehicles or on
vehicles being operated in unfavorable atmospheric conditions in order to
enhance their visibility. This section also does not prohibit the simultaneous
flashing of turn signals or warning lights whether on farm machinery or
vehicles escorting farm machinery when used on a street or highway.
   (f)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4513.17)
§ 438.165  LIGHTS AND SOUND-PRODUCING DEVICES ON CORONERS’ VEHICLES.
   (a)   Notwithstanding any other provision of law, a motor vehicle operated
by a coroner, deputy coroner or coroner’s investigator may be equipped with a
flashing, oscillating or rotating red or blue light and siren, whistle or bell
capable of emitting sound audible under normal conditions from a distance of
not less than 500 feet. Such a vehicle may display the flashing, oscillating or
rotating red or blue light and may give the audible signal of the siren,
whistle or bell only when responding to a fatality or a fatal motor vehicle
accident on a street or highway and only at those locations where the stoppage
of traffic impedes the ability of the coroner, deputy coroner or coroner’s
investigator to arrive at the site of the fatality.
   (b)   This section does not relieve the coroner, deputy coroner or coroner’s
investigator operating a motor vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard
for the safety of all persons and property upon the highway.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4513.171)
§ 438.17  VEHICLES TRANSPORTING PRESCHOOL CHILDREN.
   (a)   No person shall operate any motor vehicle owned, leased, or hired by a
nursery school, kindergarten, or day-care center, while transporting preschool
children to or from such an institution unless the motor vehicle is equipped
with and displaying two amber flashing lights mounted on a bar attached to the
top of the vehicle, and a sign bearing the designation “caution — children,”
which shall be attached to the bar carrying the amber flashing lights in such a
manner as to be legible to persons both in front of and behind the vehicle. The
lights and sign shall meet standards and specifications adopted by the Director
of Public Safety.
   (b)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle displaying the lights and sign
required by this section for any purpose other than the transportation of
preschool children as provided in this section.
(ORC 4513.182)
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4513.99)
§ 438.18  FOCUS AND AIM OF HEADLIGHTS.
   (a)   No person shall use any lights mentioned in Ohio R.C. 4513.03 through
4513.18, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinances, upon any motor
vehicle, trailer or semitrailer unless these lights are equipped, mounted and
adjusted as to focus and aim in accordance with regulations which are
prescribed by the Director of Public Safety.
   (b)   The headlights on any motor vehicle shall comply with the headlamp
color requirements contained in Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard Number
108, 49 C.F.R. § 571.108. No person shall operate a motor vehicle in violation
of this division.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4513.19)
§ 438.19  MOTOR VEHICLE AND MOTORCYCLE BRAKES.
   (a)   The following requirements govern as to brake equipment on vehicles:
      (1)   Every motor vehicle, other than a motorcycle, when operated upon a
highway shall be equipped with brakes adequate to control the movement of and
to stop and hold the motor vehicle, including two separate means of applying
the brakes, each of which means shall be effective to apply the brakes to at
least two wheels. If these two separate means of applying the brakes are
connected in any way, then on such motor vehicles, manufactured or assembled
after January 1, 1942, they shall be so constructed that failure of any one
part of the operating mechanism shall not leave the motor vehicle without
brakes on at least two wheels.
      (2)   Every motorcycle, when operated upon a highway shall be equipped
with at least one adequate brake, which may be operated by hand or by foot.
      (3)   Every motorized bicycle shall be equipped with brakes meeting the
rules adopted by the Director of Public Safety under Ohio R.C. 4511.521.
      (4)   When operated upon the highways, the following vehicles shall be
equipped with brakes adequate to control the movement of and to stop and to
hold the vehicle, designed to be applied by the driver of the towing motor
vehicle from its cab, and also designed and connected so that, in case of a
breakaway of the towed vehicle, the brakes shall be automatically applied:
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in this section, every trailer or
semitrailer, except a pole trailer, with an empty weight of 2,000 pounds or
more, manufactured or assembled on or after January 1, 1942;
         B.   Every manufactured home or travel trailer with an empty weight of
2,000 pounds or more, manufactured or assembled on or after January 1, 2001.
      (5)   Every watercraft trailer with a gross weight or manufacturer’s
gross vehicle weight rating of 3,000 pounds or more that is manufactured or
assembled on or after January 1, 2008, shall have separate brakes equipped with
hydraulic surge or electrically operated brakes on two wheels.
      (6)   In any combination of motor-drawn trailers or semitrailers equipped
with brakes, means shall be provided for applying the rearmost brakes in
approximate synchronism with the brakes on the towing vehicle, and developing
the required braking effort on the rearmost wheels at the fastest rate; or
means shall be provided for applying braking effort first on the rearmost
brakes; or both of the above means, capable of being used alternatively, may be
employed.
      (7)   Every vehicle and combination of vehicles, except motorcycles and
motorized bicycles, and except trailers and semitrailers of a gross weight of
less than 2,000 pounds, and pole trailers, shall be equipped with parking
brakes adequate to hold the vehicle on any grade on which it is operated, under
all conditions of loading, on a surface free from snow, ice, or loose material.
The parking brakes shall be capable of being applied in conformance with the
foregoing requirements by the driver’s muscular effort or by spring action or
by equivalent means. Their operation may be assisted by the service brakes or
other source of power provided that failure of the service brake actuation
system or other power assisting mechanism will not prevent the parking brakes
from being applied in conformance with the foregoing requirements. The parking
brakes shall be so designed that when once applied they shall remain applied
with the required effectiveness despite exhaustion of any source of energy or
leakage of any kind.
      (8)   The same brake drums, brake shoes and lining assemblies, brake shoe
anchors, and mechanical brake shoe actuation mechanism normally associated with
the wheel brake assemblies may be used for both the service brakes and the
parking brakes. If the means of applying the parking brakes and the service
brakes are connected in any way, they shall be so constructed that failure of
any one part shall not leave the vehicle without operative brakes.
      (9)   Every motor vehicle or combination of motor-drawn vehicles shall,
at all times and under all conditions of loading, be capable of being stopped
on a dry, smooth, level road free from loose material, upon application of the
service or foot brake, within the following specified distances, or shall be
capable of being decelerated at a sustained rate corresponding to these
distances:
         A.   Vehicles or combinations of vehicles having brakes on all wheels
shall come to a stop in 30 feet or less from a speed of 20 miles per hour.
         B.   Vehicles or combinations of vehicles not having brakes on all
wheels shall come to a stop in 40 feet or less from a speed of 20 miles per
hour.
      (10)   All brakes shall be maintained in good working order and shall be
so adjusted as to operate as equally as practicable with respect to the wheels
on opposite sides of the vehicle.
(ORC 4513.20)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4513.99)
§ 438.20  HORN, SIREN AND THEFT ALARM SIGNAL.
   (a)   (1)   Every motor vehicle when operated upon a highway shall be
equipped with a horn which is in good working order and capable of emitting
sound audible, under normal conditions, from a distance of not less than 200
feet.
      (2)   No motor vehicle shall be equipped with, nor shall any person use
upon a vehicle, any siren, whistle, or bell. Any vehicle may be equipped with a
theft alarm signal device which shall be so arranged that it cannot be used as
an ordinary warning signal. Every emergency vehicle shall be equipped with a
siren, whistle or bell, capable of emitting sound audible under normal
conditions from a distance of not less than 500 feet and of a type approved by
the Director of Public Safety. Such equipment shall not be used except when
such vehicle is operated in response to an emergency call or is in the
immediate pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the law, in which case
the driver of the emergency vehicle shall sound such equipment when it is
necessary to warn pedestrians and other drivers of the approach thereof.
(ORC 4513.21)
   (b)   No person shall use the horn of a motor vehicle except to give warning
to other drivers or pedestrians.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. 
(ORC 4513.21)
§ 438.21  MUFFLER; MUFFLER CUTOUT; EXCESSIVE SMOKE, GAS OR NOISE.
   (a)   (1)   Every motor vehicle and motorcycle with an internal combustion
engine shall at all times be equipped with a muffler which is in good working
order and in constant operation to prevent excessive or unusual noise, and no
person shall use a muffler cutout, bypass or similar device upon a motor
vehicle on a highway. Every motorcycle muffler shall be equipped with baffle
plates.
      (2)   No person shall own, operate or have in the person’s possession any
motor vehicle or motorcycle equipped with a device for producing excessive
smoke or gas, or so equipped as to permit oil or any other chemical to flow
into or upon the exhaust pipe or muffler of such vehicle, or equipped in any
way to produce or emit smoke or dangerous or annoying gases from any portion of
such vehicle, other than the ordinary gases emitted by the exhaust of an
internal combustion engine under normal operation.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4513.22)
§ 438.22  REAR-VIEW MIRROR; CLEAR VIEW TO FRONT, BOTH SIDES AND REAR.
   (a)   Every motor vehicle and motorcycle shall be equipped with a mirror so
located as to reflect to the operator a view of the highway to the rear of such
vehicle or motorcycle. Operators of vehicles and motorcycles shall have a clear
and unobstructed view to the front and to both sides of their vehicles and
motorcycles and shall have a clear view to the rear of their vehicles and
motorcycles by mirror.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4513.23)
§ 438.23  WINDSHIELD REQUIRED; SIGN OR POSTER UPON WINDSHIELD; WINDSHIELD
WIPER.
   (a)   No person shall drive any motor vehicle on a street or highway in this
municipality, other than a motorcycle or motorized bicycle, that is not
equipped with a windshield.
   (b)   (1)   No person shall drive any motor vehicle, other than a bus, with
any sign, poster, or other nontransparent material upon the front windshield,
sidewings, side, or rear windows of such vehicle other than a certificate or
other paper required to be displayed by law, except that there may be in the
lower left-hand or right-hand corner of the windshield a sign, poster, or decal
not to exceed four inches in height by six inches in width. No sign, poster, or
decal shall be displayed in the front windshield in such a manner as to conceal
the vehicle identification number for the motor vehicle when, in accordance
with federal law, that number is located inside the vehicle passenger
compartment and so placed as to be readable through the vehicle glazing without
moving any part of the vehicle.
      (2)   Division (b)(1) of this section does not apply to a person who is
driving a passenger car with an electronic device, including an antenna,
electronic tolling or other transponder, camera, directional navigation device,
or other similar electronic device located in the front windshield if the
device meets both of the following:
         A.   It does not restrict the vehicle operator’s sight lines to the
road and highway signs and signals.
         B.   It does not conceal the vehicle identification number.
      (3)   Division (b)(1) of this section does not apply to a person who is
driving a commercial car with an electronic device, including an antenna,
electronic tolling or other transponder, camera, directional navigation device,
or other similar electronic device located in the front windshield if the
device meets both of the following:
         A.   It does not restrict the vehicle operator’s sight lines to the
road and highway signs and signals.
         B.   It is mounted not more than six inches below the upper edge of
the windshield and is outside the area swept by the vehicle’s windshield
wipers.
   (c)   The windshield on every motor vehicle shall be equipped with a device
for cleaning rain, snow, or other moisture from the windshield. The device
shall be maintained in good working order and so constructed as to be
controlled or operated by the operator of the vehicle.
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4513.24)
§ 438.24  TINTED GLASS; MATERIALS ON GLASS.
   (a)   No person shall operate, on any highway or other public or private
property open to the public for vehicular travel or parking, lease, or rent any
motor vehicle that is registered in this state unless the motor vehicle
conforms to the requirements concerning tinted glass and reflectorized material
of Ohio R.C. 4513.241 and of any applicable rule adopted under that section.
   (b)   No person shall install in or on any motor vehicle any glass or other
material that fails to conform to the requirements of Ohio R.C. 4513.241 or of
any rule adopted under that section.
   (c)   (1)   No used motor vehicle dealer or new motor vehicle dealer, as
defined in Ohio R.C. 4517.01, shall sell any motor vehicle that fails to
conform to the requirements of Ohio R.C. 4513.241 or of any rule adopted under
that section.
      (2)   No manufacturer, remanufacturer, or distributor, as defined in Ohio
R.C. 4517.01, shall provide to a motor vehicle dealer licensed under Ohio R.C.
Chapter 4517 or to any other person, a motor vehicle that fails to conform to
the requirements of Ohio R.C. 4513.241  or of any rule adopted under that
section.
   (d)   No reflectorized materials shall be permitted upon or in any front
windshield, side windows, sidewings, or rear window.
   (e)   This section does not apply to the manufacturer’s tinting or glazing
of motor vehicle windows or windshields that is otherwise in compliance with or
permitted by Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard #205.
   (f)   With regard to any side window behind a driver’s seat or any rear
window other than any window on an emergency door, this division (b) does not
apply to any school bus used to transport a child with disabilities pursuant to
Ohio R.C. Chapter 3323, whom it is impossible or impractical to transport by
regular school bus in the course of regular route transportation provided by a
school district. As used in this division, “child with disabilities” has the
same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 3323.01.
   (g)   This section does not apply to any school bus that is to be sold and
operated outside the municipality.
   (h)   (1)   This section does not apply to a motor vehicle used by a law
enforcement agency under either of the following circumstances:
         A.   The vehicle does not have distinctive markings of a law
enforcement vehicle but is operated by or on behalf of the law enforcement
agency in an authorized investigation or other activity requiring that the
presence and identity of the vehicle occupants be undisclosed.
         B.   The vehicle primarily is used by the law enforcement canine unit
for transporting a police dog.
      (2)   As used in this division, “law enforcement agency” means a police
department, the office of a sheriff, the State Highway Patrol, a county
prosecuting attorney, or a federal, state, or local governmental body that
enforces criminal laws and that has employees who have a statutory power of
arrest.
(ORC 4513.241(C) - (J))
   (i)   (1)   Whoever violates division (a), (c)(2) or (d) of this section is
guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (c)(1) of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor if the dealer or the dealer’s agent knew of the nonconformity
at the time of sale.
      (3)   A.   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree, except that an organization may not be
convicted unless the act of installation was authorized by the board of
directors, trustees, partners, or by a high managerial officer acting on behalf
of the organization, and installation was performed by an employee of the
organization acting within the scope of the person’s employment.
      (4)   A.   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree, except that an organization may not be
convicted unless the act of installation was authorized by the board of
directors, trustees, partners, or by a high managerial officer acting on behalf
of the organization, and installation was performed by an employee of the
organization acting within the scope of the person’s employment.
         B.   In addition to any other penalty imposed under this section,
whoever violates division (b) of this section is liable in a civil action to
the owner of a motor vehicle on which was installed the nonconforming glass or
material for any damages incurred by that person as a result of the
installation of the nonconforming glass or material, costs of maintaining the
civil action, and attorney fees.
         C.   In addition to any other penalty imposed under this section, if
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation
of division (b) of this section and the offender is a motor vehicle repair
operator registered under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4775 or a motor vehicle dealer
licensed under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4517, whoever violates division (b) of this
section is subject to a registration or license suspension, as applicable, for
a period of not more than 180 days.
(ORC 4513.241(K))
Statutory reference:
   Administrative regulations, see OAC Chapter 4501-41
   Recording and reporting violations, certain court requirements, see Ohio
R.C. 4513.241(L)
§ 438.25  LIMITED LOAD EXTENSION ON LEFT SIDE OF PASSENGER VEHICLE.
   (a)   No passenger-type vehicle shall be operated on a highway with any load
carried on the vehicle which extends more than six inches beyond the line of
the fenders on the vehicle’s left side.
(ORC 4513.30)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4513.99)
§ 438.26  MOTOR VEHICLE STOP LIGHTS.
   (a)   (1)   Every motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer, and pole trailer when
operated upon a highway shall be equipped with two or more stop lights, except
that passenger cars manufactured or assembled prior to January 1, 1967,
motorcycles, and motor-driven cycles shall be equipped with at least one stop
light. Stop lights shall be mounted on the rear of the vehicle, actuated upon
application of the service brake, and may be incorporated with other rear
lights. Such stop lights when actuated shall emit a red light visible from a
distance of 500 feet to the rear; provided that in the case of a train of
vehicles only the stop lights on the rearmost vehicle need be visible from the
distance specified.
      (2)   Such stop lights when actuated shall give a steady warning light to
the rear of a vehicle or train of vehicles to indicate the intention of the
operator to diminish the speed of or stop a vehicle or train of vehicles.
      (3)   When stop lights are used as required by this section, they shall
be constructed or installed so as to provide adequate and reliable illumination
and shall conform to the appropriate rules and regulations established under
Ohio R.C. 4513.19.
      (4)   Historical motor vehicles as defined in Ohio R.C. 4503.181, not
originally manufactured with stop lights, are not subject to this section.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4513.071)
§ 438.27  BUMPERS.
   (a)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   “Gross vehicle weight rating” means the manufacturer’s gross
vehicle weight rating established for that vehicle.
      (2)   “Manufacturer” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 4501.01.
      (3)   “Multipurpose passenger vehicle” means a motor vehicle with motive
power, except a motorcycle, designed to carry ten persons or less, that is
constructed either on a truck chassis or with special features for occasional
off-road operation.
      (4)   “Passenger car” means any motor vehicle with motive power, designed
for carrying ten persons or less, except a multipurpose passenger vehicle or
motorcycle.
      (5)   “Truck” means every motor vehicle, except trailers and
semitrailers, designed and used to carry property and having a gross vehicle
weight rating of 10,000 pounds or less.
   (b)   Rules adopted by the Director of Public Safety, in accordance with
Ohio R.C. Chapter 119, shall govern the maximum bumper height or, in the
absence of bumpers and in cases where bumper height have been lowered or
modified, the maximum height to the bottom of the frame rail of any passenger
car, multipurpose passenger vehicle or truck.
   (c)   No person shall operate upon a street or highway any passenger car,
multipurpose passenger vehicle or truck registered in this state that does not
conform to the requirements of this section or any applicable rule adopted
pursuant to Ohio R.C. 4513.021.
   (d)   No person shall modify any motor vehicle registered in this state in
such a manner as to cause the vehicle body or chassis to come in contact with
the ground, expose the fuel tank to damage from collision, or cause the wheels
to come in contact with the body under normal operation, and no person shall
disconnect any part of the original suspension system of the vehicle to defeat
the safe operation of that system.
   (e)   Nothing contained in this section or in the rules adopted pursuant to
Ohio R.C. 4513.021 shall be construed to prohibit either of the following:
      (1)   The installation upon a passenger car, multipurpose passenger
vehicle or truck registered in this state of heavy duty equipment, including
shock absorbers and overload springs.
      (2)   The operation on a street or highway of a passenger car,
multipurpose passenger vehicle, or truck registered in this state with normal
wear to the suspension system if the normal wear does not adversely affect the
control of the vehicle.
   (f)   This section and the rules adopted pursuant to Ohio R.C. 4513.021 do
not apply to any specially designed or modified passenger car, multipurpose
passenger vehicle, or truck when operated off a street or highway in races and
similar events.
   (g)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4513.021)
Statutory reference:
   Maximum height on bumpers, see OAC Chapter 4501-43
§ 438.28  AIR CLEANER REQUIRED.
   No person shall operate upon any street, alley or other public place any
motor vehicle which is not equipped with a functioning air cleaner, except for
motor vehicles equipped with electronic fuel-injection engines.
§ 438.29  USE OF CHILD RESTRAINTS.
   (a)   When any child who is in either or both of the following categories is
being transported in a motor vehicle, other than a taxicab or public safety
vehicle as defined in Ohio R.C. 4511.01, that is required by the United States
Department of Transportation to be equipped with seat belts at the time of
manufacture or assembly, the operator of the motor vehicle shall have the child
properly secured in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions in a child
restraint system that meets federal motor vehicle safety standards:
      (1)   A child who is less than four years of age;
      (2)   A child who weighs less than 40 pounds.
   (b)   When any child who is in either or both of the following categories is
being transported in a motor vehicle, other than a taxicab, that is owned,
leased, or otherwise under the control of a nursery school or day-care center,
the operator of the motor vehicle shall have the child properly secured in
accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions in a child restraint system
that meets federal motor vehicle safety standards:
      (1)   A child who is less than four years of age;
      (2)   A child who weighs less than 40 pounds.
   (c)   When any child who is less than eight years of age and less than four
feet nine inches in height, who is not required by division (a) or (b) of this
section to be secured in a child restraint system, is being transported in a
motor vehicle, other than a taxicab or public safety vehicle as defined in Ohio
R.C. 4511.01 or a vehicle that is regulated under Ohio R.C. 5104.015, that is
required by the United States Department of Transportation to be equipped with
seat belts at the time of manufacture or assembly, the operator of the motor
vehicle shall have the child properly secured in accordance with the
manufacturer’s instructions on a booster seat that meets federal motor vehicle
safety standards.
   (d)   When any child who is at least eight years of age but not older than
15 years of age, and who is not otherwise required by division (a), (b), or (c)
of this section to be secured in a child restraint system or booster seat, is
being transported in a motor vehicle, other than a taxicab or public safety
vehicle as defined in Ohio R.C. 4511.01, that is required by the United States
Department of Transportation to be equipped with seat belts at the time of
manufacture or assembly, the operator of the motor vehicle shall have the child
properly restrained either in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions
in a child restraint system that meets federal motor vehicle safety standards
or in an occupant restraining device as defined in Ohio R.C. 4513.263.
   (e)   Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, no law
enforcement officer shall cause an operator of a motor vehicle being operated
on any street or highway to stop the motor vehicle for the sole purpose of
determining whether a violation of division (c) or (d) of this section has been
or is being committed or for the sole purpose of issuing a ticket, citation, or
summons for a violation of division (c) or (d) of this section or causing the
arrest of or commencing a prosecution of a person for a violation of division
(c) or (d) of this section, and absent another violation of law, a law
enforcement officer’s view of the interior or visual inspection of a motor
vehicle being operated on any street or highway may not be used for the purpose
of determining whether a violation of division (c) or (d) of this section has
been or is being committed.
   (f)   The Director of Public Safety shall adopt such rules as are necessary
to carry out this section.
   (g)   The failure of an operator of a motor vehicle to secure a child in a
child restraint system, a booster seat, or an occupant restraining device as
required in this section is not negligence imputable to the child, is not
admissible as evidence in any civil action involving the rights of the child
against any other person allegedly liable for injuries to the child, is not to
be used as a basis for a criminal prosecution of the operator of the motor
vehicle other than a prosecution for a violation of this section, and is not
admissible as evidence in any criminal action involving the operator of the
motor vehicle other than a prosecution for a violation of this section.
   (h)   This section does not apply when an emergency exists that threatens
the life of any person operating or occupying a motor vehicle that is being
used to transport a child who otherwise would be required to be restrained
under this section. This section does not apply to a person operating a motor
vehicle who has an affidavit signed by a physician licensed to practice in this
state under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4731 or a chiropractor licensed to practice in
this state under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4734 that states that the child who
otherwise would be required to be restrained under this section has a physical
impairment that makes use of a child restraint system, booster seat or an
occupant restraining device impossible or impractical, provided that the person
operating the vehicle has safely and appropriately restrained the child in
accordance with any recommendations of the physician or chiropractor as noted
on the affidavit.
   (i)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to require any person to
carry with the person the birth certificate of a child to prove the age of the
child, but the production of a valid birth certificate for a child showing that
the child was not of an age to which this section applies is a defense against
any ticket, citation or summons issued for violating this section.
   (j)   (1)   Whoever violates division (a), (b), (c), or (d) of this section
shall be punished as follows, provided that the failure of an operator of a
motor vehicle to secure more than one child in a child restraint system,
booster seat or occupant restraining device as required by this section that
occurred at the same time, on the same day and at the same location is deemed
to be a single violation of this section:
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in division (j)(1)B. of this
section, the offender is guilty of a minor misdemeanor and shall be fined not
less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than seventy-five dollars
($75.00).
         B.   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of division (a), (b),(c) or (d) of this section or of a
state law or municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent any of those
divisions, the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
      (2)   All fines imposed pursuant to division (j)(1) of this section shall
be forwarded to the State Treasurer for deposit in the Child Highway Safety
Fund created by Ohio R.C. 4511.81(I).
(ORC 4511.81(A) - (H), (K), (L))
§ 438.30  USE OF OCCUPANT RESTRAINING DEVICES.
   (a)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      (1)   “Automobile” means any commercial tractor, passenger car,
commercial car, or truck that is required to be factory-equipped with an
occupant restraining device for the operator or any passenger by regulations
adopted by the United States Secretary of Transportation pursuant to the
“National Traffic and Motor Vehicle Safety Act of 1966,” 80 Stat. 719, 15
U.S.C. 1392.
      (2)   “Commercial tractor,” “passenger car,” and “commercial car” have
the same meanings as in Ohio R.C. 4501.01.
      (3)   “Occupant restraining device” means a seat safety belt, shoulder
belt, harness, or other safety device for restraining a person who is an
operator of or passenger in an automobile and that satisfies the minimum
federal vehicle safety standards established by the United States Department of
Transportation.
      (4)   “Passenger” means any person in an automobile, other than its
operator, who is occupying a seating position for which an occupant restraining
device is provided.
      (5)   “Tort action” means a civil action for damages for injury, death,
or loss to person or property. “Tort action” includes a product liability
claim, as defined in Ohio R.C. 2307.71, and as asbestos claim, as defined in
Ohio R.C. 2307.91, but does not include a civil action for damages for breach
of contract or another agreement between persons.
      (6)   “Vehicle” and “motor vehicle,” as used in the definitions of the
terms set forth above, have the same meanings as in Ohio R.C. 4511.01.
   (b)   Prohibited acts.  No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Operate an automobile on any street or highway unless he or she is
wearing all of the available elements of a properly adjusted occupant
restraining device, or operate a school bus that has an occupant restraining
device installed for use in its operator’s seat unless he or she is wearing all
of the available elements of the device, as properly adjusted.
      (2)   Operate an automobile on any street or highway unless each
passenger in the automobile who is subject to the requirement set forth in
division (b)(3) of this section is wearing all of the available elements of a
properly adjusted occupant restraining device.
      (3)   Occupy, as a passenger, a seating position on the front seat of an
automobile being operated on any street or highway unless he or she is wearing
all of the available elements of a properly adjusted occupant restraining
device.
      (4)   Operate a taxicab on any street or highway unless all factory-
equipped occupant restraining devices in the taxicab are maintained in usable
form.
   (c)   Exceptions.  Division (b)(3) of this section does not apply to a
person who is required by Ohio R.C. 4511.81 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance to be secured in a child restraint device or booster seat.
Division (b)(1) of this section does not apply to a person who is an employee
of the United States Postal Service or of a newspaper home delivery service,
during any period in which the person is engaged in the operation of an
automobile to deliver mail or newspapers to addressees. Divisions (b)(1) and
(b)(3) of this section do not apply to a person who has an affidavit signed by
a physician licensed to practice in this state under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4731 or
a chiropractor licensed to practice in this state under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4734
that states that the person has a physical impairment that makes use of an
occupant restraining device impossible or impractical.
   (d)   Officers not permitted to stop cars to determine violation. 
Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, no law enforcement
officer shall cause an operator of an automobile being operated on any street
or highway to stop the automobile for the sole purpose of determining whether a
violation of division (b) of this section has been or is being committed or for
the sole purpose of issuing a ticket, citation, or summons for the violation or
for causing the arrest of or commencing a prosecution of a person for the
violation. No law enforcement officer shall view the interior or visually
inspect any automobile being operated on any street or highway for the sole
purpose of determining whether the violation has been or is being committed.
   (e)   Use of fines for educational program.  All fines collected for
violations of division (b) of this section shall be forwarded to the State
Treasurer for deposit in the funds as set forth in Ohio R.C. 4513.263(E).
   (f)   Limitations on evidence used for prosecution.
      (1)   Subject to division (f)(2) of this section, the failure of a person
to wear all of the available elements of a properly adjusted occupant
restraining device in violation of division (b)(1) or (b)(3) of this section or
the failure of a person to ensure that each minor who is a passenger of an
automobile being operated by that person is wearing all of the available
elements of a properly adjusted occupant restraining device in violation of
division (b)(2) of this section shall not be considered or used by the trier of
fact in a tort action as evidence of negligence or contributory negligence.
But, the trier of fact may determine based on evidence admitted consistent with
the Ohio Rules of Evidence that the failure contributed to the harm alleged in
the tort action and may diminish a recovery of compensatory damages that
represents non-economic loss, as defined in Ohio R.C. 2307.011, in a tort
action that could have been recovered but for the plaintiff’s failure to wear
all of the available elements of a properly adjusted occupant restraining
device. Evidence of that failure shall not be used as a basis for a criminal
prosecution of the person other than a prosecution for a violation of this
section; and shall not be admissible as evidence in a criminal action involving
the person other than a prosecution for a violation of this section.
      (2)   If, at the time of an accident involving a passenger car equipped
with occupant restraining devices, any occupant of the passenger car who
sustained injury or death was not wearing an available occupant restraining
device, was not wearing all of the available elements of such a device, or was
not wearing such a device as properly adjusted, then, consistent with the Rules
of Evidence, the fact that the occupant was not wearing the available occupant
restraining device, was not wearing all of the available elements of such a
device, or was not wearing such a device as properly adjusted is admissible in
evidence in relation to any claim for relief in a tort action to the extent
that the claim for relief satisfies all of the following:
         A.   It seeks to recover damages for injury or death to the occupant;
         B.   The defendant in question is the manufacturer, designer,
distributor, or seller of the passenger car;
         C.   The claim for relief against the defendant in question is that
the injury or death sustained by the occupant was enhanced or aggravated by
some design defect in the passenger car or that the passenger car was not
crashworthy.
   (g)   Penalty.
      (1)   Whoever violates division (b)(1) of this section shall be fined
thirty dollars ($30.00).
      (2)   Whoever violates division (b)(2) of this section shall be subject
to the penalty set forth in §
408.02.
      (3)   Whoever violates division (b)(3) of this section shall be fined
twenty dollars ($20.00).
      (4)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (b)(4) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If the
offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of
division (b)(4) of this section, whoever violates division (b)(4) of this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(ORC 4513.263)
§ 438.31  IGNITION INTERLOCK DEVICES. (REPEALED)
   (EDITOR’S NOTE:  Section 438.31 was repealed as part of the 2003 updating
and revision of this Municipal Code because substantially equivalent state law
(Ohio R.C. 4511.83(A), (B), (E)) was repealed by the Ohio General Assembly.)
§ 438.32  AIR BAGS.
   (a)   As used in this section:
      (1)   “Air bag.” Has the same meaning as in 49 C.F.R. § 579.4, as
amended.
      (2)   “Counterfeit air bag.” An air bag displaying a mark identical or
similar to the genuine mark of a motor vehicle manufacturer, without the
authorization of the motor vehicle manufacturer.
      (3)   “Nonfunctional air bag.” Any of the following:
         A.   A replacement air bag that has been previously deployed or
damaged;
         B.   A replacement air bag that has an electrical fault that is
detected by the air bag diagnostic system of a vehicle after the air bag is
installed;
         C.   A counterfeit air bag, air bag cover, or some other object that
is installed in a vehicle to deceive an owner or operator of the vehicle into
believing that a functional air bag has been installed.
   (b)   No person shall install or reinstall in any motor vehicle a
counterfeit or nonfunctional air bag or any object intended to fulfill the
function of an air bag other than an air bag that was designed in conformance
with or that is regulated by Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard Number 208
for the make, model, and model year of the vehicle, knowing that the object is
not in accordance with that standard.
   (c)   No person shall knowingly manufacture, import, sell, or offer for sale
any of the following:
      (1)   A counterfeit air bag;
      (2)   A nonfunctional air bag;
      (3)   Any other object that is intended to be installed in a motor
vehicle to fulfill the function of an air bag and that is not in conformance
with Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard Number 208 for the make, model, and
model year of the vehicle in which the object is intended to be installed.
   (d)   No person shall knowingly sell, install, or reinstall a device in a
motor vehicle that causes the diagnostic system of a vehicle to inaccurately
indicate that the vehicle is equipped with a functional air bag.
   (e)   (1)   Whoever violates division (b) or (d) of this section is guilty
of improper replacement of a motor vehicle air bag, a misdemeanor of the first
degree on a first offense. On each subsequent offense, or if the violation
results in serious physical harm to an individual, the person is guilty of a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   A violation of division (c) of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (3)   Each manufacture, importation, installation, reinstallation, sale,
or offer for sale in violation of this section shall constitute a separate and
distinct violation.
(ORC 4549.20)
§ 438.99  PENALTY.
   (EDITOR’S NOTE:  See §§
408.01 and
408.02 for general Traffic Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.)
CHAPTER 440:  COMMERCIAL AND HEAVY VEHICLES
Section
440.01   Load limits.
440.02   Maximum width, height and length.
440.03   Wheel protectors.
440.04   Vehicles transporting explosives.
440.05   Towing requirements; exception to size and weight restrictions.
440.06   Loads dropping or leaking; tracking mud; removal required.
440.07   Vehicles with spikes, lugs and chains.
440.08   Occupying travel trailer or manufactured home while in motion.
440.09   Route and load information.
440.10   Shifting load; loose loads.
440.11   Chauffeured limousines.
440.12   Engine brakes (Jake brakes).
440.99   Penalty.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   See section histories for similar state law
   Display of certificates of registration - see Ohio R.C. 4549.18
   Arrest notice of drivers - see Ohio R.C. 5577.14
   Riding in cargo storage areas - see TRAF.
416.06
   Stopping at grade crossings - see TRAF.
432.34,
432.35
   Slow-moving equipment at grade crossings - see TRAF.
432.35
   Fatigued or ill drivers - see TRAF.
442.09
   Truck loading zones - see TRAF.
452.10
   Bus stops and taxicab stands - see TRAF.
452.11
§ 440.01  LOAD LIMITS.
   (a)   State regulations.
      (1)   A.   The municipality, with respect to highways under their
jurisdiction, upon application in writing, shall issue a special regional heavy
hauling permit authorizing the applicant to operate or move a vehicle or
combination of vehicles as follows:
            1.   At a size or weight of vehicle or load exceeding the maximum
specified in Ohio R.C. 5577.01 to 5577.09, or otherwise not in conformity with
Ohio R.C. 4513.01 to 4513.37.
            2.   Upon any highway under the jurisdiction of municipality except
those highways with a condition insufficient to bear the weight of the vehicle
or combination of vehicles as stated in the application.
            3.   For regional trips at distances of 150 miles or less from a
facility stated on the application as the applicant’s point of origin.
            4.   Issuance of a special regional heavy hauling permit is subject
to the payment of a fee established by the municipality in accordance with this
section.
         B.   In circumstances where a person is not eligible to receive a
permit under division (a)(1)A. of this section, the municipality, with respect
to highways under its jurisdiction, upon application in writing and for good
cause shown, may issue a special permit in writing authorizing the applicant to
operate or move a vehicle or combination of vehicles of a size or weight of
vehicle or load exceeding the maximum specified in Ohio R.C. 5577.01 through
5577.09, or otherwise not in conformity with Ohio R.C. 4513.01 through 4513.37,
upon any highway under its jurisdiction.
      (2)   Notwithstanding Ohio R.C. 715.22 and 723.01, the holder of a permit
issued by the Director of Transportation under Ohio R.C. 4513.34 may move the
vehicle or combination of vehicles described in the permit on any highway that
is a part of the state highway system when the movement is partly within and
partly without the corporate limits of the municipality. No local authority
shall require any other permit or license or charge any license fee or other
charge against the holder of a permit for the movement of a vehicle or
combination of vehicles on any highway which is a part of the state highway
system. The Ohio Director of Transportation shall not require the holder of a
permit issued by the municipality to obtain a special permit for the movement
of vehicles or combination of vehicles on highways within the jurisdiction of
the municipality. Permits may be issued for any period of time not to exceed
one year, as the local authority in its discretion determines advisable or for
the duration of any public construction project.
      (3)   A.   The application for a permit issued under this section shall
be in the form that the municipality prescribes. The municipality may prescribe
a permit fee to be imposed and collected when any permit described in this
section is issued. The permit fee may be in an amount sufficient to reimburse
the municipality for the administrative costs incurred in issuing the permit,
and also to cover the cost of normal and expected damage caused to the roadway
or a street or highway structure as the result of the operation of the
nonconforming vehicle or combination of vehicles.
         B.   For the purposes of this section and of rules adopted by the
Director under Ohio R.C. 4513.34, milk transported in bulk by vehicle is deemed
a nondivisible load.
      (4)   The municipality shall issue a special regional heavy hauling
permit under division (a)(1)A. of this section upon application and payment of
the applicable fee. However, the municipality may issue or withhold a special
permit specified in division (a)(1)B. of this section. If a permit is to be
issued, the municipality may limit or prescribe conditions of operation for the
vehicle and may require the posting of a bond or other security conditioned
upon the sufficiency of the permit fee to compensate for damage caused to the
roadway or a street or highway structure. In addition, the municipality, as a
condition of issuance of an overweight permit, may require the applicant to
develop and enter into a mutual agreement with the municipality to compensate
for or to repair excess damage caused to the roadway by travel under the
permit.
      (5)   Every permit issued under this section shall be carried in the
vehicle or combination of vehicles to which it refers and shall be open to
inspection by any police officer or authorized agent of any authority granting
the permit. No person shall violate any of the terms of a permit.
      (6)   The Director of Transportation may debar an applicant from applying
for a special permit under this section upon a finding based on a reasonable
belief that the applicant has done any of the actions specified in Ohio R.C.
4513.34(F).
      (7)   Notice and procedures for debarment shall be as provided in Ohio
R.C. 4513.34(G).
      (8)   A.   No person shall violate the terms of a permit issued under
this section that relate to gross load limits.
         B.   No person shall violate the terms of a permit issued under this
section that relate to axle load by more than 2,000 pounds per axle or group of
axles.
         C.   No person shall violate the terms of a permit issued under this
section that relate to an approved route except upon order of a law enforcement
officer.
      (9)   A permit issued by the municipality under this section for the
operation of a vehicle or combination of vehicles is valid for the purposes of
the vehicle operation in accordance with the conditions and limitations
specified on the permit. Such a permit is voidable by law enforcement only for
operation of a vehicle or combination of vehicles in violation of the weight,
dimension, or route provisions of the permit. However, a permit is not voidable
for operation in violation of a route provision of a permit if the operation is
upon the order of a law enforcement officer.
(ORC 4513.34)
   (b)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
(ORC 4513.99)
   (c)   Use of local streets generally.  No person shall operate a vehicle
exceeding a size as specified Ohio R.C. 5577.01 through 5577.09, or otherwise
not in conformity with Ohio R.C. 4513.01 through 4513.37, or exceeding a gross
weight of five tons, upon any street in the municipality other than state
routes and county roads, except those local streets designated as a truck route
and marked as such by appropriate traffic signs, and except when such operation
is necessary to load or unload property, to go to or from the usual place of
storage of such vehicle or to perform any other legitimate business or act
other than passage through the municipality. Operators of vehicles so deviating
from either a state route or a designated truck route within the municipality
shall confine such deviation to that required in order to accomplish the
purpose of the departure. On county roads, Council or other duly designated
local authority shall establish reasonable weight limits commensurate with the
construction and material specifications for such roads and the load resistance
of such roads as determined by the County Engineer. county roads shall be
posted with signs indicating such weight limits.
(1974 Code, § 339.02(a))
   (d)   Local permit and conditions.  Upon application and for good cause, the
Police Chief may issue a local permit authorizing an applicant to move an
oversize or overweight vehicle or combination of vehicles upon local streets
and highways.
      (1)   No permittee shall be required to obtain a special permit from the
Ohio Director of Transportation for the movement of the vehicle or combination
of vehicles on streets or highways under local jurisdiction. However, the
approval of the Ohio Director of Transportation shall be required for movement
upon state routes as provided in division (a) of this section.
      (2)   The Police Chief may grant a permit for a single or round trip, or
for such period of time, not to exceed one year, as the Police Chief in his or
her discretion deems advisable, or for the duration of any construction
project. The Police Chief may limit or prescribe terms or conditions of
operation for such vehicle or combination of vehicles by designating the route,
hours, speed or such other restrictions as may be necessary for the
preservation of the public peace, property, health and safety. The Police Chief
may require the posting of bond or other security necessary to compensate for
any damage to a roadway or road structure.
      (3)   For each such permit, the Police Chief shall charge twenty-five
dollars ($25.00), and for each hour of time or any part thereof spent by the
Police Department in supervising the movement of such vehicle, the applicant
shall pay the sum of fifty dollars ($50.00).
      (4)   Except as provided in divisions (a) and (b) of this section,
streets and highways shall be posted with signs indicating “no thru trucks -
gross weight 5 tons” or words of similar import to inform drivers of the
limitations imposed by this section. No driver shall disobey the instructions
indicated on any such sign.
      (5)   Violation of any of the limitations, terms or conditions of the
permit granted by the Police Chief shall be cause for immediate revocation or
suspension of such permit and denial of request for any future permit. Such
violation shall also subject the violator to the penalties prescribed by §§
408.01 and
408.02.
   (d)   Nothing in this section shall be deemed to restrict the right of the
electric, gas and telephone companies, which operate in and service the
residents of the municipality, to make use of the streets and alleys of the
municipality by vehicles belonging to such companies.
(1974 Code, § 339.02(d))
§ 440.02  MAXIMUM WIDTH, HEIGHT AND LENGTH.
   (a)   No vehicle shall be operated upon the public highways, streets,
bridges, and culverts within this municipality whose dimensions exceed those
specified in this section.
   (b)   No such vehicle shall have a width in excess of:
      (1)   104 inches for passenger bus type vehicles operated exclusively
within the municipality.
      (2)   102 inches, excluding such safety devices as are required by law,
for passenger bus type vehicles operated over freeways, and such other state
roads with minimum pavement widths of 22 feet, except those roads or portions
of roads over which operation of 102-inch buses is prohibited by order of the
Director of Transportation.
      (3)   132 inches for traction engines.
      (4)   102 inches for recreational vehicles, excluding safety devices and
retracted awnings and other appurtenances of six inches or less in width and
except that the Director may prohibit the operation of 102-inch recreational
vehicles on designated state highways or portions of highways.
      (5)   102 inches, including load, for all other vehicles, except that the
Director may prohibit the operation of 102-inch vehicles on such state highways
or portions of state highways as the Director designates.
   (c)   No such vehicle shall have a length in excess of:
      (1)   66 feet for passenger bus type vehicles and articulated passenger
bus type vehicles operated by a regional transit authority pursuant to Ohio
R.C. 306.30 to 306.54.
      (2)   45 feet for all other passenger bus type vehicles.
      (3)   53 feet for any semitrailer when operated in a commercial tractor-
semitrailer combination, with or without load, except that the Director may
prohibit the operation of any such commercial tractor-semitrailer combination
on such state highways or portions of state highways as the Director
designates.
      (4)   28-1/2 feet for any semitrailer or trailer when operated in a
commercial tractor-semitrailer-trailer or commercial tractor-semitrailer-
semitrailer combination, except that the Director may prohibit the operation of
any such commercial tractor-semitrailer-trailer or commercial tractor-
semitrailer-semitrailer combination on such state highways or portions of state
highways as the Director designates.
      (5)   A.   97 feet for drive-away saddlemount vehicle transporter
combinations and drive-away saddlemount with fullmount vehicle transporter
combinations when operated on any interstate, United States route, or state
route, including reasonable access travel on all other roadways for a distance
not to exceed one road mile from any interstate, United States route, or state
route, not to exceed three saddlemounted vehicles, but which may include one
fullmount;
         B.   75 feet for drive-away saddlemount vehicle transporter
combinations and drive-away saddlemount with fullmount vehicle transporter
combinations when operated on any roadway not designated as an interstate,
United States route, or state route, not to exceed three saddlemounted
vehicles, but which may include one fullmount.
      (6)   65 feet for any other combination of vehicles coupled together,
with or without load, except as provided in division (c)(3) and (4), and in
division (e) below.
      (7)   45 feet for recreational vehicles.
      (8)   50 feet for all other vehicles, except trailers and semitrailers,
with or without load.
   (d)   No such vehicle shall have a height in excess of 13½ feet, with or
without load.
   (e)   An automobile transporter or boat transporter shall be allowed a
length of 65 feet, and a stinger-steered automobile transporter or stinger-
steered boat transporter shall be allowed a length of 75 feet, except that the
load thereon may extend no more than four feet beyond the rear of such vehicles
and may extend no more than three feet beyond the front of such vehicles, and
except further that the Director may prohibit the operation of a stinger-
steered automobile transporter, stinger-steered boat transporter, or a B-train
assembly on any state highway or portion of any state highway that the Director
designates.
   (f)   (1)   The widths prescribed in division (b) of this section shall not
include side mirrors, turn signal lamps, marker lamps, handholds for cab entry
and egress, flexible fender extensions, mud flaps, splash and spray suppressant
devices, and load-induced tire bulge.
      (2)   The widths prescribed in division (b)(5) of this section shall not
include automatic covering devices, tarp and tarp hardware, and tiedown
assemblies, provided these safety devices do not extend more than three inches
from either side of the vehicle.
      (3)   The lengths prescribed in divisions (c)(2) to (c)(7) shall not
include safety devices, bumpers attached to the front or rear of such bus or
combination, non-property carrying devices or components that do not extend
more than 24 inches beyond the rear of the vehicle and are needed for loading
or unloading, B-train assembly used between the first and second semitrailer of
a commercial tractor-semitrailer-semitrailer combination, energy conservation
devices as provided in any regulations adopted by the Secretary of the United
States Department of Transportation, or any noncargo-carrying refrigerator
equipment attached to the front of trailers and semitrailers. In special cases,
vehicles that dimensions exceed those prescribed by this section may operate in
accordance with rules adopted by the Director.
   (g)   (1)   This section does not apply to fire engines, fire trucks, or
other vehicles or apparatus belonging to the municipality or to the volunteer
fire department thereof or used by such department in the discharge of its
functions. This section does not apply to vehicles and pole trailers used in
the transportation of wooden and metal poles, nor to the transportation of
pipes or well-drilling equipment, nor to farm machinery and equipment.
      (2)   The owner or operator of any vehicle, machinery, or equipment not
specifically enumerated in this section but the dimensions of which exceed the
dimensions provided by this section, when operating the same on the highways
and streets of the municipality, shall comply with the rules of the Director
governing such movement. Any person adversely affected shall have the same
right of appeal as provided in Ohio R.C. Chapter 119.
      (3)   This section does not require the municipality or any railroad or
other private corporation to provide sufficient vertical clearance to permit
the operation of such vehicle, or to make any changes in or about existing
structures now crossing streets, roads, and other public thoroughfares.
   (h)   As used in this section, “recreational vehicle” has the same meaning
as in Ohio R.C. 4501.01.
(ORC 5577.05)
   (i)   No person shall violate any rule or regulation promulgated by the
Director of Transportation in accordance with Ohio R.C. 5577.05.
(ORC 5577.06)
   (j)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor on a
first offense; on a second or subsequent offense, such person is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(ORC 5577.99(C))
§ 440.03  WHEEL PROTECTORS.
   (a)   No person shall drive or operate, or cause to be driven or operated,
any commercial car, trailer, or semitrailer, used for the transportation of
goods or property, the gross weight of which, with load, exceeds three tons,
upon the public highways, streets, bridges, and culverts within the
municipality, unless such vehicle is equipped with suitable metal protectors or
substantial flexible flaps on the rearmost wheels of such vehicle or
combination of vehicles to prevent, as far as practicable, the wheels from
throwing dirt, water, or other materials on the windshields of following
vehicles. Such protectors or flaps shall have a ground clearance of not more
than one-third of the distance from the center of the rearmost axle to the
center of the flaps under any conditions of loading of the vehicle, and they
shall be at least as wide as the tires they are protecting. If the vehicle is
so designed and constructed that such requirements are accomplished by means of
fenders, body construction, or other means of enclosure, then no such
protectors or flaps are required. Rear wheels not covered at the top by
fenders, bodies, or other parts of the vehicle shall be covered at the top by
protective means extending at least to the center line of the rearmost axle.
(ORC 5577.11)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not more than twenty-five
dollars ($25.00).
(ORC 5577.99(E))
§ 440.04  VEHICLES TRANSPORTING EXPLOSIVES.
   (a)   Any person operating any vehicle transporting explosives upon a
highway shall at all times comply with the following requirements:
      (1)   The vehicle shall be marked or placarded on each side and on the
rear with the word “EXPLOSIVES” in letters not less than eight inches high, or
there shall be displayed on the rear of such vehicle a red flag not less than
24 inches square marked with the word “DANGER” in white letters six inches
high, or shall be marked or placarded in accordance with § 177.823 of the
United States Department of Transportation regulations.
      (2)   The vehicle shall be equipped with not less than two fire
extinguishers, filled and ready for immediate use, and placed at convenient
points on such vehicle.
(ORC 4513.29)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4513.99)
§ 440.05  TOWING REQUIREMENTS; EXCEPTION TO SIZE AND WEIGHT RESTRICTIONS.
   (a)   (1)   When one vehicle is towing another vehicle, the drawbar or other
connection shall be of sufficient strength to pull all the weight towed
thereby, and the drawbar or other connection shall not exceed 15 feet from one
vehicle to the other, except the connection between any two vehicles
transporting poles, pipe, machinery, or other objects of structural nature
which cannot readily be dismembered.
      (2)   When one vehicle is towing another and the connection consists only
of a chain, rope, or cable, there shall be displayed upon such connection a
white flag or cloth not less than 12 inches square.
      (3)   In addition to such drawbar or other connection, each trailer and
each semitrailer which is not connected to a commercial tractor by means of a
fifth wheel shall be coupled with stay chains or cables to the vehicle by which
it is being drawn. These chains or cables shall be of sufficient size and
strength to prevent the towed vehicle’s parting from the drawing vehicle in
case the drawbar or other connection should break or become disengaged. In case
of a loaded pole trailer, the connecting pole to the drawing vehicle shall be
coupled to the drawing vehicle with stay chains or cables of sufficient size
and strength to prevent the towed vehicle’s parting from the drawing vehicle.
      (4)   Every trailer or semitrailer, except pole and cable trailers and
pole and cable dollies operated by a public utility as defined in Ohio R.C.
5727.01, shall be equipped with a coupling device which shall be so designed
and constructed that the trailer will follow substantially in the path of the
vehicle drawing it, without whipping or swerving from side to side. Vehicles
used to transport agricultural produce or agricultural production materials
between a local place of storage and supply and the farm, when drawn or towed
on a street or highway at a speed of 25 miles per hour or less, and vehicles
designed and used exclusively to transport a boat between a place of storage
and a marina, or in and around a marina, when drawn or towed on a street or
highway for a distance of no more than ten miles and at a speed of 25 miles per
hour or less, shall have a drawbar or other connection, including the hitch
mounted on the towing vehicle, which shall be of sufficient strength to pull
all the weight towed thereby. Only one such vehicle used to transport
agricultural produce or agricultural production materials as provided in this
section may be towed or drawn at one time except as follows:
         A.   An agricultural tractor may tow or draw more than one such
vehicle;
         B.   A pickup truck or straight truck designed by the manufacturer to
carry a load of not less than one-half ton and not more than two tons may tow
or draw not more than two such vehicles that are being used to transport
agricultural produce from the farm to a local place of storage. No vehicle
being so towed by such a pickup truck or straight truck shall be considered to
be a motor vehicle.
(ORC 4513.32)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4513.99)
   (c)   Exception to size and weight restrictions.
      (1)   The size and weight provisions of this chapter and Ohio R.C.
Chapter 5577 do not apply to a person who is engaged in the initial towing or
removal or a wrecked or disabled motor vehicle from the site of an emergency on
a public highway where the vehicle became wrecked or disabled to the nearest
site where the vehicle can be brought into conformance with the requirements of
this chapter and Ohio R.C. Chapter 5577 or to the nearest qualified repair
facility.
      (2)   Any subsequent towing of a wrecked or disabled vehicle shall comply
with the size and weight provisions of this chapter and Ohio R.C. Chapter 5577.
      (3)   No court shall impose any penalty prescribed in Ohio R.C. 5577.99,
or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, or the civil liability
established in Ohio R.C. 5577.12 upon a person towing or removing a vehicle in
the manner described in division (c)(1) of this section.
(ORC 5577.15)
§ 440.06  LOADS DROPPING OR LEAKING; TRACKING MUD; REMOVAL REQUIRED.
   (a)   (1)   No vehicle shall be driven or moved on any highway unless the
vehicle is so constructed, loaded, or covered as to prevent any of its load
from dropping, sifting, leaking, or otherwise escaping therefrom, except that
sand or other substances may be dropped for the purpose of securing traction,
or water or other substances may be sprinkled on a roadway in cleaning or
maintaining the roadway.
      (2)   Except for a farm vehicle used to transport agricultural produce or
agricultural production materials or a rubbish vehicle in the process of
acquiring its load, no vehicle loaded with garbage, swill, cans, bottles, waste
paper, ashes, refuse, trash, rubbish, waste, wire, paper, cartons, boxes,
glass, solid waste, or any other material of an unsanitary nature that is
susceptible to blowing or bouncing from a moving vehicle shall be driven or
moved on any highway unless the load is covered with a sufficient cover to
prevent the load or any part of the load from spilling onto the highway.
(ORC 4513.31)
   (b)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
(ORC 4513.99)
   (c)   No person shall operate any vehicle so as to track mud on any public
way or place.
   (d)   It shall be the duty of the driver of a vehicle who unlawfully drops
or deposits mud or permits the load or any portion thereof to be dropped or
deposited upon any public way or place to immediately remove the same or cause
it to be removed.
(1974 Code, § 339.08)
§ 440.07  VEHICLES WITH SPIKES, LUGS AND CHAINS.
   (a)   No person shall drive over the improved highways of this municipality
a traction engine or tractor with tires or wheels equipped with ice picks,
spuds, spikes, chains or other projections of any kind extending beyond the
cleats, and no person shall tow or in any way pull another vehicle over the
improved highways of this municipality which towed or pulled vehicle has tires
or wheels equipped with ice picks, spuds, spikes, chains or other projections
of any kind. “Traction engine” or “tractor,” as used in this section, applies
to all self-propelling engines equipped with metal-tired wheels operated or
propelled by any form of engine, motor or mechanical power.
   (b)   This municipality shall not adopt, enforce, or maintain any ordinance,
rule or regulation contrary to or inconsistent with division (a), nor shall
this municipality require any license tax upon or registration fee for any
traction engine, tractor, or trailer, or any permit or license to operate.
Operators of traction engines or tractors shall have the same rights upon the
public streets and highways as the drivers of any other vehicles, unless some
other safe and convenient way is provided, and no public road open to traffic
shall be closed to traction engines or tractors.
(ORC 5589.08)
   (c)   For the purposes of this section, “studded tire” means any tire
designed for use on a vehicle and equipped with metal studs or studs of wear-
resisting material that project beyond the tread of the traction surface of the
tire.
   (d)   (1)   Except as provided in division (d)(2) of this section, no person
shall operate any motor vehicle other than a public safety vehicle or school
bus that is equipped with studded tires on any street or highway in this
municipality, except during the period extending from the first day of November
of each year through the fifteenth day of April of the succeeding year.
      (2)   A person may operate a motor vehicle that is equipped with
retractable studded tires with the studs retracted at any time of the year, but
shall operate the motor vehicle with the studs extended only as provided in
division (d)(1) of this section.
   (e)   Division (d) of this section does not apply to the use of tire chains
when there is snow or ice on the streets or highways where such chains are
being used, or the immediate vicinity thereof.
(ORC 5589.081)
   (f)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 5589.99(B))
§ 440.08  OCCUPYING TRAVEL TRAILER OR MANUFACTURED HOME WHILE IN MOTION.
   (a)   No person shall occupy any travel trailer or manufactured or mobile
home while it is being used as a conveyance upon a street or highway.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(ORC 4511.701)
§ 440.09  ROUTE AND LOAD INFORMATION.
   Drivers of vehicles described in this chapter are required, upon request by
a police officer, to give full and true information as to the route they are
following and the name of the consignor and consignee and place of delivery or
removal and the location of any consignment being hauled or goods being
removed, and upon a designation by such police officer of a route to be
followed, shall immediately adopt and pursue such route.
§ 440.10  SHIFTING LOAD; LOOSE LOADS.
   (a)   In addition to any other lawful requirements of load distribution, no
person shall operate any vehicle upon a street or highway unless such vehicle
is so laden as to prevent its contents from shifting or otherwise unbalancing
the vehicle to such an extent as to interfere with the safe operation of the
same.
   (b)   No motor vehicle or trailer shall be driven unless the tailboard or
tailgate, tarpaulins, chains (except ground or contact chains), ropes, stakes,
poles, and the like, or any part of the load, are securely fastened to prevent
dangling, flapping, swinging or falling from the side, end or top of the load
or body. All projecting cargo shall be properly guarded by a red flag or cloth
or a red light or lantern as required by Ohio R.C. 4513.09, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
§ 440.11  CHAUFFEURED LIMOUSINES.
   (a)   The operator of a chauffeured limousine shall accept passengers only
on the basis of prearranged contracts, as defined in Ohio R.C. 4501.01, and
shall not cruise in search of patronage unless the limousine is in compliance
with any statute or ordinance governing the operation of taxicabs or other
similar vehicles for hire.
   (b)   The operator of a chauffeured limousine may provide transportation to
passengers who arrange for the transportation through an intermediary,
including a digital dispatching service. Notwithstanding any law to the
contrary, when providing transportation arranged through an intermediary, the
operator of a chauffeured limousine may establish the fare and method of fare
calculation, so long as the method of fare calculation is provided to the
passenger upon request.
   (c)   No person shall advertise or hold himself or herself out as doing
business as a limousine service or livery service or other similar designation
unless each vehicle used by the person to provide the service is registered in
accordance with Ohio R.C. 4503.24 and is in compliance with Ohio R.C. 4509.80.
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(ORC 4511.85)
§ 440.12  ENGINE BRAKES (JAKE BRAKES).
   (a)   For purposes of this section, the term “Jake brake” shall mean an
engine brake of the type originated and/or manufactured by Jacobs Vehicle
Systems, or a similar device, which mounts on a motor vehicle engine, changes
the action of the exhaust values, and provides retarding power which is
proportional to the engine’s revolutions per minute (RPM), so as to slow the
motor vehicle.  The term “motor vehicle” shall have the same meaning given to
such term in §
402.22.
   (b)   No person, while operating a motor vehicle within the municipality,
shall activate a Jake brake on such motor vehicle unless the other braking
devices on such motor vehicle have failed or exigent circumstances exist which
require the use of such Jake brake.
(Ord. 97-O-1621, passed 8-19-1997)
§ 440.99  PENALTY.
   (EDITOR’S NOTE:  See §§
408.01 and
408.02 for general Traffic Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.)
CHAPTER 442:  DRIVERS OF COMMERCIAL VEHICLES
Section
442.01   Definitions.
442.02   Use of actual gross weight in lieu of rating.
442.03   Licensing requirements.
442.04   Physical qualification to operate commercial motor vehicles.
442.05   Criminal offenses.
442.06   Application of 49 C.F.R. 383.
442.07   Information required of prospective drivers by employers; unauthorized
driving.
442.08   Authority of peace officers re drunk driving.
442.09   Permitting or driving while fatigued or ill prohibited.
442.99   Penalty.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   See section histories for similar state law
   Warning devices when disabled on freeways - see Ohio R.C. 4513.28
   Hours of service of truck drivers - see Ohio R.C. 4921.30
   Arrest notice of drivers - see Ohio R.C. 5577.14
   Load limits - see TRAF.
440.01
   Route and load information - see TRAF.
440.09
§ 442.01  DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this chapter:
   (a)   “Alcohol concentration.” The concentration of alcohol in a person’s
blood, breath or urine. When expressed as a percentage, it means grams of
alcohol per the following:
      (1)   100 milliliters of whole blood, blood serum, or blood plasma;
      (2)   210 liters of breath;
      (3)   100 milliliters of urine.
   (b)   “Commercial driver’s license.” A license issued in accordance with
Ohio R.C. Chapter 4506 that authorizes an individual to drive a commercial
motor vehicle.
   (c)   “Commercial driver’s license information system.” The information
system established pursuant to the requirements of the “Commercial Motor
Vehicle Safety Act of 1986,” 100 Stat. 3207-171, 49 U.S.C. App. 2701.
   (d)   “Commercial motor vehicle.” Except when used in Ohio R.C. 4506.25, any
motor vehicle designed or used to transport persons or property that meets any
of the following qualifications:
      (1)   Any combination of vehicles with a gross vehicle weight or combined
gross vehicle weight rating of 26,001 pounds or more, provided that the gross
vehicle weight or gross vehicle weight rating of the vehicle or vehicles being
towed is in excess of 10,000 pounds;
      (2)   Any single vehicle with a gross vehicle weight or gross vehicle
weight rating of 26,001 pounds or more;
      (3)   Any single vehicle or combination of vehicles that is not a Class A
or Class B vehicle, but is designed to transport 16 or more passengers
including the driver;
      (4)   Any school bus with a gross vehicle weight or gross vehicle weight
rating of less than 26,001 pounds that is designed to transport fewer than 16
passengers including the driver;
      (5)   Is transporting hazardous materials for which placarding is
required under 49 C.F.R. Part 172, Subpart F, as amended; or
      (6)   Any single vehicle or combination of vehicles that is designed to
be operated and to travel on a public street or highway and is considered by
the Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration to be a commercial motor
vehicle, including, but not limited to, a motorized crane, a vehicle whose
function is to pump cement, a rig for drilling wells, and a portable crane.
   (e)   “Controlled substance.” Includes all of the following:
      (1)   Any substance classified as a controlled substance under the
“Controlled Substances Act,” 80 Stat. 1242 (1970), 21 U.S.C. 802(6), as
amended;
      (2)   Any substance included in Schedules I through V of 21 C.F.R. Part
1308, as amended;
      (3)   Any drug of abuse.
   (f)   “Conviction.” An unvacated adjudication of guilt or a determination
that a person has violated or failed to comply with the law in a court of
original jurisdiction or an authorized administrative tribunal, an unvacated
forfeiture of bail or collateral deposited to secure the person’s appearance in
court, a plea of guilty or nolo contendere accepted by the court, the payment
of a fine or court cost, or violation of a condition of release without bail,
regardless of whether or not the penalty is rebated, suspended or probated.
   (g)   “Disqualification.” Means any of the following:
      (1)   The suspension, revocation, or cancellation of a person’s
privileges to operate a commercial motor vehicle;
      (2)   Any withdrawal of a person’s privileges to operate a commercial
motor vehicle as the result of a violation of state or local law relating to
motor vehicle traffic control other than parking, vehicle weight, or vehicle
defect violations;
      (3)   A determination by the Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration
that a person is not qualified to operate a commercial motor vehicle under 49
C.F.R. 391.
   (h)   “Domiciled.” Having a true, fixed, principal, and permanent residence
to which an individual intends to return.
   (i)   “Downgrade.”  Any of the following, as applicable:
      (1)   A change in the commercial driver’s license, or commercial driver’s
license temporary instruction permit, holder’s self-certified status as
described in division Ohio R.C. 4506.10(A)(1);
      (2)   A change to a lesser class of vehicle;
      (3)   Removal of commercial driver’s license privileges from the
individual’s driver’s license.
   (j)   “Drive.” To drive, operate or be in physical control of a motor
vehicle.
   (k)   “Driver.” Any person who drives, operates or is in physical control of
a commercial motor vehicle or is required to have a commercial driver’s
license.
   (l)   “Driver’s license.” A license issued by the Bureau of Motor Vehicles
that authorizes an individual to drive.
   (m)   “Drug of abuse.” Any controlled substance, dangerous drug as defined
in Ohio R.C. 4729.01, or over-the-counter medication that, when taken in
quantities exceeding the recommended dosage, can result in impairment of
judgment or reflexes.
   (n)   “Electronic device.”  Includes a cellular telephone, a personal
digital assistant, a pager, a computer, and any other device used to input,
write, send, receive, or read text.
   (o)   “Eligible unit of local government.” A village, township, or county
that has a population of not more than 3,000 persons according to the most
recent federal census.
   (p)   “Employer.” Any person, including the federal government, any state,
and a political subdivision of any state, that owns or leases a commercial
motor vehicle or assigns a person to drive such a motor vehicle.
   (q)   “Endorsement.” An authorization on a person’s commercial driver’s
license that is required to permit the person to operate a specified type of
commercial motor vehicle.
   (r)   “Farm truck.” A truck controlled and operated by a farmer for use in
the transportation to or from a farm, for a distance of not more than 150
miles, of products of the farm, including livestock and its products, poultry
and its products, floricultural and horticultural products, and in the
transportation to the farm, from a distance of not more than 150 miles, of
supplies for the farm, including tile, fence and every other thing or commodity
used in agricultural, floricultural, horticultural, livestock, and poultry
production, and livestock, poultry, and other animals and things used for
breeding, feeding, or other purposes connected with the operation of the farm,
when the truck is operated in accordance with this definition and is not used
in the operations of a motor carrier, as defined in Ohio R.C. 4923.01.
   (s)   “Fatality.” The death of a person as the result of a motor vehicle
accident occurring not more than 365 days prior to the date of death.
   (t)   “Felony.” Any offense under federal or state law that is punishable by
death or imprisonment for a term exceeding one year and includes any offense
specifically classified as a felony under the law of this state, regardless of
the penalty that may be imposed.
   (u)   “Foreign jurisdiction.” Any jurisdiction other than a state.
   (v)   “Gross vehicle weight rating.” The value specified by the manufacturer
as the maximum loaded weight of a single or a combination vehicle. The gross
vehicle weight rating of a combination vehicle is the gross vehicle weight
rating of the power unit plus the gross vehicle weight rating of each towed
unit.
   (w)   “Hazardous materials.” Any material that has been designated as
hazardous under 49 U.S.C. 5103 and is required to be placarded under 49 C.F.R.
Part 172, Subpart F or any quantity of a material listed as a select agent or
toxin in 42 C.F.R. Part 73, as amended.
   (x)   “Imminent hazard.” The existence of a condition that presents a
substantial likelihood that death, serious illness, severe personal injury, or
a substantial endangerment to health, property, or the environment may occur
before the reasonably foreseeable completion date of a formal proceeding begun
to lessen the risk of death, illness, injury, or endangerment.
   (y)   “Medical variance.”  One of the following received by a driver from
the Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration that allows the driver to be
issued a medical certificate:
      (1)   An exemption letter permitting operation of a commercial motor
vehicle under 49 C.F.R. part 381, subpart C or 49 C.F.R. § 391.64;
      (2)   A skill performance evaluation certificate permitting operation of
a commercial motor vehicle pursuant to 49 C.F.R. § 391.49.
   (z)   “Mobile telephone.” A mobile communication device that falls under or
uses any commercial mobile radio service as defined in 47 C.F.R. part 20,
except that mobile telephone does not include two-way or citizens band radio
services.
   (aa)   “Motor vehicle.” A vehicle, machine, tractor, trailer, or semitrailer
propelled or drawn by mechanical power used on highways, except that such term
does not include a vehicle, machine, tractor, trailer, or semitrailer operated
exclusively on a rail.
   (bb)   “Out-of-service order.” A declaration by an authorized enforcement
officer of a federal, state, local, Canadian, or Mexican jurisdiction declaring
that the driver, commercial motor vehicle, or commercial motor carrier
operation is out of service as defined in 49 C.F.R. 390.5.
   (cc)   “Peace officer.” Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2935.01.
   (dd)   “Portable tank.” A liquid or gaseous packaging designed primarily to
be loaded on or temporarily attached to a vehicle and equipped with skids,
mountings, or accessories to facilitate handling of the tank by mechanical
means.
   (ee)   “Public safety vehicle.” Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 4511.01
(E)(1) and (E)(3).
   (ff)   “Recreational vehicle.” Includes every vehicle that is defined as a
recreational vehicle in Ohio R.C. 4501.01 and is used exclusively for purposes
other than engaging in business for profit.
   (gg)   “Residence.” Any person’s residence determined in accordance with
standards prescribed in the rules adopted by the Registrar.
   (hh)   “School bus.” Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 4511.01.
   (ii)   “Serious traffic violation.” Any of the following:
      (1)   A conviction arising from a single charge of operating a commercial
motor vehicle in violation of any provision of Ohio R.C. 4506.03;
      (2)   A.   Except as provided in division (2)B. of this definition, a
violation while operating a commercial motor vehicle of a law of this state, or
any municipal ordinance or county or township resolution, or any other
substantially similar law of another state or political subdivision of another
state, prohibiting either of the following:
            1.   Texting while driving;
            2.   Using a handheld mobile telephone.
         B.   It is not a serious traffic violation if the person was texting
or using a handheld mobile telephone to contact law enforcement or other
emergency services.
      (3)   A conviction arising from the operation of any motor vehicle that
involves any of the following:
         A.   A single charge of any speed in excess of the posted speed limit
by 15 miles per hour or more;
         B.   Violations of Ohio R.C. 4511.20 or 4511.201 or any substantially
equivalent ordinance or resolution, or of any substantially equivalent law of
another state or political subdivision of another state;
         C.   Violation of a law of this state or an ordinance or resolution
relating to traffic control, other than a parking violation, or of any
substantially equivalent law of another state or political subdivision of
another state, that results in a fatal accident;
         D.   Violation of Ohio R.C. 4506.03 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance or county or township resolution, or of any substantially
equivalent law of another state or political subdivision of another state, that
involves the operation of a commercial motor vehicle without a valid commercial
driver’s license with the proper class or endorsement for the specific vehicle
group being operated or for the passengers or type of cargo being transported;
         E.   Violation of Ohio R.C. 4506.03 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance or county or township resolution, or of any substantially
equivalent law of another state or political subdivision of another state, that
involves the operation of a commercial motor vehicle without a valid commercial
driver’s license being in the person’s possession;
         F.   Violation of Ohio R.C. 4511.33 or 4511.34, or any municipal
ordinance or county or township resolution substantially equivalent to either
of those sections, or any substantially equivalent law of another state or
political subdivision of another state;
         G.   Violation of any other law of this state, any law of another
state, or any ordinance or resolution of a political subdivision of this state
or another state that meets both of the following requirements:
            1.   It relates to traffic control, other than a parking violation;
            2.   It is determined to be a serious traffic violation by the
United States Secretary of Transportation and is designated by the director as
such by rule.
   (jj)   “State.” A state of the United States and includes the District of
Columbia.
   (kk)   “Tank vehicle.” Any commercial motor vehicle that is designed to
transport any liquid or gaseous materials within a tank or tanks that are
either permanently or temporarily attached to the vehicle or its chassis and
have an individual rated capacity of more than 119 gallons and an aggregate
rated capacity of 1,000 gallons or more. The term does not include a commercial
motor vehicle transporting an empty storage container tank that is not designed
for transportation, has a rated capacity of 1,000 gallons or more, and is
temporarily attached to a flatbed trailer.
   (ll)   “Tester.” Means a person or entity acting pursuant to a valid
agreement entered into pursuant to Ohio R.C. 4506.09(B).
   (mm)   “Texting.”  Manually entering alphanumeric text into, or reading text
from, an electronic device. “Texting” includes short message service (SMS), e-
mail, instant messaging, a command or request to access a world wide web page,
pressing more than a single button to initiate or terminate a voice
communication using a mobile telephone, or engaging in any other form of
electronic text retrieval or entry, for present or future communication.
“Texting” does not include the following:
      (1)   Using voice commands to initiate, receive, or terminate a voice
communication using a mobile telephone;
      (2)   Inputting, selecting, or reading information on a global
positioning system or navigation system;
      (3)   Pressing a single button to initiate or terminate a voice
communication using a mobile telephone; or
      (4)   Using, for a purpose that is not otherwise prohibited by law, a
device capable of performing multiple functions, such as a fleet management
system, a dispatching device, a mobile telephone, a citizens band radio, or a
music player.
   (nn)   “Texting while driving.”  Texting while operating a commercial motor
vehicle, with the motor running, including while temporarily stationary because
of traffic, a traffic control device, or other momentary delays. Texting while
driving does not include operating a commercial motor vehicle with or without
the motor running when the driver has moved the vehicle to the side of, or off,
a highway and is stopped in a location where the vehicle can safely remain
stationary.
   (oo)   “United States.” Means the 50 states and the District of Columbia.
   (pp)   “Upgrade.”  A change in the class of vehicles, endorsements, or self-
certified status as described in division Ohio R.C. 4506.10(A)(1) that expands
the ability of a current commercial driver’s license holder to operate
commercial motor vehicles under this chapter or Ohio R.C. Chapter 4506.
   (qq)   “Use of a handheld mobile telephone.” Means:
      (1)   Using at least one hand to hold a mobile telephone to conduct a
voice communication;
      (2)   Dialing or answering a mobile telephone by pressing more than a
single button; or
      (3)   Reaching for a mobile telephone in a manner that requires a driver
to maneuver so that the driver is no longer in a seated driving position, or
restrained by a seat belt that is installed in accordance with 49 C.F.R. §
393.93 and adjusted in accordance with the vehicle manufacturer’s instructions.
   (rr)   “Vehicle.” Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 4511.01.
(ORC 4506.01)
§ 442.02  USE OF ACTUAL GROSS WEIGHT IN LIEU OF RATING.
   For purposes of this chapter, the actual gross weight of a vehicle or
combination of vehicles may be used in lieu of a gross vehicle weight rating to
determine whether a vehicle or combination of vehicles qualifies as a
commercial motor vehicle if the gross vehicle weight rating specified by the
manufacturer for the vehicle of combination of vehicles is not determinable, or
if the manufacturer of the vehicle has not specified a gross vehicle weight
rating.
(ORC 4506.011)
§ 442.03  LICENSING REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Drive a commercial motor vehicle while having in the person’s
possession or otherwise under the person’s control more than one valid driver’s
license issued by this state, any other state, or by a foreign jurisdiction;
      (2)   Drive a commercial motor vehicle on a highway in this municipality
in violation of an out-of-service order while the person’s driving privilege is
suspended, revoked, or cancelled, or while the person is subject to
disqualification;
      (3)   Drive a motor vehicle on a highway in the municipality under the
authority of a commercial driver’s license issued by another state or a foreign
jurisdiction, after having been a resident of this state for 30 days or longer;
      (4)   Knowingly give false information in any application or
certification required by Ohio R.C. 4506.07.
   (b)   The municipality shall give every conviction occurring out of this
state and notice of which was received by the State Department of Public Safety
after December 31, 1989, full faith and credit and treat it for sanctioning
purposes under this chapter as though the conviction had occurred in this
state.
(ORC 4506.04(A), (B))
   (c)   No person shall drive any commercial motor vehicle for which an
endorsement is required under Ohio R.C. 4506.12 unless the proper endorsement
appears on the person’s commercial driver’s license or commercial driver’s
license temporary instruction permit. No person shall drive a commercial motor
vehicle in violation of a restriction established under Ohio R.C. 4506.12 that
appears on the person’s commercial driver’s license or commercial driver’s
license temporary instruction permit.
(ORC 4506.12(I))
   (d)   (1)   Whoever violates division (a)(1), (2) or (3) of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (a)(4) of this section is guilty of
falsification, a misdemeanor of the first degree. In addition, the provisions
of Ohio R.C. 4507.19 apply.
(ORC 4506.04(C))
      (3)   A.   Whoever violates division (c) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
         B.   The offenses established under division (c) of this section are
strict liability offenses and Ohio R.C. 2901.20 does not apply. The designation
of these offenses as strict liability offenses shall not be construed to imply
that any other offense for which there is no specified degree of culpability,
whether in this section or another section of this code or the Ohio Revised
Code, is not a strict liability offense.
(ORC 4506.12(J))
§ 442.04  PHYSICAL QUALIFICATION TO OPERATE COMMERCIAL  MOTOR VEHICLES.
   (a)   No person who holds a valid commercial driver’s license shall drive a
commercial motor vehicle unless the person is physically qualified to do so.
      (1)   Any person applying for a commercial driver’s license or commercial
driver’s license temporary instruction permit, the renewal or upgrade of a
commercial driver’s license or commercial driver’s license temporary
instruction permit, or the transfer of a commercial driver’s license from out
of state shall self-certify to the Registrar for purposes of 49 C.F.R. § 383.71
one of the following in regard to the applicant’s operation of a commercial
motor vehicle, as applicable:
         A.   1.   If the applicant operates or expects to operate a commercial
motor vehicle in interstate or foreign commerce and is subject to and meets the
requirements under 49 C.F.R. part 391, the applicant shall self-certify that
the applicant is non-excepted interstate and shall provide the Registrar with
the original or a copy of a medical examiner’s certificate and each
subsequently issued medical examiner’s certificate prepared by a qualified
medical examiner to maintain a medically certified status on the applicant’s
commercial driver licensing system driver record;
            2.   If the applicant operates or expects to operate a commercial
motor vehicle in interstate commerce, but engages in transportation or
operations excepted under 49 C.F.R. §§ 390.3(f), 391.2, 391.68, or 398.3 from
all or parts of the qualification requirements of 49 C.F.R. part 391, the
applicant shall self-certify that the applicant is excepted interstate and is
not required to obtain a medical examiner’s certificate;
         B.   1.   If the applicant operates only in intrastate commerce and is
subject to state driver qualification requirements, the applicant shall self-
certify that the applicant is non-excepted intrastate;
            2.   If the applicant operates only in intrastate commerce and is
excepted from all or parts of the state driver qualification requirements, the
applicant shall self- certify that the applicant is excepted intrastate.
      (2)   Notwithstanding the expiration date on a person’s commercial
driver’s license or commercial driver’s license temporary instruction permit,
every commercial driver’s license or commercial driver’s license temporary
instruction permit holder shall provide the Registrar with the certification
required by this section on or after January 30, 2012, but prior to January 30,
2014.
      (3)   Notwithstanding the expiration date on a person’s commercial
driver’s license, every commercial driver’s license holder shall provide the
Registrar with the certification required by this section, on or after January
30, 2012, but prior to January 30, 2014.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(ORC 4506.10(A), (E))
§ 442.05  CRIMINAL OFFENSES.
   (a)   No person who holds a commercial driver’s license or commercial
driver’s license temporary instruction permit or who operates a motor vehicle
for which a commercial driver’s license or permit is required shall do any of
the following:
      (1)   Drive a commercial motor vehicle while having a measurable or
detectable amount of alcohol or of a controlled substance in the person’s
blood, breath, or urine;
      (2)   Drive a commercial motor vehicle while having an alcohol
concentration of 0.04% or more by whole blood or breath;
      (3)   Drive a commercial motor vehicle while having an alcohol
concentration of .048% or more by blood serum or blood plasma;
      (4)   Drive a commercial motor vehicle while having an alcohol
concentration of .056% or more by urine;
      (5)   Drive a motor vehicle while under the influence of a controlled
substance;
      (6)   Drive a motor vehicle in violation of Ohio R.C. 4511.19 or a
municipal O.V.I. ordinance as defined in Ohio R.C. 4511.181;
      (7)   Use a vehicle in the commission of a felony;
      (8)   Refuse to submit to a test under Ohio R.C. 4506.17 or Ohio R.C.
4511.191, or any substantially similar municipal ordinance;
      (9)   Operate a commercial motor vehicle while the person’s commercial
driver’s license or permit or other commercial driving privileges are revoked,
suspended, cancelled or disqualified;
      (10)   Cause a fatality through the negligent operation of a commercial
motor vehicle, including but not limited to the offenses of aggravated
vehicular homicide, vehicular homicide and vehicular manslaughter;
      (11)   Fail to stop after an accident in violation of Ohio R.C. 4549.02
to 4549.03, or any substantially similar municipal ordinance;
      (12)   Drive a commercial motor vehicle in violation of any provision of
Ohio R.C. 4511.61 to 4511.63 or any federal or local law or ordinance
pertaining to railroad-highway grade crossings;
      (13)   Use a motor vehicle in the commission of a felony involving the
manufacture, distribution, or dispensing of a controlled substance as defined
in Ohio R.C. 3719.01 or the possession with intent to manufacture, distribute,
or dispense a controlled substance.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(ORC 4506.15)
Statutory reference:
   Alcohol or controlled substance testing, disqualification of drivers, see
Ohio R.C. 4506.17
   Disqualification of drivers for violations, see Ohio R.C. 4506.16
§ 442.06  APPLICATION OF 49 C.F.R. 383.
   (a)   The provisions of 49 C.F.R. Part 383, Subpart C (Notification
Requirements and Employer Responsibilities), as amended, shall apply to all
commercial drivers or persons who apply for employment as commercial drivers.
No person shall fail to make a report to the person’s employer as required by
this section.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(ORC 4506.19)
§ 442.07  INFORMATION REQUIRED OF PROSPECTIVE DRIVERS BY EMPLOYERS;
UNAUTHORIZED DRIVING.
   (a)   Each employer shall require every applicant for employment as a driver
of a commercial vehicle to provide the applicant’s employment history for the
ten years preceding the date the employment application is submitted to the
prospective employer. The following information shall be submitted:
      (1)   A list of the names and addresses of the applicant’s previous
employers for which the applicant was the operator of a commercial motor
vehicle;
      (2)   The dates the applicant was employed by these employers;
      (3)   The reason for leaving each of these employers.
   (b)   No employer shall knowingly permit or authorize any driver employed by
the employer to drive a commercial motor vehicle during any period in which any
of the following apply:
      (1)   The driver’s commercial driver’s license is suspended, revoked, or
cancelled by any state or a foreign jurisdiction;
      (2)   The driver has lost the privilege to drive, or currently is
disqualified from driving, a commercial motor vehicle in any state or foreign
jurisdiction;
      (3)   The driver, the commercial motor vehicle the driver is driving, or
the motor carrier operation is subject to an out-of-service order in any state
or a foreign jurisdiction;
      (4)   The driver has more than one driver’s license.
   (c)   No employer shall knowingly permit or authorize a driver to operate a
commercial motor vehicle in violation of Ohio R.C. 4506.15.
   (d)   No employer shall knowingly permit or authorize a driver to operate a
commercial motor vehicle if the driver does not hold a valid, current
commercial driver’s license or commercial driver’s license temporary
instruction permit bearing the proper class or endorsements for the vehicle. No
employer shall knowingly permit or authorize a driver to operate a commercial
motor vehicle in violation of the restrictions on the driver’s commercial
driver’s license or commercial driver’s license temporary instruction permit.
   (e)   Whoever violates division (a), (b) or (d) of this section is guilty of
a misdemeanor of the first degree.
   (f)   Whoever violates division (c) of this section is guilty of a felony to
be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(ORC 4506.20)
§ 442.08  AUTHORITY OF PEACE OFFICERS RE DRUNK DRIVING.
   (a)   Within the jurisdictional limits of the appointing authority, any
peace officer shall stop and detain any person found violating Ohio R.C.
4506.15, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, without obtaining
a warrant. When there is reasonable ground to believe that a violation of Ohio
R.C. 4506.15, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, has been
committed and a test or tests of the person’s whole blood, blood plasma or
blood serum, breath or urine is necessary, the peace officer shall take the
person to an appropriate place for testing. If a person refuses to submit to a
test after being warned as provided in Ohio R.C. 4506.17(C), or submits to a
test that discloses the presence of a controlled substance or an alcohol
concentration of 0.04% or more by whole blood or breath, an alcohol
concentration of .048% or more by blood serum or blood plasma, or an alcohol
concentration of .056% or more by urine, the peace officer shall require that
the person immediately surrender the person’s commercial driver’s license to
the peace officer.
   (b)   As used in this section, “jurisdictional limits” means the limits
within which a peace officer may arrest and detain a person without a warrant
under Ohio R.C. 2935.03, except that the Superintendent and the troopers of the
State Highway Patrol may stop and detain, without warrant, any person who, in
the presence of the Superintendent or any trooper, is engaged in a violation of
any of the provisions of this subchapter or Ohio R.C. Chapter 4506.
(ORC 4506.23)
§ 442.09  PERMITTING OR DRIVING WHILE FATIGUED OR ILL PROHIBITED.
   (a)   No person shall drive a commercial motor vehicle, as defined in Ohio
R.C. 4506.01, or a commercial car or commercial tractor, as defined in Ohio
R.C. 4501.01, while the person’s ability or alertness is so impaired by
fatigue, illness, or other causes that it is unsafe for the person to drive
such vehicle. No driver shall use any drug which would adversely affect the
driver’s ability or alertness.
   (b)   No owner, as defined in Ohio R.C. 4501.01, of a commercial motor
vehicle, commercial car or commercial tractor, or a person employing or
otherwise directing the driver of such vehicle, shall require or knowingly
permit a driver in any such condition described in division (a) of this section
to drive such vehicle upon any street or highway.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If the offender previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to one or more violations of this section or
Ohio R.C. 4511.79, or Ohio R.C. 4511.63, 4511.76, 4511.761, 4511.762, 4511.764,
or 4511.77 or a municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to any of
those sections, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree.
(ORC 4511.79)
§ 442.99  PENALTY.
   (EDITOR’S NOTE:  See §§
408.01 and
408.02 for general Traffic Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.)
CHAPTER 444:  BICYCLES AND MOTORCYCLES
Section
444.01   Code application to bicycles.
444.02   Riding upon seats; carrying packages; motorcycle handle bars; helmets
and glasses.
444.03   Attaching bicycles, motorcycles to other vehicles.
444.04   Riding on right side of roadway; riding abreast.
444.05   Lights, signal devices, brakes on bicycles.
444.06   Riding bicycles upon sidewalks.
444.07   Safe riding regulations for bicycles.
444.08   Parking; locks.
444.09   Parent’s responsibility.
444.10   Suspension of riding privileges; impounding of bicycles.
444.11   Operation of motorized bicycles.
444.12   Operation by minors on public property.
444.13   Operation by minors on private property.
444.14   Licensing of bicycles.
444.15   Electric bicycles.
444.99   Penalty.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   See section histories for similar state law
   Bicycle defined - see TRAF.
402.05
   Motorcycle defined - see TRAF.
402.23
   Bicycles prohibited on freeways - see TRAF.
412.05
   Operation of vehicles on bicycle paths - see TRAF.
432.41
   Motorcycle operator’s license required - see TRAF.
436.01(a)
   Motorcycle headlight - see TRAF.
438.03
   Motorcycle brakes - see TRAF.
438.19
   Off-highway motorcycles - see TRAF.
Ch. 446
§ 444.01  CODE APPLICATION TO BICYCLES.
   (a)   The provisions of this Traffic Code that are applicable to bicycles
and electric bicycles apply whenever a bicycle or electric bicycle is operated
upon any highway or upon any path set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles.
   (b)   Except as provided in division (d) of this section, a bicycle operator
or electric bicycle operator who violates any provisions of this Traffic Code
described in division (a) of this section that is applicable to bicycles or
electric bicycles may be issued a ticket, citation, or summons by a law
enforcement officer for the violation in the same manner as the operator of a
motor vehicle would be cited for the same violation. A person who commits any
such violation while operating a bicycle or electric bicycle shall not have any
points assessed against the person’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s
license, temporary instruction permit, or probationary license under Ohio R.C.
4510.036.
   (c)   Except as provided in division (d) of this section, in the case of a
violation of any provision of this Traffic Code described in division (a) of
this section by a bicycle operator, electric bicycle operator, or motor vehicle
operator when the trier of fact finds that the violation by the motor vehicle
operator endangered the lives of bicycle riders or electric bicycle riders at
the time of the violation, the court, notwithstanding any provision of the Ohio
Revised Code to the contrary, may require the bicycle operator, electric
bicycle operator, or motor vehicle operator to take and successfully complete a
bicycling skills course approved by the court in addition to or in lieu of any
penalty otherwise prescribed by this Traffic Code or the Ohio Revised Code for
that violation.
   (d)   Divisions (b) and (c) of this section do not apply to violations of
Ohio R.C. 4511.19, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
(ORC 4511.52)
   (e)   Every person operating a bicycle shall obey the instructions of
official traffic control devices and signals applicable to vehicles, unless
otherwise directed by a police officer.
§ 444.02  RIDING UPON SEATS; CARRYING PACKAGES; MOTORCYCLE HANDLE BARS; HELMETS
AND GLASSES.
   (a)   For purposes of this section, “snowmobile” has the same meaning as
given that term in Ohio R.C. 4519.01.
   (b)   (1)   No person operating a bicycle or electric bicycle shall ride
other than upon or astride the permanent and regular seat attached thereto or
carry any other person upon such bicycle or electric bicycle other than upon a
firmly attached and regular seat thereon, and no person shall ride upon a
bicycle or electric bicycle other than upon such a firmly attached and regular
seat.
      (2)   No person operating a motorcycle shall ride other than upon or
astride the permanent and regular seat or saddle attached thereto, or carry any
other person upon such motorcycle other than upon a firmly attached and regular
seat or saddle thereon, and no person shall ride upon a motorcycle other than
upon such a firmly attached and regular seat or saddle.
      (3)   No person shall ride upon a motorcycle that is equipped with a
saddle other than while sitting astride the saddle, facing forward, with one
leg on each side of the motorcycle.
      (4)   No person shall ride upon a motorcycle that is equipped with a seat
other than while sitting upon the seat.
      (5)   No person operating a bicycle or electric bicycle shall carry any
package, bundle, or article that prevents the driver from keeping at least one
hand upon the handlebars.
      (6)   No bicycle, electric bicycle, or motorcycle shall be used to carry
more persons at one time than the number for which it is designed and
equipped.  No motorcycle shall be operated on a highway when the handlebars
rise higher than the shoulders of the operator when the operator is seated in
the operator’s seat or saddle.
   (c)   (1)   Except as provided in division (c)(3) of this section, no person
shall operate or be a passenger on a snowmobile or motorcycle without using
safety glasses or other protective eye device. Except as provided in division
(c)(3) of this section, no person who is under the age of 18 years, or who
holds a motorcycle operator’s endorsement or license bearing a “novice”
designation that is currently in effect as provided in Ohio R.C. 4507.13, shall
operate a motorcycle on a highway, or be a passenger on a motorcycle, unless
wearing a protective helmet on the person’s head, and no other person shall be
a passenger on a motorcycle operated by such a person unless similarly wearing
a protective helmet. The helmet, safety glasses, or other protective eye device
shall conform with rules adopted by the Ohio Director of Public Safety. The
provisions of this paragraph or a violation thereof shall not be used in the
trial of any civil action.
      (2)   A.   Except as provided in division (c)(3) of this section, no
person shall operate a motorcycle with a valid temporary instruction permit and
temporary instruction permit identification card issued by the Registrar of
Motor Vehicles pursuant to Ohio R.C. 4507.05 unless the person, at the time of
such operation, is wearing on the person’s head a protective helmet that
conforms with rules adopted by the Ohio Director of Public Safety.
         B.   No person shall operate a motorcycle with a valid temporary
instruction permit and temporary instruction permit identification card issued
by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles pursuant to Ohio R.C. 4507.05 in any of the
following circumstances:
            1.   At any time when lighted lights are required by Ohio R.C.
4513.03(A)(1);
            2.   While carrying a passenger;
            3.   On any limited access highway or heavily congested roadway.
      (3)   Divisions (c)(1) and (c)(2)A. of this section do not apply to a
person who operates or is a passenger in an autocycle or cab-enclosed
motorcycle when the occupant compartment top is in place enclosing the
occupants.
   (d)   Nothing in this section shall be construed as prohibiting the carrying
of a child in a seat or trailer that is designed for carrying children and is
firmly attached to the bicycle or electric bicycle.
   (e)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (b) or (c)(1) or (c)(3) of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic
offense, whoever violates division (b) or (c)(1) or (c)(3) of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates division (b) or (c)(1) or
(c)(3) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(ORC 4511.53)
§ 444.03  ATTACHING BICYCLES, MOTORCYCLES TO OTHER VEHICLES.
   (a)   (1)   No person riding upon any bicycle, electric bicycle, coaster,
roller skates, sled, or toy vehicle shall attach the same or himself or herself
to any vehicle upon a roadway.
      (2)   No operator shall knowingly permit any person riding upon any
bicycle, electric bicycle, coaster, roller skates, sled, or toy vehicle to
attach the same or himself or herself to any vehicle while it is moving upon a
roadway.
      (3)   This section does not apply to towing a disabled vehicle.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (c)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(ORC 4511.54)
§ 444.04  RIDING ON RIGHT SIDE OF ROADWAY; RIDING ABREAST.
   (a)   Every person operating a bicycle or electric bicycle upon a roadway
shall ride as near to the right side of the roadway as practicable obeying all
traffic rules applicable to vehicles and exercising due care when passing a
standing vehicle or one proceeding in the same direction.
   (b)   Persons riding bicycles, electric bicycles, or motorcycles upon a
roadway shall ride not more than two abreast in a single lane, except on paths
or parts of roadways set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles, electric
bicycles, or motorcycles.
   (c)   This section does not require a person operating a bicycle or electric
bicycle to ride at the edge of the roadway when it is unreasonable or unsafe to
do so. Conditions that may require riding away from the edge of the roadway
include when necessary to avoid fixed or moving objects, parked or moving
vehicles, surface hazards, or if it otherwise is unsafe or impracticable to do
so, including if the lane is too narrow for the bicycle or electric bicycle and
an overtaking vehicle to travel safely side by side within the lane.
   (d)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (e)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
408.02(b).
(ORC 4511.55)
§ 444.05  LIGHTS, SIGNAL DEVICES, BRAKES ON BICYCLES.
   (a)   Every bicycle or electric bicycle when in use at the times specified
in Ohio R.C. 4513.03 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance shall be
equipped with the following:
      (1)   A lamp mounted on the front of either the bicycle or electric
bicycle or the operator that shall emit a white light visible from a distance
of at least 500 feet to the front and 300 feet to the sides. A generator-
powered lamp that emits light only when the bicycle or electric bicycle is
moving may be used to meet this requirement.
      (2)   A red reflector on the rear that shall be visible from all
distances from 100 feet to 600 feet to the rear when directly in front of
lawful lower beams of head lamps on a motor vehicle.
      (3)   A lamp emitting either flashing or steady red light visible from a
distance of 500 feet to the rear shall be used in addition to the red
reflector. If the red lamp performs as a reflector in that it is visible as
specified in division (a)(2) of this section, the red lamp may serve as the
reflector and a separate reflector is not required.
   (b)   Additional lamps and reflectors may be used in addition to those
required under division (a) of this section, except that red lamps and red
reflectors shall not be used on the front of the bicycle or electric bicycle
and white lamps and white reflectors shall not be used on the rear of the
bicycle or electric bicycle.
   (c)   A bicycle or electric bicycle may be equipped with a device capable of
giving an audible signal, except that a bicycle or electric bicycle shall not
be equipped with nor shall any person use upon a bicycle or electric bicycle
any siren or whistle.
   (d)   Every bicycle and electric bicycle shall be equipped with an adequate
brake when used on a street or highway.
   (e)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(ORC 4511.56)
§ 444.06  RIDING BICYCLES UPON SIDEWALKS.
   (a)   No person shall operate a bicycle upon a sidewalk within a
commercially zoned district, upon a sidewalk within a shopping center or upon a
sidewalk where signs are erected prohibiting such operation.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor and
shall be subject to the penalty provided in §
408.01.
(Ord. 91-O-1267, passed 12-17-1991)
   (c)   At no time shall a person under the age of 11 years operate a bicycle
on a street.
§ 444.07  SAFE RIDING REGULATIONS FOR BICYCLES.
   (a)   Whenever a designated usable path for bicycles has been provided
adjacent to a street, bicycle riders shall use such path and shall not use the
street.
   (b)   Whenever a person is riding a bicycle upon a sidewalk or street, such
person shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian and shall give an audible
signal before attempting to overtake and pass a pedestrian or another bicycle.
This audible signal must be given only by bell or other warning device capable
of giving an audible signal and shall be given at such a distance and in such a
manner as not to startle the person being overtaken and passed.
   (c)   No person shall ride a bicycle across or through any intersection
involving a through street. Such intersections are to be crossed by walking the
bicycle across or through the intersection.
   (d)   Whenever a person is riding a bicycle upon a sidewalk, the person,
before overtaking and passing a blind person carrying a white or metallic cane,
shall dismount and overtake or pass on foot.
   (e)   When a bicycle is operated on the street, the operator shall give hand
signals before turning, changing lanes or stopping. Such signals shall conform
with Ohio R.C. 4511.40, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (f)   Every rider of a bicycle shall exercise due care to avoid colliding
with any pedestrian or any vehicle upon any roadway, sidewalk or bicycle path,
or endangering the life, limb or property of any person while in the lawful use
of the streets, sidewalks or any other private or public property.
   (g)   No person shall operate a bicycle at a speed greater than is
reasonable and proper under the conditions then existing.
   (h)   The operator of a bicycle emerging from or turning into an alley,
driveway or building shall, upon approaching a sidewalk or the sidewalk area
extending across any alley, driveway or building, yield the right-of-way to all
pedestrians approaching on such sidewalk area. Upon entering the street, such
operator shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on such
street.
   (i)   No person shall engage in trick riding or operate a bicycle without
both hands upon the handle grips except when necessary to give the hand signals
required herein.
   (j)   No person shall operate a bicycle in a weaving or zigzag course unless
such irregular course is necessary for safe operation in compliance with law.
(1974 Code, § 373.08(b), (c))
§ 444.08  PARKING; LOCKS.
   (a)   No person shall park a bicycle upon a sidewalk in such a manner as to
interfere with pedestrian traffic or damage the property of another.
   (b)   No person shall park a bicycle upon a roadway in such a manner as to
interfere with vehicular traffic.
   (c)   No bicycle shall remain unlocked when parked upon any public way or
place.
§ 444.09  PARENT’S RESPONSIBILITY.
   No parent of any child or guardian of any ward shall authorize or knowingly
permit any such child or ward to violate any of the provisions of this chapter.
§ 444.10  SUSPENSION OF RIDING PRIVILEGES; IMPOUNDING OF BICYCLES.
   In addition to the penalties provided in §§
408.01 and
408.02, a court may prohibit any person who violates or fails to comply with
any of the provisions of this chapter relating to bicycles from riding a
bicycle for a period not to exceed three months. In addition, any person
violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter
relating to bicycles may be punished by having his or her bicycle impounded for
a period not exceeding 30 days.
§ 444.11  OPERATION OF MOTORIZED BICYCLES.
   (a)   No person shall operate a motorized bicycle upon a highway or any
public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel
or parking, unless all of the following conditions are met:
      (1)   The person is 14 or 15 years of age and holds a valid probationary
motorized bicycle license issued after the person has passed the test provided
for in this section, or the person is 16 years of age or older and holds either
a valid commercial driver’s license issued under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4506 or a
driver’s license issued under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4507 or a valid motorized
bicycle license issued after the person has passed the test provided for in
this section, except that if a person is 16 years of age, has a valid
probationary motorized bicycle license and desires a motorized bicycle license,
the person is not required to comply with the testing requirements provided for
in this section.
      (2)   The motorized bicycle is equipped in accordance with the rules
adopted under division (b) of this section and is in proper working order.
      (3)   The person, if under 18 years of age, is wearing a protective
helmet on the person’s head with the chin strap properly fastened and the
motorized bicycle is equipped with a rearview mirror.
      (4)   The person operates the motorized bicycle when practicable within
three feet of the right edge of the roadway obeying all traffic rules
applicable to vehicles.
   (b)   The Director of Public Safety, subject to Ohio R.C. Chapter 119, shall
adopt and promulgate rules concerning protective helmets, the equipment of
motorized bicycles, and the testing and qualifications of persons who do not
hold a valid driver’s or commercial driver’s license. The test shall be as near
as practicable to the examination required for a motorcycle operator’s
endorsement under Ohio R.C. 4507.11. The test shall also require the operator
to give an actual demonstration of the operator’s ability to operate and
control a motorized bicycle by driving one under the supervision of an
examining officer.
   (c)   Every motorized bicycle license expires on the birthday of the
applicant in the fourth year after the date it is issued, but in no event shall
any motorized bicycle license be issued for a period longer than four years.
   (d)   No person operating a motorized bicycle shall carry another person
upon the motorized bicycle.
   (e)   The protective helmet and rearview mirror required by division (a)(3)
of this section shall, on and after January 1, 1985, conform with rules adopted
by the Director under division (b) of this section.
   (f)   Each probationary motorized bicycle license or motorized bicycle
license shall be laminated with a transparent plastic material.
   (g)   Whoever violates division (a), (d), or (e) of this section is guilty
of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4511.521)
Statutory reference:
   Suspension of probationary motorized bicycle license by the state, see Ohio
R.C. 4510.34
§ 444.12  OPERATION BY MINORS ON PUBLIC PROPERTY.
   No parent or guardian of a minor under eighteen years of age shall allow or
permit such minor to operate any unlicensed mini-bike, motorcycle or go-cart
upon any sidewalk, street, alley, road or highway within the municipality or
within Firestone Park.
(Ord. 73-O-34, passed 6-5-1973)
§ 444.13  OPERATION BY MINORS ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   No person shall operate, and no parent or guardian of a minor under 18 years
of age shall allow or permit such minor to operate, any unlicensed mini-bike,
motorcycle or go-cart upon any private property within the municipality without
the express consent of the owner of such private property.
(Ord. 73-O-34, passed 6-5-1973)
§ 444.14  LICENSING OF BICYCLES.
   (a)   License required.  No person shall operate or use a bicycle in the
municipality without first obtaining a license therefor.
   (b)   Knowledge of licensee.  Upon application for a bicycle license, the
applicant may be required to be examined by a police officer with regard to his
or her knowledge of this chapter and ability to operate and control a bicycle.
   (c)   Mechanical condition.  A bicycle license applicant or holder may be
required at any time to demonstrate to a police officer that his or her bicycle
is in safe mechanical condition and has the equipment required by this chapter.
   (d)   Fees.  If the applicant and bicycle meet the requirements of this
chapter, a license will be issued by the Police Department.  Every person
desiring a bicycle license shall pay an annual fee of one dollar ($1.00) at the
time application is made.  The license shall expire on December 31 of each
year.  A penalty of fifty cents ($0.50) shall be imposed upon the bicycle owner
who fails to renew the license within ten days after the above date, or upon a
person who fails to obtain a license for a bicycle within ten days after first
possessing the bicycle in the municipality.
   (e)   Transfer.  A bicycle licensee may transfer license plates from one
bicycle to a replacement bicycle upon reporting such transfer to the Police
Department, with no additional fee.
   (f)   License tag.  A suitable license tag shall be supplied by the
municipality, which shall be attached to the lower end of the rear fender or
rear frame of the bicycle, so that it will be clearly visible from a position
behind the bicycle.  Upon loss of the license plate, the loss shall be reported
to the Police Department within ten days and a new license plate (sticker)
obtained, for which the fee shall be twenty-five cents ($0.25).
   (g)   Change of ownership.  Any person who sells or transfers ownership of
any bicycle shall report the sale or transfer within five days to the Police
Department, and shall also give the name and address of the new owner.
(Ord. 73-O-61, passed 11-6-1973)
§ 444.15  ELECTRIC BICYCLES.
   (a)   (1)   On and after January 1, 2020, manufacturers and distributors of
electric bicycles shall permanently affix a label, in a prominent location, to
each electric bicycle. The label shall specify whether the electric bicycle is
a class 1, class 2, or class 3 electric bicycle, the top assisted speed that
the electric bicycle is capable of reaching, and the motor wattage of the
electric bicycle.
      (2)   No person shall modify an electric bicycle in a manner that changes
the top assisted speed that the electric bicycle is capable of reaching unless
the person also modifies the label required under division (a)(1) of this
section to reflect the modification.
   (b)   (1)   The manufacturer of an electric bicycle shall ensure that the
electric bicycle complies with the equipment and manufacturing requirements for
bicycles established by the consumer product safety commission under 16 C.F.R.
§§ 1512 et seq.
      (2)   The manufacturer shall manufacture all class 1 electric bicycles
and class 3 electric bicycles so that when the rider ceases pedaling the
electric motor ceases to provide assistance. The manufacturer shall manufacture
all class 2 electric bicycles so that when the rider applies the brakes or
releases or activates a switch or similar mechanism the electric motor ceases
to provide assistance.
      (3)   All class 3 electric bicycles shall be equipped with a speedometer
that displays the speed of the electric bicycle in miles per hour.
   (c)   (1)   The operation of a class 1 electric bicycle and a class 2
electric bicycle is permitted on a path set aside for the exclusive use of
bicycles or on a shared-use path, unless the county, township, municipal
corporation, other local authority, or state agency as defined in Ohio R.C.
1.60 with control over the path by resolution, ordinance, or rule prohibits the
use of a class 1 electric bicycle or class 2 electric bicycle on such a path.
      (2)   No person shall operate a class 3 electric bicycle on a path set
aside for the exclusive use of bicycles or a shared-use path unless that path
is within or adjacent to a highway or the county, township, municipal
corporation, or local authority, or state agency as defined in Ohio R.C. 1.60
with control over the path by resolution, ordinance, or rule authorizes the use
of a class 3 electric bicycle on such a path.
      (3)   No person shall operate a class 1 electric bicycle, a class 2
electric bicycle, or a class 3 electric bicycle on a path that is intended to
be used primarily for mountain biking, hiking, equestrian use, or other similar
uses, or any other single track or natural surface trail that has historically
been reserved for non-motorized use, unless the county, township, municipal
corporation, other local authority, or state agency as defined in Ohio R.C.
1.60 with control over the path by resolution, ordinance, or rule authorizes
the use of a class 1 electric bicycle, a class 2 electric bicycle, or a class 3
electric bicycle on such a path.
   (d)   (1)   No person under 16 years of age shall operate a class 3 electric
bicycle; however, a person under 16 years of age may ride as a passenger on a
class 3 electric bicycle that is designed to accommodate passengers.
      (2)   No person shall operate or be a passenger on a class 3 electric
bicycle unless the person is wearing a protective helmet that meets the
standards established by the Consumer Product Safety Commission or the American
Society for Testing and Materials.
   (e)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever operates
an electric bicycle in a manner that is prohibited under division (c) of this
section and whoever violates division (d) of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic
offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been
convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (2)   The offenses established under division (e)(1) of this section are
strict liability offenses and strict liability is a culpable mental state for
purposes of Ohio R.C. 2901.20. The designation of these offenses as strict
liability offenses shall not be construed to imply that any other offense, for
which there is no specified degree of culpability, is not a strict liability
offense.
(ORC 4511.522)
§ 444.99  PENALTY.
   (EDITOR’S NOTE:  See §§
408.01 and
408.02 for general Traffic Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.)
CHAPTER 446:  SNOWMOBILES, OFF-HIGHWAY MOTORCYCLES AND ALL-PURPOSE VEHICLES
Section
446.01   Definitions.
446.02   Equipment.
446.03   Code application; prohibited operation.
446.04   Permitted operation.
446.05   Licensing requirements of operator.
446.06   Accident reports.
446.07   Local control within police power.
446.08   Registration of vehicles.
446.09   Operation of off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle without
certificate of title; failure to surrender.
446.10   Operation by minors on public property.
446.11   Operation by minors on private property.
446.99   Penalty.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   See section histories for similar state law
   Power of trial court of record to impound registration certificates for
certain violations - see Ohio R.C. 4519.47
   Street or highway defined - see TRAF.
402.48
   Operation on bicycle paths - see TRAF.
432.41
   Bicycles and motorcycles - see TRAF.
Ch. 444
   Required usage of helmets and safety glasses - see TRAF.
444.02
§ 446.01  DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this chapter:
   (a)   “All-purpose vehicle.” Any self-propelled vehicle designed primarily
for cross-country travel on land and water, or on more than one type of
terrain, and steered by wheels or caterpillar treads, or any combination
thereof, including vehicles that operate on a cushion of air, vehicles commonly
known as all-terrain vehicles, all season vehicles, mini-bikes and trail bikes.
The term does not include a utility vehicle as defined in Ohio R.C. 4501.01 or
any vehicle principally used in playing golf, any motor vehicle or aircraft
required to be registered under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4503 or Ohio R.C. Chapter
4561, and any vehicle excepted from definition as a motor vehicle by Ohio R.C.
4501.01(B).
   (b)   “Dealer.” Any person or firm engaged in the business of manufacturing
or selling snowmobiles, off-highway motorcycles, or all-purpose vehicles at
wholesale or retail, or who rents, leases or otherwise furnishes snowmobiles,
off-highway motorcycles, or all-purpose vehicles for hire.
   (c)   “Electronic” and “electronic record.” Have the same meanings as in
Ohio R.C. 4501.01.
   (d)   “Electronic dealer.” A dealer whom the Registrar of Motor Vehicles
designates under Ohio R.C. 4519.511.
   (e)   “Interstate highway.” Any part of the interstate system of highways as
defined in subsection (e), 90 Stat. 431 (1976), 23 U.S.C. 103, as amended.
   (f)   “Limited access highway” or “freeway.” Have the same meanings as in
Ohio R.C. 5511.02.
   (g)   “Mini-truck.” A vehicle that has four wheels, is propelled by an
electric motor with a rated power of 7,500 watts or less or an internal
combustion engine with a piston displacement capacity of 660 cubic centimeters
or less, has a total dry weight of 900 to 2,200 pounds, contains an enclosed
cabin and a seat for the vehicle operator, resembles a pickup truck or van with
a cargo area or bed located at the rear of the vehicle, and was not originally
manufactured to meet federal motor vehicle safety standards.
   (h)   “Off-highway motorcycle.” Every motorcycle, as defined in Ohio R.C.
4511.01, that is designed to be operated primarily on lands other than a street
or highway.
   (i)   “Operator.” Any person who operates or is in actual physical control
of a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle.
   (j)   “Owner.” Any person or firm, other than a lienholder or dealer, having
title to a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle, or other
right to the possession thereof.
   (k)   “Proof of financial responsibility.” Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
4509.01.
   (l)   “Snowmobile.” Any self-propelled vehicle designed primarily for use on
snow or ice, and steered by skis, runners or caterpillar treads.
   (m)   “State highway” and “state route.” Have the same meanings as in R.C. §
4511.01.
   (n)   “Street” or “highway.” Have the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 4511.01.
(ORC 4519.01)
§ 446.02  EQUIPMENT.
   (a)   In addition to any rules or regulations promulgated by the Ohio
Director of Public Safety pursuant to Ohio R.C. 4519.20 and Ohio R.C. Chapter
119, equipment of snowmobiles, off-highway motorcycles, and all-purpose
vehicles shall include but not necessarily be limited to requirements for the
following items of equipment:
      (1)   At least one headlight having a minimum candlepower of sufficient
intensity to reveal persons and objects at a distance of at least 100 feet
ahead under normal atmospheric conditions during hours of darkness;
      (2)   At least one red tail light having a minimum candlepower of
sufficient intensity to be plainly visible from a distance of 500 feet to the
rear under normal atmospheric conditions during hours of darkness;
      (3)   Every snowmobile, while traveling on packed snow, shall be capable
of carrying a driver who weighs 175 pounds or more, and, while carrying such
driver, be capable of stopping in no more than 40 feet from an initial steady
speed of 20 miles per hour, or locking its traction belt; and
      (4)   A muffler system capable of precluding the emission of excessive
smoke or exhaust fumes, and of limiting the engine noise of vehicles. On
snowmobiles manufactured after January 1, 1973, such requirement shall include
sound dampening equipment such that noise does not exceed 82 decibels on the
“A” scale at 50 feet as measured according to SAE J192 (September 1970).
   (b)   No person shall operate any snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or
all-purpose vehicle in violation of this section, except that equipment
specified in division (a)(1) and (a)(2) of this section shall not be required
on snowmobiles, off-highway motorcycles, or all-purpose vehicles operated
during the daylight hours.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (b) of this section shall be fined not more than fifty dollars
($50.00). If the offender within the preceding year previously has committed a
violation of division (b) of this section or of Ohio R.C. 4519.20(B), whoever
violates division (b) of this section shall be fined not less than fifteen
dollars ($15.00) nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00), imprisoned not
more than three days, or both.
(ORC 4519.20)
§ 446.03  CODE APPLICATION; PROHIBITED OPERATION.
   (a)   The applicable provisions of this traffic code apply to the operation
of snowmobiles, off-highway motorcycles, and all-purpose vehicles, except that
no person shall operate a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all-purpose
vehicle as follows:
      (1)   On any state highway, including a limited access highway or freeway
or the right-of-way thereof, except for emergency travel during such time and
in such manner as the Ohio Director of Public Safety designates or except as
authorized by R.C. § 4519.41(F);
      (2)   On any private property, or in any nursery or planting area,
without the permission of the owner or other person having the right to
possession of the property;
      (3)   On any land or waters controlled by the state, except at those
locations where a sign has been posted permitting such operation;
      (4)   On the tracks or right-of-way of any operating railroad;
      (5)   While transporting any firearm, bow or other implement for hunting
that is not unloaded and securely encased;
      (6)   For the purpose of chasing, pursuing, capturing or killing any
animal or wild fowl; or
      (7)   During the time from sunset to sunrise, unless displaying lighted
lights as required by Ohio R.C. 4519.20 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not less than fifty
dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), or imprisoned
not less than 3 nor more than 30 days, or both.
(ORC 4519.40)
§ 446.04  PERMITTED OPERATION.
   Snowmobiles, off-highway motorcycles, and all-purpose vehicles may be
operated as follows:
   (a)   To make a crossing of a highway, other than a highway as designated in
Ohio R.C. 4519.40(A)(1) or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance,
whenever the crossing can be made in safety and will not interfere with the
movement of vehicular traffic approaching from any direction on the highway,
and provided that the operator yields the right-of-way to any approaching
traffic that presents an immediate hazard;
   (b)   On highways in the county or township road systems whenever the local
authority having jurisdiction over such highways so permits;
   (c)   Off and alongside street or highway for limited distances from the
point of unloading from a conveyance to the point at which the snowmobile, off-
highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle is intended and authorized to be
operated;
   (d)   On the berm or shoulder of a highway, other than a highway as
designated in Ohio R.C. 4519.40(A)(1) or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, when the terrain permits such operation to be undertaken safely and
without the necessity of entering any traffic lane;
   (e)   On the berm or shoulder or a county or township road, while traveling
from one area of operation of the snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all-
purpose vehicle to another such area.
   (f)   For snowmobiles without metal studded tracks and all-purpose vehicles,
on state highways located on an island in Lake Erie, including limited access
highways and freeways, between the first day of November and the thirtieth day
of April, provided that all of the following conditions apply:
      (1)   The operator has a valid driver’s license as required under R.C. §
4519.44.
      (2)   The snowmobile or all-purpose vehicle is in compliance with rules
governing safety equipment adopted under R.C. § 4519.20.
      (3)   The owner of the snowmobile or all-purpose vehicle maintains proof
of financial responsibility for both on-road and off-road use of the snowmobile
or all-purpose vehicle.
      (4)   The operator obeys all traffic rules and regulations.
(ORC 4519.41)
§ 446.05  LICENSING REQUIREMENTS OF OPERATOR.
   (a)   No person who does not hold a valid, current motor vehicle driver’s or
commercial driver’s license, motorcycle operator’s endorsement or probationary
license, issued under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4506 or Ohio R.C. Chapter 4507 or a
valid, current driver's license issued by another jurisdiction, shall operate a
snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle on any street or
highway in this municipality, on any portion of the right-of-way thereof, or on
any public land or waters.
   (b)   No person who is less than 16 years of age shall operate a snowmobile,
off-highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle on any land or waters other than
private property or waters owned by or leased to the person’s parent or
guardian, unless accompanied by another person who is 18 years of age or older,
and who holds a license as provided in division (a) of this section, except
that the Ohio Department of Natural Resources may permit such operation on
state controlled land under its jurisdiction when such person is less than 16
years of age and is accompanied by a parent or guardian who is a licensed
driver 18 years of age or older.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not less than fifty
dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), or imprisoned
not less than 3 nor more than 30 days, or both.
(ORC 4519.44)
§ 446.06  ACCIDENT REPORTS.
   (a)   The operator of a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all-purpose
vehicle involved in any accident resulting in bodily injury to or death of any
person or damage to the property of any person in excess of one hundred dollars
($100.00) shall report the accident within 48 hours to the Chief of Police, and
within 30 days shall forward a written report of the accident to the Ohio
Registrar of Motor Vehicles on a form prescribed by the Registrar. If the
operator is physically incapable of making the reports and there is another
participant in the accident not so incapacitated, the participant shall make
the reports. In the event there is no other participant, and the operator is
other than the owner, the owner, within the prescribed periods of time, shall
make the reports.
   (b)   Any law enforcement officer or other person authorized by Ohio R.C.
4519.42 and 4519.43 who investigates or receives information of an accident
involving a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle shall
forward to the Registrar a written report of the accident within 48 hours.
(ORC 4519.46)
§ 446.07  LOCAL CONTROL WITHIN POLICE POWER.
   Nothing contained in this chapter shall prevent the municipality from
regulating the operation of snowmobiles, off-highway motorcycle, and all-
purpose vehicles on streets and highways and other public property under
municipal jurisdiction, and within the reasonable exercise of the police power,
except that no registration or licensing of any snowmobile, off-highway
motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle required to be registered or titled under
Ohio R.C. Chapter 4519 shall be required.
(ORC 4519.48)
§ 446.08  REGISTRATION OF VEHICLES.
   (a)   (1)   Except as provided in division (b), (c) and (d) of this section,
no person shall operate any snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all-purpose
vehicle within this municipality unless the snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle,
or all-purpose vehicle is registered and numbered in accordance with Ohio R.C.
4519.03 and 4519.04.
      (2)   Except as provided in Ohio R.C. 4511.215 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, no registration is required for a mini-truck
that is operated within this state. A mini-truck may be operated only in
accordance with Ohio R.C. 4511.215 and Ohio R.C. 4519.401, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance. This division (a)(2) shall take effect on
January 1, 2017.
   (b)   (1)   No registration is required for a snowmobile or off-highway
motorcycle that is operated exclusively upon lands owned by the owner of the
snowmobile or off-highway motorcycle, or on lands to which the owner of the
snowmobile or off-highway motorcycle has a contractual right.
      (2)   No registration is required for an all-purpose vehicle that is used
primarily for agricultural purposes when the owner qualifies for the current
agricultural use valuation tax credit, unless it is to be used on any public
land, trail, or right-of-way.
      (3)   Any all-purpose vehicle exempted from registration under division
(b)(2) of this section and operated for agricultural purposes may use public
roads and rights-of-way when traveling from one farm field to another, when
such use does not violate Ohio R.C. 4519.41.
      (4)   No registration is required for a snowmobile or all-purpose vehicle
that is operated on a state highway as authorized by R.C. § 4519.41(F).
   (c)   No registration is required for a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle,
or all-purpose vehicle owned and used in this state by a resident of another
state whenever that state has in effect a registration law similar to Ohio R.C.
Chapter 4519 and the snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle
is properly registered under that state’s law. Any snowmobile, off-highway
motorcycle, or all- purpose vehicle owned and used in this State by a resident
of a state not having a registration law similar to Ohio R.C. Chapter 4519
shall comply with Ohio R.C. 4519.09.
   (d)   No registration is required for a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle,
or all-purpose vehicle owned and used in this municipality by the United
States, another state or a political subdivision thereof, but the snowmobile,
off-highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle shall display the name of the
owner thereon.
   (e)   The owner or operator of any all-purpose vehicle operated or used upon
the waters in this municipality shall comply with Ohio R.C. Chapter 1547 and
Ohio R.C. Chapter 1548 relative to the operation of watercraft.
   (f)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section shall be fined not less
than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00).
(ORC 4519.02)
Statutory reference:
   Destruction or disposal of vehicle; transfer of ownership; change of
address; loss of certificate, see Ohio R.C. 4519.05
   Registration of emergency vehicles, see Ohio R.C. 4519.08
   Registration procedure, see Ohio R.C. 4519.03
   Temporary license placards and fees, see Ohio R.C. 4519.10
   Temporary operating permit for certain nonresidents, see Ohio R.C. 4519.09
§ 446.09  OPERATION OF OFF-HIGHWAY MOTORCYCLE OR ALL-PURPOSE VEHICLE WITHOUT
CERTIFICATE OF TITLE; FAILURE TO SURRENDER.
   (a)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Operate in this state an off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose
vehicle without having a certificate of title for the off-highway motorcycle or
all-purpose vehicle if such a certificate is required by Ohio R.C. Chapter 4519
to be issued for the off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle, or, if a
physical certificate of title has not been issued for it, operate an off-
highway motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle knowing that the ownership
information related to the motorcycle or vehicle has not been entered into the
automated title processing system by a Clerk of a Court of Common Pleas.
      (2)   Operate in this municipality an off-highway motorcycle or all-
purpose vehicle if a certificate of title to the off-highway motorcycle or all-
purpose vehicle has been issued and then has been canceled.
      (3)   Fail to surrender any certificate of title upon cancellation of it
by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles and notice of the cancellation as prescribed
in Ohio R.C. Chapter 4519.
      (4)   Fail to surrender the certificate of title to a Clerk of a Court of
Common Pleas as provided in Ohio R.C. Chapter 4519, in case of the destruction
or dismantling of, or change in, the off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose
vehicle described in the certificate of title.
      (5)   Violate any provision of Ohio R.C. 4519.51 to 4519.70 for which no
penalty is otherwise provided or any lawful rules adopted pursuant to those
sections.
      (6)   Operate in this state an off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose
vehicle knowing that the certificate of title to or ownership of the motorcycle
or vehicle as otherwise reflected in the automated title processing system has
been canceled.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not more than two hundred
dollars ($200.00), or imprisoned not more than 90 days, or both.
(ORC 4519.66)
§ 446.10  OPERATION BY MINORS ON PUBLIC PROPERTY.
   No parent or guardian of a minor under eighteen years of age shall allow or
permit such minor to operate any unlicensed snowmobile upon any sidewalk,
street, alley, road or highway within the municipality or within Firestone
Park.
(Ord. 73-O-34, passed 6-5-1973)
§ 446.11  OPERATION BY MINORS ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   No person shall operate, and no parent or guardian of a minor under 18 years
of age shall allow or permit such minor to operate, any unlicensed snowmobile
upon any private property within the municipality without the express consent
of the owner of such private property.
(Ord. 73-O-34, passed 6-5-1973)
§ 446.99  PENALTY.
   (EDITOR’S NOTE:  See §§
408.01 and
408.02 for general Traffic Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.)
TITLE EIGHT:  PARKING
CHAPTER 452:  PARKING GENERALLY
Section
452.01   Prohibition against parking on streets or highways.
452.02   Police may remove illegally parked vehicle.
452.03   Prohibited standing or parking places.
452.04   Manner of parallel and angle parking; handicapped persons.
452.05   Willfully leaving vehicles on private or public property.
452.06   Parking prohibitions on private property; private tow-away zones.
452.07   Unattended vehicles; duty to lock ignition, remove key, set brake,
etc.
452.08   Opening doors on side available to traffic.
452.09   Selling, washing or repairing vehicle upon roadway.
452.10   Truck loading zones.
452.11   Bus stops and taxicab stands.
452.12   Parking in alleys and narrow streets; exceptions.
452.13   Twenty-four hour limit.
452.14   Overnight parking and parking during declared weather emergencies
prohibited.
452.15   Storage of inoperable or unlicensed vehicles.
452.16   Parking on South Main Street prohibited.
452.17   Parking on Elm Street prohibited.
452.18   Parking on East Friend Street prohibited.
452.185   Parking on the north side of Seventh Street prohibited.
452.19   Registered owner prima-facie liable for unlawful parking.
452.20   Waiver.
452.21   Parking fines.
452.99   Penalty.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   See section histories for similar state law
   Parking defined - see TRAF.
402.26
   Stop defined - see TRAF.
402.45
   Stopping and standing defined - see TRAF.
402.47
   Police may remove ignition key from unattended vehicle - see TRAF.
404.01
   Impounding; redemption - see TRAF.
404.07
   Parking near stopped emergency or safety vehicles - see TRAF.
432.27
   Lights on parked or stopped vehicles - see TRAF.
438.09
   Parking of bicycles; locks - see TRAF.
444.08
   Storage of junk vehicles - see GEN. OFF.
660.07
§ 452.01  PROHIBITION AGAINST PARKING ON STREETS OR HIGHWAYS.
   (a)   (1)   Upon any highway, no person shall stop, park, or leave standing
any vehicle, whether attended or unattended, upon the paved or main traveled
part of the highway if it is practicable to stop, park, or so leave such
vehicle off the paved or main traveled part of the highway. In every event a
clear and unobstructed portion of the highway opposite such standing vehicle
shall be left for the free passage of other vehicles, and a clear view of such
stopped vehicle shall be available from a distance of 200 feet in each
direction upon such highway.
      (2)   This section does not apply to the driver of any vehicle which is
disabled while on the paved or improved or main traveled portion of a highway
in such manner and to such extent that it is impossible to avoid stopping and
temporarily leaving the disabled vehicle in such position.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(ORC 4511.66)
§ 452.02  POLICE MAY REMOVE ILLEGALLY PARKED VEHICLE.
   (a)   Whenever any police officer finds a vehicle standing upon a highway in
violation of Ohio R.C. 4511.66 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, such officer may move such vehicle, or require the driver or other
person in charge of the vehicle to move the same, to a position off the paved
or improved or main traveled part of such highway.
   (b)   Whenever any police officer finds a vehicle unattended upon any
highway, bridge, or causeway, or in any tunnel, where such vehicles constitutes
an obstruction to traffic, such officer may provide for the removal of such
vehicle to the nearest garage or other place of safety.
(ORC 4511.67)
§ 452.03  PROHIBITED STANDING OR PARKING PLACES.
   (a)   No person shall stand or park a vehicle, except when necessary to
avoid conflict with other traffic or to comply with the provisions of this
title, or while obeying the directions of a police officer or a traffic-control
device, in any of the following places:
      (1)   On a sidewalk, except as provided in division (b) of this section;
      (2)   In front of a public or private driveway;
      (3)   Within an intersection;
      (4)   Within ten feet of a fire hydrant;
      (5)   On a crosswalk;
      (6)   Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection;
      (7)   Within 30 feet of, and upon the approach to, any flashing beacon,
stop sign, or traffic-control device;
      (8)   Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within 30 feet of
points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless a
different length is indicated by a traffic-control device;
      (9)   Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing;
      (10)   Within 20 feet of a driveway entrance to any fire station and, on
the side of the street opposite the entrance to any fire station, within 75
feet of the entrance when it is properly posted with signs;
      (11)   Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when
such standing or parking would obstruct traffic;
      (12)   Alongside any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a
street;
      (13)   Upon any bridge or elevated structure upon a highway, or within a
highway tunnel;
      (14)   At any place where signs prohibit stopping;
      (15)   Within one foot of another parked vehicle;
      (16)   On the roadway portion of a freeway, expressway, or thruway.
   (b)   A person shall be permitted, without charge or restriction, to stand
or park on a sidewalk a motor-driven cycle or motor scooter that has an engine
not larger than 150 cubic centimeters, or a bicycle or electric bicycle,
provided that the motor-driven cycle, motor scooter, bicycle, or electric
bicycle does not impede the normal flow of pedestrian traffic. This division
does not authorize any person to operate a vehicle in violation of R.C. §
4511.711, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (a) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of
the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(ORC 4511.68)
   (d)   Vehicles shall be permitted to stop or remain standing for a period
not to exceed five minutes while loading or unloading passengers in the area
presently designated as a no-parking zone on the northwest quadrant of the
public square.
(Ord. 74-O-123, passed 8-20-1974)
§ 452.04  MANNER OF PARALLEL AND ANGLE PARKING; HANDICAPPED PERSONS.
   (a)   Every vehicle stopped or parked upon a roadway where there is an
adjacent curb shall be stopped or parked with the right-hand wheels of the
vehicle parallel with and not more than 12 inches from the right-hand curb,
unless it is impossible to approach so close to the curb; in such case the stop
shall be made as close to the curb as possible and only for the time necessary
to discharge and receive passengers or to load or unload merchandise. Local
authorities by ordinance may permit angle parking on any roadway under their
jurisdiction, except that angle parking shall not be permitted on a state route
within the municipality unless an unoccupied roadway width of not less than 25
feet is available for free-moving traffic.
   (b)   Local authorities by ordinance may permit parking of vehicles with the
left-hand wheels adjacent to and within 12 inches of the left-hand curb of a
one-way roadway.
   (c)   (1)   A.   Except as provided in division (c)(1)B. of this section, no
vehicle shall be stopped or parked on a road or highway with the vehicle facing
in a direction other than the direction of travel on that side of the road or
highway.
         B.   The operator of a motorcycle may back the motorcycle into an
angled parking space so that when the motorcycle is parked it is facing in a
direction other than the direction of travel on the side of the road or
highway.
      (2)   The operator of a motorcycle may back the motorcycle into a parking
space that is located on the side of, and parallel to, a road or highway. The
motorcycle may face any direction when so parked. Not more than two motorcycles
at a time shall be parked in a parking space as described in this division (c)
(2) of this section irrespective of whether or not the space is metered.
   (d)   Notwithstanding any statute or any rule, regulation, resolution, or
ordinance, air compressors, tractors, trucks, and other equipment, while being
used in the construction, reconstruction, installation, repair, or removal of
facilities near, on, over, or under a street or highway, may stop, stand, or
park where necessary in order to perform such work, provided a flagperson is on
duty or warning signs or lights are displayed as may be prescribed by the
Director of Transportation.
   (e)   Special parking locations and privileges for persons with disabilities
that limit or impair the ability to walk, also known as handicapped parking
spaces or disability parking spaces, shall be provided and designated by all
political subdivisions and by the state and all agencies and instrumentalities
thereof at all offices and facilities where parking is provided, whether owned,
rented, or leased, and at all publicly owned parking garages. The locations
shall be designated through the posting of an elevated sign, whether
permanently affixed or movable, imprinted with the international symbol of
access and shall be reasonably close to exits, entrances, elevators, and ramps.
All elevated signs posted in accordance with this division and Ohio R.C.
3781.111(C) shall be mounted on a fixed or movable post, and the distance from
the ground to the bottom edge of the sign shall measure not less than five
feet. If a new sign or a replacement sign designating a special parking
location is posted on or after October 14, 1999, there also shall be affixed
upon the surface of that sign or affixed next to the designating sign a notice
that states the fine applicable for the offense of parking a motor vehicle in
the special designated parking location if the motor vehicle is not legally
entitled to be parked in that location.
   (f)   (1)   A.   No person shall stop, stand, or park any motor vehicle at
special parking locations provided under division (e) of this section, or at
special clearly marked parking locations provided in or on privately owned
parking lots, parking garages, or other parking areas and designated in
accordance with that division, unless one of the following applies:
            1.   The motor vehicle is being operated by or for the transport of
a person with a disability that limits or impairs the ability to walk and is
displaying a valid removable windshield placard or special license plates; or
            2.   The motor vehicle is being operated by or for the transport of
a handicapped person and is displaying a parking card or special handicapped
license plates.
         B.   Any motor vehicle that is parked in a special marked parking
location in violation of division (f)(1)A.1. or (f)(1)A.2. of this section may
be towed or otherwise removed from the parking location by the law enforcement
agency of the municipality. A motor vehicle that is so towed or removed shall
not be released to its owner until the owner presents proof of ownership of the
motor vehicle and pays all towing and storage fees normally imposed by the
municipality for towing and storing motor vehicles. If the motor vehicle is a
leased vehicle, it shall not be released to the lessee until the lessee
presents proof that that person is the lessee of the motor vehicle and pays all
towing and storage fees normally imposed by the municipality for towing and
storing motor vehicles.
         C.   If a person is charged with a violation of division (f)(1)A.1. or
(f)(1)A.2. of this section, it is an affirmative defense to the charge that the
person suffered an injury not more than 72 hours prior to the time the person
was issued the ticket or citation and that, because of the injury, the person
meets at least one of the criteria contained in Ohio R.C. 4503.44(A)(1).
      (2)   No person shall stop, stand, or park any motor vehicle in an area
that is commonly known as an access aisle, which area is marked by diagonal
stripes and is located immediately adjacent to a special parking location
provided under division (e) of this section or at a special clearly marked
parking location provided in or on a privately owned parking lot, parking
garage, or other parking area and designated in accordance with that division.
   (g)   When a motor vehicle is being operated by or for the transport of a
person with a disability that limits or impairs the ability to walk and is
displaying a removable windshield placard or a temporary removable windshield
placard or special license plates, or when a motor vehicle is being operated by
or for the transport of a handicapped person, and is displaying a parking card
or special handicapped license plates, the motor vehicle is permitted to park
for a period of two hours in excess of the legal parking period permitted by
local authorities, except where local ordinances or police rules provide
otherwise or where the vehicle is parked in such a manner as to be clearly a
traffic hazard.
   (h)   No owner of an office, facility, or parking garage where special
parking locations are required to be designated in accordance with division (e)
of this section shall fail to properly mark the special parking locations in
accordance with that division or fail to maintain the markings of the special
locations, including the erection and maintenance of the fixed or movable
signs.
   (i)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to require a person or
organization to apply for a removable windshield placard or special license
plates if the parking card or special license plates issued to the person or
organization under prior law have not expired or been surrendered or revoked.
   (j)   As used in this section:
      (1)   “Handicapped person” means any person who has lost the use of one
or both legs or one or both arms, who is blind, deaf, or so severely
handicapped as to be unable to move without the aid of crutches or a
wheelchair, or whose mobility is restricted by a permanent cardiovascular,
pulmonary, or other handicapping condition.
      (2)   “Person with a disability that limits or impairs the ability to
walk” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 4503.44.
      (3)   “Special license plates” and “removable windshield placard” mean
any license plates or removable windshield placard or temporary removable
windshield placard issued under Ohio R.C. 4503.41 or 4503.44, and also mean any
substantially equivalent license plates or removable windshield placard or
temporary removable windshield placard issued by a state, district, country, or
sovereignty.
   (k)   Penalty.
      (1)   Whoever violates division (a) or (c) of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.
      (2)   A.   Whoever violates division (f)(1)A.1. or (f)(1)A.2. of this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished as provided in
division (k)(2)A. and B. of this section. Except as otherwise provided in
division (k)(2)A. of this section, an offender who violates division (f)(1)A.1.
or (f)(1)A.2. of this section shall be fined not less than two hundred fifty
dollars ($250.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). An offender who
violates division (f)(1)A.1. or (f)(1)A.2. of this section shall be fined not
more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) if the offender, prior to sentencing,
proves either of the following to the satisfaction of the court:
            1.   At the time of the violation of division (f)(1)A.1. of this
section, the offender or the person for whose transport the motor vehicle was
being operated had been issued a removable windshield placard that then was
valid or special license plates that then were valid but the offender or the
person neglected to display the placard or license plates as described in
division (f)(1)A.1. of this section.
            2.   At the time of the violation of division (f)(1)A.2. of this
section, the offender or the person for whose transport the motor vehicle was
being operated had been issued a parking card that then was valid or special
handicapped license plates that then were valid but the offender or the person
neglected to display the card or license plates as described in division (f)
(1)A.2. of this section.
         B.   In no case shall an offender who violates division (f)(1)A.1. or
(f)(1)A.2. be sentenced to any term of imprisonment.
         C.   An arrest or conviction for a violation of division (f)(1)A.1. or
(f)(1)A.2. of this section does not constitute a criminal record and need not
be reported by the person so arrested or convicted in response to any inquiries
contained in any application for employment, license, or other right or
privilege, or made in connection with the person’s appearance as a witness.
         D.   The Clerk of the Court shall pay every fine collected under
divisions (k)(2) and (k)(3) of this section to the municipality. Except as
provided in division (k)(2) of this section, the municipality shall use the
fine monies it receives under divisions (k)(2) and (k)(3) of this section to
pay the expenses it incurs in complying with the signage and notice
requirements contained in division (e) of this section. The municipality may
use up to 50% of each fine it receives under divisions (k)(2) and (k)(3) of
this section to pay the costs of educational, advocacy, support, and assistive
technology programs for persons with disabilities, and for public improvements
within the municipality that benefit or assist persons with disabilities, if
governmental agencies or nonprofit organizations offer the programs.
      (3)   Whoever violates division (f)(2) of this section shall be fined not
less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) nor more than five hundred
dollars ($500.00). In no case shall an offender who violates division (f)(2) of
this section be sentenced to any term of imprisonment. An arrest or conviction
for a violation of division (f)(2) of this section does not constitute a
criminal record and need not be reported by the person so arrested or convicted
in response to any inquiries contained in any application for employment,
license, or other right or privilege, or made in connection with the person’s
appearance as a witness.
      (4)   Whoever violates division (h) of this section shall be punished as
follows:
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in division (k)(4) of this section,
the offender shall be issued a warning.
         B.   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of division (h) of this section or of a municipal
ordinance that is substantially equivalent to that division, the offender shall
not be issued a warning but shall be fined not more than twenty-five dollars
($25.00) for each parking location that is not properly marked or whose
markings are not properly maintained.
(ORC 4511.69)
§ 452.05  WILLFULLY LEAVING VEHICLES ON PRIVATE OR PUBLIC PROPERTY.
   (a)   The County Sheriff or Chief of Police, within the Sheriff’s or Chief’s
respective territorial jurisdiction, or a state highway patrol trooper, upon
notification to the Sheriff or Chief of Police of such action and of the
location of the place of storage, may order into storage any motor vehicle,
including an abandoned junk motor vehicle as defined in Ohio R.C. 4513.63,
that:
      (1)   Has come into the possession of the Sheriff, Chief of Police, or
state highway patrol trooper as a result of the performance of the Sheriff’s,
Chief’s, or trooper’s duties; or
      (2)   Has been left on a public street or other property open to the
public for purposes of vehicular travel, or upon or within the right-of-way of
any road or highway, for 48 hours or longer without notification to the Sheriff
or Chief of Police of the reasons for leaving the motor vehicle in such place.
However, when such a motor vehicle constitutes an obstruction to traffic it may
be ordered into storage immediately unless either of the following applies:
         A.   The vehicle was involved in an accident and is subject to Ohio
R.C. 4513.66, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance;
         B.   The vehicle is a commercial motor vehicle. If the vehicle is a
commercial motor vehicle, the Sheriff, Chief of Police, or state highway patrol
trooper shall allow the owner or operator of the vehicle the opportunity to
arrange for the removal of the motor vehicle within a period of time specified
by the Sheriff, Chief of Police, or state highway patrol trooper. If the
Sheriff, Chief of Police, or state highway patrol trooper determines that the
vehicle cannot be removed within the specified period of time, the Sheriff,
Chief of Police, or state highway patrol trooper shall order the removal of the
vehicle.
      (3)   Subject to division (c) of this section, the Sheriff or Chief of
Police shall designate the place of storage of any motor vehicle so ordered
removed.
   (b)   If the Sheriff, Chief of Police, or a state highway patrol trooper
issues an order under division (a) of this section and arranges for the removal
of a motor vehicle by a towing service, the towing service shall deliver the
motor vehicle to the location designated by the Sheriff or Chief of Police not
more than two hours after the time it is removed.
   (c)   (1)   The Sheriff or Chief of Police shall cause a search to be made
of the records of the Bureau of Motor Vehicles to ascertain the identity of the
owner and any lienholder of a motor vehicle ordered into storage by the Sheriff
or Chief of Police, or by a state highway patrol trooper within five business
days of the removal of the vehicle. Upon obtaining such identity, the Sheriff
or Chief of Police shall send or cause to be sent to the owner or lienholder at
the owner’s or lienholder’s last known address by certified mail with return
receipt requested, notice that informs the owner or lienholder that the motor
vehicle will be declared a nuisance and disposed of if not claimed within ten
days of the date of mailing of the notice.
      (2)   A.   The owner or lienholder of the motor vehicle may reclaim the
motor vehicle upon payment of any expenses or charges incurred in its removal
and storage, and presentation of proof of ownership, which may be evidenced by
a certificate of title or memorandum certificate of title to the motor vehicle,
a certificate of registration for the motor vehicle, or a lease agreement. Upon
presentation of proof of ownership evidenced as provided above, the owner of
the motor vehicle also may retrieve any personal items from the vehicle without
retrieving the vehicle and without paying any fee. However, a towing service or
storage facility may charge an after-hours retrieval fee established by the
Public Utilities Commission in rules adopted under R.C. § 4921.25 if the owner
retrieves the personal items after hours, unless the towing service or storage
facility fails to provide the notice required under R.C. § 4513.69(B)(3), if
applicable. However, the owner shall not do either of the following:
            1.   Retrieve any personal item that has been determined by the
Sheriff, Chief of Police, or a state highway patrol trooper, as applicable, to
be necessary to a criminal investigation;
            2.   Retrieve any personal item from a vehicle if it would endanger
the safety of the owner, unless the owner agrees to sign a waiver of liability.
         B.   For purposes of division (c)(2) of this section, “personal items”
do not include any items that are attached to the vehicle.
      (3)   If the owner or lienholder of the motor vehicle reclaims it after a
search of the records of the Bureau of Motor Vehicles has been conducted and
after notice has been sent to the owner or lienholder as described in this
section, and the search was conducted by the place of storage, and the notice
was sent to the motor vehicle owner by the place of storage, the owner or
lienholder shall pay to the place of storage a processing fee of $25, in
addition to any expenses or charges incurred in the removal and storage of the
vehicle.
   (d)   If the owner or lienholder makes no claim to the motor vehicle within
ten days of the date of mailing of the notice, and if the vehicle is to be
disposed of at public auction as provided in Ohio R.C. 4513.62 or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the Sheriff or Chief of Police,
without charge to any party, shall file with the Clerk of Courts of the county
in which the place of storage is located an affidavit showing compliance with
the requirements of this section. Upon presentation of the affidavit, the
Clerk, without charge, shall issue a salvage certificate of title, free and
clear of all liens and encumbrances, to the Sheriff or Chief of Police. If the
vehicle is to be disposed of to a motor vehicle salvage dealer or other
facility as provided in Ohio R.C. 4513.62 or any substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, the Sheriff or Chief of Police shall execute in triplicate
an affidavit, as prescribed by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles, describing the
motor vehicle and the manner in which it was disposed of, and that all
requirements of this section have been complied with. The Sheriff or Chief of
Police shall retain the original of the affidavit for the Sheriff’s or Chief’s
records, and shall furnish two copies to the motor vehicle salvage dealer or
other facility. Upon presentation of a copy of the affidavit by the motor
vehicle salvage dealer, the Clerk of Courts, within 30 days of the
presentation, shall issue a salvage certificate of title, free and clear of all
liens and encumbrances.
   (e)   Whenever a motor vehicle salvage dealer or other facility receives an
affidavit for the disposal of a motor vehicle as provided in this section, the
dealer or facility shall not be required to obtain an Ohio certificate of title
to the motor vehicle in the dealer’s or facility’s own name if the vehicle is
dismantled or destroyed and both copies of the affidavit are delivered to the
Clerk of Courts.
   (f)   No towing service or storage facility shall fail to comply with this
section.
(ORC 4513.61)
   (g)   Abandonment of Junk Motor Vehicle Prohibited.
      (1)   A.   No person shall willfully leave an abandoned junk motor
vehicle, as defined in Ohio R.C. 4513.63, on private property for more than 72
hours without the permission of the person having the right to the possession
of the property, or on a public street or other property open to the public for
purposes of vehicular travel or parking, or upon or within the right-of-way of
any road or highway for 48 hours or longer without notification to the Police
Chief of the reason for leaving the motor vehicle in that place.
         B.   For purposes of this division (g)(1), the fact that a motor
vehicle has been so left without permission or notification is prima facie
evidence of abandonment.
         C.   Nothing contained in this section and Ohio R.C. 4513.60, 4513.61
and 4513.63 shall invalidate or prevent the enactment of further provisions of
municipal ordinances regulating or prohibiting the abandonment of motor
vehicles on streets, highways, public property or private property within the
municipality.
      (2)   Whoever violates this division (g) is guilty of a minor misdemeanor
and shall also be assessed any costs incurred by the municipality in disposing
of the abandoned junk motor vehicle, less any money accruing to the
municipality from the disposal.
(ORC 4513.64)
§ 452.06  PARKING PROHIBITIONS ON PRIVATE PROPERTY; PRIVATE TOW-AWAY ZONES.
   (a)   (1)   The Sheriff or Chief of Police, upon complaint of any person
adversely affected, may order into storage any motor vehicle, other than an
abandoned junk motor vehicle as defined in R.C. § 4513.63, that has been left
on private residential or private agricultural property for at least four hours
without the permission of the person having the right to the possession of the
property. The Sheriff or Chief of Police, upon complaint of a repair garage or
place of storage, may order into storage any motor vehicle, other than an
abandoned junk motor vehicle, that has been left at the garage or place of
storage for a longer period than that agreed upon. When ordering a motor
vehicle into storage pursuant to this division, the Sheriff or Chief of Police
may arrange for the removal of the motor vehicle by a towing service and shall
designate a storage facility.
      (2)   A towing service towing a motor vehicle under division (a)(1) of
this section shall remove the motor vehicle in accordance with that division.
The towing service shall deliver the motor vehicle to the location designated
by the Sheriff or Chief of Police not more than two hours after the time it is
removed from the private property, unless the towing service is unable to
deliver the motor vehicle within two hours due to an uncontrollable force,
natural disaster, or other event that is not within the power of the towing
service.
      (3)   Subject to division (b) of this section, the owner of a motor
vehicle that has been removed pursuant to this division may recover the vehicle
only in accordance with division (d) of this section.
      (4)   As used in this section, “private residential property” means
private property on which is located one or more structures that are used as a
home, residence, or sleeping place by one or more persons, if no more than
three separate households are maintained in the structure or structures. The
phrase does not include any private property on which is located one or more
structures that are used as a home, residence, or sleeping place by two or more
persons, if more than three separate households are maintained in the structure
or structures.
   (b)   (1)   If the owner or operator of a motor vehicle that has been
ordered into storage pursuant to division (a)(1) of this section arrives after
the motor vehicle has been prepared for removal, but prior to its actual
removal from the property, the towing service shall give the owner or operator
oral or written notification at the time of such arrival that the vehicle owner
or operator may pay a fee of not more than one-half of the fee for the removal
of the motor vehicle established by the Public Utilities Commission in rules
adopted under R.C. § 4921.25, in order to obtain release of the motor vehicle.
However, if the vehicle is within a municipal corporation and the municipal
corporation has established a vehicle removal fee, the towing service shall
give the owner or operator oral or written notification that the owner or
operator may pay not more than one-half of that fee to obtain release of the
motor vehicle. That fee may be paid by use of a major credit card unless the
towing service uses a mobile credit card processor and mobile service is not
available at the time of the transaction.
      (2)   Upon payment of the applicable fee, the towing service shall give
the vehicle owner or operator a receipt showing both the full amount normally
assessed and the actual amount received and shall release the motor vehicle to
the owner or operator. Upon its release, the owner or operator immediately
shall move it so that it is not on the private residential or private
agricultural property without the permission of the person having the right to
possession of the property, or is not at the garage or place of storage without
the permission of the owner, whichever is applicable.
   (c)   (1)   The Sheriff and Chief of Police shall maintain a record of motor
vehicles that the Sheriff or Chief of Police orders into storage pursuant to
division (a)(1) of this section. The record shall include an entry for each
such motor vehicle that identifies the motor vehicle’s license number, make,
model, and color, the location from which it was removed, the date and time of
its removal, the telephone number of the person from whom it may be recovered,
and the address of the place to which it has been taken and from which it may
be recovered. The Sheriff or Chief of Police shall provide any information in
the record that pertains to a particular motor vehicle to any person who,
either in person or pursuant to a telephone call, identifies self as the owner
or operator of the motor vehicle and requests information pertaining to its
location.
      (2)   Any person who registers a complaint that is the basis of the
Sheriff’s or Police Chief’s order for the removal and storage of a motor
vehicle under division (a)(1) of this section shall provide the identity of the
law enforcement agency with which the complaint was registered to any person
who identifies self as the owner or operator of the motor vehicle and requests
information pertaining to its location.
   (d)   (1)   The owner or lienholder of a motor vehicle that is ordered into
storage pursuant to division (a)(1) of this section may reclaim it upon both of
the following:
         A.   Payment of all applicable fees established by the Public
Utilities Commission in rules adopted under R.C. § 4921.25 or, if the vehicle
was towed within a municipal corporation that has established fees for vehicle
removal and storage, payment of all applicable fees established by the
municipal corporation.
         B.   Presentation of proof of ownership, which may be evidenced by a
certificate of title to the motor vehicle, a certificate of registration for
the motor vehicle, or a lease agreement.
      (2)   When the owner of a vehicle towed under this section retrieves the
vehicle, the towing service or storage facility in possession of the vehicle
shall give the owner written notice that if the owner disputes that the motor
vehicle was lawfully towed, the owner may be able to file a civil action under
R.C. § 4513.611.
      (3)   Upon presentation of proof of ownership as required under division
(d)(1)B. of this section, the owner of a motor vehicle that is ordered into
storage under division (a)(1) of this section may retrieve any personal items
from the motor vehicle without retrieving the vehicle and without paying any
fee. However, a towing service or storage facility may charge an after-hours
retrieval fee established by the Public Utilities Commission in rules adopted
under R.C. § 4921.25 if the owner retrieves the personal items after hours,
unless the towing service or storage facility fails to provide the notice
required under R.C. § 4513.69(B)(3), if applicable. The owner of a motor
vehicle shall not do either of the following:
         A.   Retrieve any personal item that has been determined by the
Sheriff or Chief of Police, as applicable, to be necessary to a criminal
investigation;
         B.   Retrieve any personal item from a vehicle if it would endanger
the safety of the owner, unless the owner agrees to sign a waiver of liability.
      (4)   For purposes of division (d)(3) of this section, “personal items”
do not include any items that are attached to the motor vehicle.
      (5)   If a motor vehicle that is ordered into storage pursuant to
division (a)(1) of this section remains unclaimed by the owner for 30 days, the
procedures established by R.C. §§ 4513.61 and 4513.62 apply.
   (e)   (1)   No person shall remove, or cause the removal of, any motor
vehicle from any private residential or private agricultural property other
than in accordance with division (a)(1) of this section or R.C. §§ 4513.61 to
4513.65.
      (2)   No towing service or storage facility shall fail to comply with the
requirements of this section.
   (f)   This section does not apply to any private residential or private
agricultural property that is established as a private tow-away zone in
accordance with division (h) of this section or R.C. § 4513.601.
   (g)   Whoever violates division (e) of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.60)
   (h)   Private Tow-away Zones.
      (1)   The owner of a private property may establish a private tow-away
zone, but may do so only if all of the following conditions are satisfied:
         A.   The owner of the private property posts on the property a sign,
that is at least 18 inches by 24 inches in size, that is visible from all
entrances to the property, and that includes all of the following information:
            1.   A statement that the property is a tow-away zone;
            2.   A description of persons authorized to park on the property.
If the property is a residential property, the owner of the private property
may include on the sign a statement that only tenants and guests may park in
the private tow-away zone, subject to the terms of the property owner. If the
property is a commercial property, the owner of the private property may
include on the sign a statement that only customers may park in the private
tow-away zone. In all cases, if it is not apparent which persons may park in
the private tow-away zone, the owner of the private property shall include on
the sign the address of the property on which the private tow-away zone is
located or the name of the business that is located on the property designated
as a private tow-away zone.
            3.   If the private tow-away zone is not enforceable at all times,
the times during which the parking restrictions are enforced;
            4.   The telephone number and the address of the place from which a
towed vehicle may be recovered at any time during the day or night;
            5.   A statement that the failure to recover a towed vehicle may
result in the loss of title to the vehicle as provided in R.C. § 4505.101(B).
            6.   In order to comply with the requirements of division (h)(1)A.
of this section, the owner of a private property may modify an existing sign by
affixing to the existing sign stickers or an addendum in lieu of replacing the
sign.
         B.   A towing service ensures that a vehicle towed under this division
(h) is taken to a location from which it may be recovered that complies with
all of the following:
            1.   It is located within 25 linear miles of the location of the
private tow-away zone, unless it is not practicable to take the vehicle to a
place of storage within 25 linear miles.
            2.   It is well-lighted.
            3.   It is on or within a reasonable distance of a regularly
scheduled route of one or more modes of public transportation, if any public
transportation is available in the municipal corporation or township in which
the private tow-away zone is located.
      (2)   A.   If a vehicle is parked on private property that is established
as a private tow-away zone in accordance with division (h)(1) of this section,
without the consent of the owner of the private property or in violation of any
posted parking condition or regulation, the owner of the private property may
cause the removal of the vehicle by a towing service. The towing service shall
remove the vehicle in accordance with this division (h). The vehicle owner and
the operator of the vehicle are considered to have consented to the removal and
storage of the vehicle, to the payment of the applicable fees established by
the Public Utilities Commission in rules adopted under R.C. § 4921.25, and to
the right of a towing service to obtain title to the vehicle if it remains
unclaimed as provided in R.C. § 4505.101. The owner or lienholder of a vehicle
that has been removed under this division (h), subject to division (h)(3) of
this section, may recover the vehicle in accordance with division (h)(7) of
this section.
         B.   If a municipal corporation requires tow trucks and tow truck
operators to be licensed, no owner of a private property located within the
municipal corporation shall cause the removal and storage of any vehicle
pursuant to division (h)(2) of this section by an unlicensed tow truck or
unlicensed tow truck operator.
         C.   No towing service shall remove a vehicle from a private tow-away
zone except pursuant to a written contract for the removal of vehicles entered
into with the owner of the private property on which the private tow-away zone
is located.
      (3)   If the owner or operator of a vehicle that is being removed under
authority of division (h)(2) of this section arrives after the vehicle has been
prepared for removal, but prior to its actual removal from the property, the
towing service shall give the vehicle owner or operator oral or written
notification at the time of such arrival that the vehicle owner or operator may
pay a fee of not more than one-half of the fee for the removal of the vehicle
established by the Public Utilities Commission in rules adopted under R.C. §
4921.25 in order to obtain release of the vehicle. That fee may be paid by use
of a major credit card unless the towing service uses a mobile credit card
processor and mobile service is not available at the time of the transaction.
Upon payment of that fee, the towing service shall give the vehicle owner or
operator a receipt showing both the full amount normally assessed and the
actual amount received and shall release the vehicle to the owner or operator.
Upon its release, the owner or operator immediately shall move the vehicle so
that the vehicle is not parked on the private property established as a private
tow-away zone without the consent of the owner of the private property or in
violation of any posted parking condition or regulation.
      (4)   A.   Prior to towing a vehicle under division (h)(2) of this
section, a towing service shall make all reasonable efforts to take as many
photographs as necessary to evidence that the vehicle is clearly parked on
private property in violation of a private tow-away zone established under
division (h)(1) of this section. The towing service shall record the time and
date of the photographs taken under this division (h). The towing service shall
retain the photographs and the record of the time and date, in electronic or
printed form, for at least 30 days after the date on which the vehicle is
recovered by the owner or lienholder or at least two years after the date on
which the vehicle was towed, whichever is earlier.
         B   A towing service shall deliver a vehicle towed under division (h)
(2) of this section to the location from which it may be recovered not more
than two hours after the time it was removed from the private tow-away zone,
unless the towing service is unable to deliver the motor vehicle within two
hours due to an uncontrollable force, natural disaster, or other event that is
not within the power of the towing service.
      (5)   A.   If an owner of a private property that is established as a
private tow- away zone in accordance with division (h)(1) of this section
causes the removal of a vehicle from that property by a towing service under
division (h)(2) of this section, the towing service, within two hours of
removing the vehicle, shall provide notice to the Sheriff or the Police
Department concerning all of the following:
            1.   The vehicle’s license number, make, model, and color;
            2.   The location from which the vehicle was removed;
            3.   The date and time the vehicle was removed;
            4.   The telephone number of the person from whom the vehicle may
be recovered;
            5.   The address of the place from which the vehicle may be
recovered.
         B.   The Sheriff and Chief of Police shall maintain a record of any
vehicle removed from private property in the Sheriff’s or Police Chief’s
jurisdiction that is established as a private tow-away zone of which the
Sheriff or Police Chief has received notice under this division (h). The record
shall include all information submitted by the towing service. The Sheriff or
Police Chief shall provide any information in the record that pertains to a
particular vehicle to a person who, either in person or pursuant to a telephone
call, identifies self as the owner, operator, or lienholder of the vehicle and
requests information pertaining to the vehicle.
      (6)   A.   When a vehicle is removed from private property in accordance
with this division (h), within three business days of the removal, the towing
service or storage facility from which the vehicle may be recovered shall cause
a search to be made of the records of the Bureau of Motor Vehicles to ascertain
the identity of the owner and any lienholder of the motor vehicle. The
Registrar of Motor Vehicles shall ensure that such information is provided in a
timely manner. Subject to division (h)(6)D. of this section, the towing service
or storage facility shall send notice to the vehicle owner and any known
lienholder as follows:
            1.   Within five business days after the Registrar of Motor
Vehicles provides the identity of the owner and any lienholder of the motor
vehicle, if the vehicle remains unclaimed, to the owner’s and lienholder’s last
known address by certified or express mail with return receipt requested or by
a commercial carrier service utilizing any form of delivery requiring a signed
receipt;
            2.   If the vehicle remains unclaimed 30 days after the first
notice is sent, in the manner required under division (h)(6)A.1. of this
section;
            3.   If the vehicle remains unclaimed 45 days after the first
notice is sent, in the manner required under division (h)(6)A.1. of this
section.
         B.   Sixty days after any notice sent pursuant to division (h)(6)A. of
this section is received, as evidenced by a receipt signed by any person, or
the towing service or storage facility has been notified that delivery was not
possible, the towing service or storage facility, if authorized under R.C. §
4505.101(B), may initiate the process for obtaining a certificate of title to
the motor vehicle as provided in that section.
         C.   A towing service or storage facility that does not receive a
signed receipt of notice, or a notification that delivery was not possible,
shall not obtain, and shall not attempt to obtain, a certificate of title to
the motor vehicle under R.C. § 4505.101(B).
         D.   With respect to a vehicle concerning which a towing service or
storage facility is not eligible to obtain title under R.C. § 4505.101, the
towing service or storage facility need only comply with the initial notice
required under division (h)(6)A.1. of this section.
      (7)   A.   The owner or lienholder of a vehicle that is removed under
division (h)(2) of this section may reclaim it upon both of the following:
            1.   Presentation of proof of ownership, which may be evidenced by
a certificate of title to the vehicle, a certificate of registration for the
motor vehicle, or a lease agreement;
            2.   Payment of the following fees:
               a.   All applicable fees established by the Public Utilities
Commission in rules adopted under R.C. § 4921.25, except that the lienholder of
a vehicle may retrieve the vehicle without paying any storage fee for the
period of time that the vehicle was in the possession of the towing service or
storage facility prior to the date the lienholder received the notice sent
under division (h)(6)A.1. of this section;
               b.   If notice has been sent to the owner and lienholder as
described in division (h)(6) of this section, a processing fee of $25.
         B.   A towing service or storage facility in possession of a vehicle
that is removed under authority of division (h)(2) of this section shall show
the vehicle owner, operator, or lienholder who contests the removal of the
vehicle all photographs taken under division (h)(4) of this section. Upon
request, the towing service or storage facility shall provide a copy of all
photographs in the medium in which the photographs are stored, whether paper,
electronic, or otherwise.
         C.   When the owner of a vehicle towed under this section retrieves
the vehicle, the towing service or storage facility in possession of the
vehicle shall give the owner written notice that if the owner disputes that the
motor vehicle was lawfully towed, the owner may be able to file a civil action
under R.C. § 4513.611.
         D.   Upon presentation of proof of ownership, which may be evidenced
by a certificate of title to the vehicle, a certificate of registration for the
motor vehicle, or a lease agreement, the owner of a vehicle that is removed
under authority of division (h)(2) of this section may retrieve any personal
items from the vehicle without retrieving the vehicle and without paying any
fee. The owner of the vehicle shall not retrieve any personal items from a
vehicle if it would endanger the safety of the owner, unless the owner agrees
to sign a waiver of liability. For purposes of division (h)(7)D. of this
section, “personal items” do not include any items that are attached to the
vehicle.
      (8)   No person shall remove, or cause the removal of, any vehicle from
private property that is established as a private tow-away zone under this
division (h) or store such a vehicle other than in accordance with this
division (h), or otherwise fail to comply with any applicable requirement of
this division (h).
      (9)   This section does not affect or limit the operation of divisions
(a) through (g) of this section, R.C. § 4513.60 or R.C. §§ 4513.61 to 4613.65
as they relate to property other than private property that is established as a
private tow-away zone under division (h)(1) of this section.
      (10)   Whoever violates division (h)(8) of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.
      (11)   As used in this section, “owner of a private property” or “owner
of the private property” includes, with respect to a private property, any of
the following:
         A.   Any person who holds title to the property;
         B.   Any person who is a lessee or sublessee with respect to a lease
or sublease agreement for the property;
         C.   A person who is authorized to manage the property;
         D.   A duly authorized agent of any person listed in divisions (h)
(11)A. to (h)(11)C. of this section.
(R.C. § 4513.601)
   (i)   If an owner of private property posts on the property in a conspicuous
manner a prohibition against parking on the property or conditions and
regulations under which parking is permitted, no person shall do either of the
following:
      (1)   Park a vehicle on the property without the owner’s consent;
      (2)   Park a vehicle on the property in violation of any condition or
regulation posted by the owner.
   (j)   Whoever violates division (i) of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4511.681)
§ 452.07  UNATTENDED VEHICLES; DUTY TO LOCK IGNITION, REMOVE KEY, SET BRAKE,
ETC.
   (a)   (1)   No person driving or in charge of a motor vehicle shall permit
it to stand unattended without first stopping the engine, locking the ignition,
removing the key from the ignition, effectively setting the parking brake, and,
when the motor vehicle is standing upon any grade, turning the front wheels to
the curb or side of the highway.
      (2)   The requirements of this section relating to the stopping of the
engine, locking of the ignition, and removing the key from the ignition of a
motor vehicle do not apply to any of the following:
         A.   A motor vehicle that is parked on residential property;
         B.   A motor vehicle that is locked, regardless of where it is parked;
         C.   An emergency vehicle ;
         D.   A public safety vehicle.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(ORC 4511.661)
§ 452.08  OPENING DOORS ON SIDE AVAILABLE TO TRAFFIC.
   (a)   No person shall open the door of a vehicle on the side available to
moving traffic unless and until it is reasonably safe to do so, and can be done
without interfering with the movement of other traffic, nor shall any person
leave a door open on the side of a vehicle available to moving traffic for a
period of time longer than necessary to load or unload passengers.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(ORC 4511.70)
§ 452.09  SELLING, WASHING OR REPAIRING VEHICLE UPON ROADWAY.
   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle upon any roadway for the
principal purpose of:
   (a)   Displaying such vehicle for sale; or
   (b)   Washing, greasing or repairing such vehicle except repairs
necessitated by an emergency.
§ 452.10  TRUCK LOADING ZONES.
   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or length of
time, other than for the expeditious unloading and delivery or pickup and
loading of materials, in any place marked as a truck loading zone during hours
when the provisions applicable to such zones are in effect. In no case shall
the stop for loading and unloading of materials exceed 30 minutes.
§ 452.11  BUS STOPS AND TAXICAB STANDS.
   (a)   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle other than a bus in a
bus stop, or other than a taxicab in a taxicab stand, when any such stop or
stand has been officially designated and appropriately posted, except that the
driver of a passenger vehicle may temporarily stop therein for the purpose of,
and while actually engaged in, loading or unloading passengers when such
stopping does not interfere with any bus or taxicab waiting to enter or about
to enter such zone, and then only for a period not to exceed three minutes, if
such stopping is not prohibited therein by posted signs.
   (b)   No operator of a bus shall stop, stand or park such vehicle upon any
street or other public way at any place for the purpose of loading or unloading
passengers or their baggage other than at a bus stop so designated and posted
as such, except in case of an emergency.
   (c)   No operator of a bus shall fail to enter a bus stop on a street or
other public way in such a manner that the bus when stopped to load or unload
passengers or baggage is in a position with the right front wheel of such
vehicle not further than 18 inches from the curb and the bus approximately
parallel to the curb so as not to unduly impede the movement of other vehicular
traffic.
   (d)   No operator of a taxicab shall stand or park such vehicle upon any
street or other public way at any place other than in a taxicab stand so
designated and posted as such. This provision shall not prevent the operator of
a taxicab from temporarily stopping in accordance with other stopping or
parking provisions at any place for the purpose of, and while actually engaged
in, the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers.
§ 452.12  PARKING IN ALLEYS AND NARROW STREETS; EXCEPTIONS.
   (a)   No person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle upon a street, other
than an alley, in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available
less than ten feet of the width of the roadway for free movement of vehicular
traffic, except that a driver may stop temporarily during the actual loading or
unloading of passengers or when directed to by a police officer or traffic
control signal.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided by law, no person shall stop, stand or
park a vehicle within an alley except while actually loading and unloading, and
then only for a period not to exceed 30 minutes.
§ 452.13  TWENTY-FOUR HOUR LIMIT.
   No owner, driver or operator of any vehicle shall park such vehicle and
permit the same to remain standing on any street, alley or public ground within
the municipality for a period in excess of 24 hours.
(Ord. 684, passed 3-17-1942)
§ 452.14  OVERNIGHT PARKING AND PARKING DURING DECLARED WEATHER EMERGENCIES
PROHIBITED.
   (a)   In order to facilitate the clearing and cleaning of the municipal
highways, streets and alleys, as well as the safe passage of vehicular traffic
thereon, no motor vehicle shall be parked upon such highways, streets and
alleys between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 5:30 a.m., nor shall any motor
vehicle be parked thereon during such times the City Manager or the City Police
Chief shall declare a weather emergency.
      (1)   The City Manager or the City Police Chief may declare a weather
emergency based upon flooding conditions which have caused or are reasonably
likely to cause hazardous conditions upon city highways, streets and/or alleys;
and the City Manager or the City Police Chief may declare a weather emergency
after three or more inches of snow have fallen within the city, or, based upon
a forecast from the National Weather Service, it is deemed by said city
officials to be reasonably likely that a snowfall of three or more inches
within the city is imminent. As soon as conditions permit, the City Manager or
the City Police Chief shall declare the termination of such weather emergency
by way of available media to the extent feasible.
      (2)   Said city officials shall use all available means of disseminating
information as to the existence of weather conditions requiring removal of
parked motor vehicles from the highways, streets and alleys within the city. 
Such notice shall be disseminated through the radio, newspaper and all other
available media to the extent feasible. The dissemination of this information,
however, shall not relieve owners or operators of motor vehicles from the
responsibility of ascertaining the existence of weather conditions requiring
the removal of parked motor vehicles from the highways, streets and alleys
within the city.
      (3)   A motor vehicle parked on any highway, street or alley within the
city at the time a weather emergency is declared shall be removed by the owner
within three hours if such emergency is declared between 8:00 a.m. and 8:00
p.m., or prior to 9:00 a.m. of the following morning if the emergency is
declared within the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. Nothing in this section
shall permit any motor vehicle to be parked in violation of any other parking
restriction previously established by ordinance or by erection of signs.
      (4)   It shall be the responsibility of the owners or operators of motor
vehicles to ascertain whether weather conditions require the removal of their
motor vehicles from the highways, streets and alleys within the city and to
remove all motor vehicles parked in violation of the provisions set forth in
this section. While the city will make every effort to inform the public of the
existence of weather conditions requiring removal of parked motor vehicles from
highways, streets and alleys within the city, the owners and operators of motor
vehicles parked in these areas shall have full responsibility to determine
existing weather conditions and to remove parked motor vehicles if the weather
conditions are such as to require their removal under the terms of this
section.
   (b)   Any motor vehicle parked in violation of this prohibition shall be
removed at the order of the Chief of Police and the owner or operator thereof
shall be subject to the penalty provided in §
452.99.
   (c)   Whoever violates the provisions of this section shall be subject to
the penalty provided in §
452.99.  In addition, where a motor vehicle is towed to a motor vehicle pound,
the motor vehicle can be recovered only upon payment of the towing and storage
charges imposed therefor.
(Ord. 1801, passed 5-18-1971; Ord. 15-O-2801, passed 3-17-2015)
§ 452.15  STORAGE OF INOPERABLE OR UNLICENSED VEHICLES.
   (a)   (1)   No person shall park or store or permit to be parked or stored
on any private or public property for a period in excess of ten days, any motor
vehicle which is not in operating condition or is unlicensed, except in an
enclosed building or garage.
      (2)   This section shall not apply to new or used automobiles held by a
licensed automobile dealer for sale or resale or for repairs.
   (b)   Should any motor vehicle be parked or stored in violation of this
section, then upon the filing of a complaint, the Manager shall cause a ten-day
notice of such violation to be mailed or delivered to the owner, ordering such
violation corrected.  Should such violation not be corrected, any police
officer or other person designated by the Manager shall take possession of such
motor vehicle, and such vehicle shall be stored at a place designated by the
Manager or the Chief of Police and shall not be released except upon payment of
towing and storage charges.  Vehicles so removed may be disposed of according
to the provisions of Ohio R.C. 737.32.  The remedy provided for herein shall be
in addition to any penalty provided for in §
452.99, which penalty shall apply to the failure to correct the violation
within the time stipulated herein.
   (c)   In the event that the owner cannot be found or his or her address is
unknown, any motor vehicle parked or stored in violation of this section, after
thirty days’ notice to the owner of the premises upon which any such motor
vehicle is parked or stored, or a notice to the person in possession thereof or
the agent of the owner of the vehicle, may be removed to a place designated by
the Manager or the Chief of Police, and shall not be released except upon
payment of towing and storage charges.  Vehicles so removed may be disposed of
according to the provisions of Ohio R.C. 737.32.
(Ord. 1533, passed 5-2-1967)
§ 452.16  PARKING ON SOUTH MAIN STREET PROHIBITED.
   The parking of motor vehicles on the east side of South Main Street between
Woodland Avenue and the railroad tracks is hereby prohibited.
(Ord. 97-O-1648, passed 1-6-1998)
§ 452.17  PARKING ON ELM STREET PROHIBITED.
   The parking of motor vehicles on Elm Street between Salem Street and the
railroad tracks is hereby prohibited between the hours of six a.m. and six p.m.
on each day of the week.
(Ord. 97-O-1649, passed 1-6-1998)
§ 452.18  PARKING ON EAST FRIEND STREET PROHIBITED.
   The parking of motor vehicles on the south and north sides of east Friend
Street from the east line of South Elm Street 200 feet easterly shall be and
hereby is prohibited.
(Ord. 01-O-1913, passed 10-16-2001)
§ 452.185  PARKING ON THE NORTH SIDE OF SEVENTH STREET PROHIBITED.
   The parking of motor vehicles on the north side of Seventh Street shall be
and hereby is prohibited, and “No Parking” signs shall be accordingly erected.
(Ord. 10-O-2619, passed 1-4-2011)
§ 452.19  REGISTERED OWNER PRIMA-FACIE LIABLE FOR UNLAWFUL PARKING.
   In any hearing on a charge of illegally parking a motor vehicle, testimony
that a vehicle bearing a certain license plate was found unlawfully parked as
prohibited by the provisions of this Traffic Code, and further testimony that
the record of the Ohio Registrar of Motor Vehicles shows that the license plate
was issued to the defendant, shall be prima facie evidence that the vehicle
which was unlawfully parked, was so parked by the defendant. A certified
registration copy, showing such fact, from the Registrar shall be proof of such
ownership.
§ 452.20  WAIVER.
   Any person charged with a violation of any provision of this chapter for
which payment of a prescribed fine may be made, may pay such sum in the manner
prescribed on the issued traffic ticket. Such payment shall be deemed a plea of
guilty, waiver of court appearance and acknowledgment of conviction of the
alleged offense and may be accepted in full satisfaction of the prescribed
penalty for such alleged violation. Payment of the prescribed fine need not be
accepted when laws prescribe that a certain number of such offenses shall
require court appearance.
§ 452.21  PARKING FINES.
   Fines for specific parking violations are herein established for imposition
upon the issuance of a parking violation ticket.
 
Code Violation Fine
452.031   Parking on sidewalks                                           $10.00
452.032   In front of a private drive                                    $10.00
452.033   Within an intersection                                         $10.00
452.034   Within ten feet of a fire hydrant                              $10.00
452.035   Parking on crosswalk                                           $10.00
452.036   Within 20 feet of a crosswalk or intersection                  $10.00
452.037   Within 30 feet of, and upon the approach to, any flashing      $10.00
          beacon, stop sign or traffic control device
452.039   Within 50 feet of a railroad crossing                          $10.00
452.0311  Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction     $10.00
          that would cause a traffic obstruction
452.0312  Double parking                                                 $10.00
452.0314  Parking where signs prohibit stopping, painted curbs or excess $10.00
          of maximum time limit
452.0315  Within one foot of another vehicle                             $10.00
452.04a-c Vehicle facing opposite direction of traffic                   $10.00
452.04d-k Parked in handicapped location                                 $25.00
452.06    Parked on posted private property                              $10.00
452.09    Washing, selling or repairing vehicle on roadway               $10.00
452.12    Parking in alleys and narrow streets                           $10.00
452.14    Parking prohibited from 2:00 a.m. to 5:20 a.m.                 $10.00
 
(Ord. 02-O-1965, passed 8-20-2002)
§ 452.99  PENALTY.
   (EDITOR’S NOTE:  See §§
408.01 and
408.02 for general Traffic Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.)
PART SIX:  GENERAL OFFENSES
         Chap.
606.   General Provisions.
         Chap.
608.   Administration, Enforcement and Public Service.
         Chap.
612.   Alcoholic Beverages.
         Chap.
618.   Animals.
         Chap.
624.   Drugs.
         Chap.
630.   Gambling.
         Chap.
636.   Offenses Relating to Persons.
         Chap.
642.   Offenses Relating to Property.
         Chap.
648.   Peace Disturbances.
         Chap.
654.   Railroads.
         Chap.
660.   Safety, Sanitation and Health.
         Chap.
666.   Sex Related Offenses.
         Chap.
678.   Weapons and Explosives.
         Chap.
698.   Penalties and Sentencing.
CHAPTER 606:  GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
606.01   Definitions.
606.02   Classification of offenses.
606.03   Offenses defined.
606.04   Rules of construction.
606.05   Criminal law jurisdiction.
606.06   Limitation on criminal prosecutions.
606.07   Requirements for criminal liability; voluntary intoxication.
606.08   Culpable mental states.
606.09   Organizational criminal liability.
606.10   Personal accountability for organizational conduct.
606.11   Attempts.
606.12   Complicity.
606.13   Self defense; limitations on duty to retreat prior to using force.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   See section histories for similar state law
   Definition of “imprisoned” - see Ohio R.C. 1.05
   Statute of limitations for income tax violations - see Ohio R.C. 718.06
   Burden and degree of proof - see Ohio R.C. 2901.05
   Venue - see Ohio R.C. 2901.12, 2931.29 et seq.
§ 606.01  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   (a)   “Campaign committee,” “contribution,” “legislative campaign fund,”
“political action committee,” “political contributing entity,” and “political
party.”  Have the same meanings as in Ohio R.C. 3517.01.
   (b)   “Contraband.”  Any property that is illegal for a person to acquire or
possess under a statute, ordinance, or rule, or that a trier of fact lawfully
determines to be illegal to possess by reason of the property’s involvement in
an offense. “Contraband” includes, but is not limited to, all of the following:
      (1)   Any controlled substance, as defined in Ohio R.C. 3719.01, or any
device or paraphernalia related thereto;
      (2)   Any unlawful gambling device or paraphernalia;
      (3)   Any dangerous ordnance or obscene material.
   (c)   “Deadly force.”  Any force that carries a substantial risk that it
will proximately result in the death of any person.
   (d)   “Detention.”  Arrest; confinement in any vehicle subsequent to an
arrest; confinement in any public or private facility for custody of persons
charged with or convicted of crime in this state or another state or under the
laws of the United States or alleged or found to be a delinquent child or
unruly child in this state or another state or under the laws of the United
States; hospitalization, institutionalization, or confinement in any public or
private facility that is ordered pursuant to or under the authority of Ohio
R.C. 2945.37, 2945.371, 2945.38, 2945.39, 2945.40, 2945.401 or 2945.402;
confinement in any vehicle for transportation to or from any facility of any of
those natures; detention for extradition or deportation; except as provided in
this division, supervision by any employee of any facility of any of those
natures that is incidental to hospitalization, institutionalization, or
confinement in the facility but that occurs outside the facility; supervision
by an employee of the Department of Rehabilitation and Correction of a person
on any type of release from a state correctional institution; or confinement in
any vehicle, airplane, or place while being returned from outside of this state
into this state by a private person or entity pursuant to a contract entered
into under Ohio R.C. 311.29(E) or Ohio R.C. 5149.03(B).  For a person confined
in a county jail who participates in a county jail industry program pursuant to
Ohio R.C. 5147.30, “detention” includes time spent at an assigned work site and
going to and from the work site.
   (e)   “Detention facility.”  Any public or private place used for the
confinement of a person charged with or convicted of any crime in this state or
another state or under the laws of the United States or alleged or found to be
a delinquent child or an unruly child in this state or another state or under
the laws of the United States.
   (f)   “Force.”  Any violence, compulsion, or constraint physically exerted
by any means upon or against a person or thing.
   (g)   “Law enforcement officer.”  Any of the following:
      (1)   A sheriff, deputy sheriff, constable, police officer of a township
or joint police district, marshal, deputy marshal, municipal police officer,
member of a police force employed by a metropolitan housing authority under
Ohio R.C. 3735.31(D) or state highway patrol trooper.
      (2)   An officer, agent, or employee of the state or any of its agencies,
instrumentalities, or political subdivisions, upon whom, by statute, a duty to
conserve the peace or to enforce all or certain laws is imposed and the
authority to arrest violators is conferred, within the limits of such statutory
duty and authority.
      (3)   The Mayor, in a capacity as chief conservator of the peace within
the municipality.
      (4)   A member of an auxiliary police force organized by the county,
township, or municipal law enforcement authorities, within the scope of the
member’s appointment or commission.
      (5)   A person lawfully called pursuant to Ohio R.C. 311.07 to aid a
sheriff in keeping the peace, for the purposes and during the time when the
person is called.
      (6)   A person appointed by a Mayor pursuant to Ohio R.C. 737.01 as a
special patrolling officer during a riot or emergency, for the purposes and
during the time when the person is appointed.
      (7)   A member of the organized militia of this state or the armed forces
of the United States, lawfully called to duty to aid civil authorities in
keeping the peace or protect against domestic violence.
      (8)   A prosecuting attorney, assistant prosecuting attorney, secret
service officer, or municipal prosecutor.
      (9)   A veterans’ home police officer appointed under Ohio R.C. 5907.02.
      (10)   A member of a police force employed by a regional transit
authority under Ohio R.C. 306.35(Y).
      (11)   A special police officer employed by a port authority under Ohio
R.C. 4582.04 or 4582.28.
      (12)   The House of Representatives Sergeant at Arms if the House of
Representatives Sergeant at Arms has arrest authority pursuant to Ohio R.C.
101.311(E)(1) and an Assistant House of Representatives Sergeant at Arms.
      (13)   The Senate Sergeant at Arms and an Assistant Senate Sergeant at
Arms.
      (14)   A special police officer employed by a municipal corporation at a
municipal airport, or other municipal air navigation facility, that has
scheduled operations, as defined in 14 C.F.R. 119.3, as amended, and that is
required to be under a security program and is governed by aviation security
rules of the Transportation Security Administration of the United States
Department of Transportation as provided in 49 C.F.R. Parts 1542 and 1544, as
amended.
   (h)   “Not guilty by reason of insanity.”  A person is “not guilty by reason
of insanity” relative to a charge of an offense only if the person proves, in
the manner specified in Ohio R.C. 2901.05, that at the time of the commission
of the offense, he or she did not know, as a result of a severe mental disease
or defect, the wrongfulness of his or her acts.
   (i)   “Offense of violence.”
      (1)   A violation of Ohio R.C. 2903.01, 2903.02, 2903.03, 2903.04,
2903.11, 2903.12, 2903.13, 2903.15, 2903.21, 2903.211, 2903.22, 2905.01,
2905.02, 2905.11, 2905.32, 2907.02, 2907.03, 2907.05, 2909.02, 2909.03,
2909.24, 2911.01, 2911.02, 2911.11, 2917.01, 2917.02, 2917.03, 2917.31,
2919.25, 2921.03, 2921.04, 2921.34, or 2923.161, of division (A)(1) of R.C. §
2903.34, of division (A)(1), (2) or (3) of Ohio R.C. 2911.12, or of division
(B)(1), (2), (3) or (4) of Ohio R.C. 2919.22, or felonious sexual penetration
in violation of former Ohio R.C. 2907.12;
      (2)   A violation of an existing or former municipal ordinance or law of
this or any other state or of the United States, substantially equivalent to
any section, division or offense listed in division (1) of this definition;
      (3)   An offense, other than a traffic offense, under an existing or
former municipal ordinance or law of this or any other state or of the United
States, committed purposely or knowingly, and involving physical harm to
persons or a risk of serious physical harm to persons;
      (4)   A conspiracy or attempt to commit, or complicity in committing, any
offense under division (1), (2), or (3) of this definition.
   (j)   “Official proceeding.”  Any proceeding before a legislative, judicial,
administrative, or other governmental agency or official authorized to take
evidence under oath, and includes any proceeding before a referee, hearing
examiner, commissioner, notary, or other person taking testimony or a
deposition in connection with an official proceeding.
   (k)   “Party official.”  Any person who holds an elective or appointive post
in a political party in the United States or this state, by virtue of which he
or she directs, conducts, or participates in directing or conducting party
affairs at any level of responsibility.
   (l)   “Person.”
      (1)   A.   Subject to division (2) of this definition, as used in any
section contained in this General Offenses Code that sets forth a criminal
offense, “person” includes all of the following:
            1.   An individual, corporation, business trust, estate, trust,
partnership and association.
            2.   An unborn human who is viable.
         B.   As used in any section contained in this General Offenses Code
that does not set forth a criminal offense, “person” includes an individual,
corporation, business trust, estate, partnership and association.
         C.   As used in division (1)A.2. of this definition, “unborn human”
means an individual organism of the species Homo sapiens from fertilization
until live birth.  “Viable” means the stage of development of a human fetus at
which there is a realistic probability of maintaining and nourishing of a life
outside the womb with or without temporary artificial life-sustaining support.
      (2)   Notwithstanding division (1)A. of this definition, in no case shall
the portion of the definition of the term “person” that is set forth in
division (1)A.2. of this definition be applied or construed in any section
contained in this General Offenses Code that sets forth a criminal offense in
any of the following manners:
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in division (2)A. of this
definition, in a manner so that the offense prohibits or is construed as
prohibiting any pregnant woman or her physician from performing an abortion
with the consent of the pregnant woman, with the consent of the pregnant woman
implied by law in a medical emergency, or with the approval of one otherwise
authorized by law to consent to medical treatment on behalf of the pregnant
woman.  An abortion that violates the conditions described in the immediately
preceding sentence may be punished as a violation of Ohio R.C. 2903.01,
2903.02, 2903.03, 2903.04, 2903.05, 2903.06, 2903.08, 2903.11, 2903.12,
2903.13, 2903.14, 2903.21 or 2903.22, or any substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, as applicable.  An abortion that does not violate the conditions
described in the second immediately preceding sentence but that does violate
Ohio R.C. 2919.12, 2919.13(B), 2919.15, 2919.151, 2919.17 or 2919.18, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, may be punished as a violation of
such section, as applicable.  Consent is sufficient under this division if it
is of the type otherwise adequate to permit medical treatment to the pregnant
woman, even if it does not comply with Ohio R.C. 2919.12.
         B.   In a manner so that the offense is applied or is construed as
applying to a woman based on an act or omission of the woman that occurs while
she is or was pregnant and that results in any of the following:
            1.   Her delivery of a stillborn baby.
            2.   Her causing, in any other manner, the death in utero of a
viable, unborn human that she is carrying.
            3.   Her causing the death of her child who is born alive but who
dies from one or more injuries that are sustained while the child is a viable,
unborn human.
            4.   Her causing her child who is born alive to sustain one or more
injuries while the child is a viable, unborn human.
            5.   Her causing, threatening to cause, or attempting to cause, in
any other manner, an injury, illness, or other psychological illness or
condition, regardless of its duration or gravity, to a viable, unborn human
that she is carrying.
   (m)   “Physical harm to persons.”  Any injury, illness, or other
physiological impairment, regardless of its gravity or duration.
   (n)   “Physical harm to property.”  Any tangible or intangible damage to
property that, in any degree, results in loss to its value or interferes with
its use or enjoyment.  “Physical harm to property” does not include wear and
tear occasioned by normal use.
   (o)   “Privilege.”  An immunity, license, or right conferred by law, or
bestowed by express or implied grant, or arising out of status, position,
office, or relationship, or growing out of necessity.
   (p)   “Property.”
      (1)   Any property, real or personal, tangible or intangible, and any
interest or license in that property.  “Property” includes, but is not limited
to, cable television service, other telecommunications service,
telecommunications devices, information service, computers, data, computer
software, financial instruments associated with computers, other documents
associated with computers, or copies of the documents, whether in machine or
human-readable form, trade secrets, trademarks, copyrights, patents, and
property protected by a trademark, copyright or patent.  “Financial instruments
associated with computers” include, but are not limited to, checks, drafts,
warrants, money orders, notes of indebtedness, certificates of deposit, letters
of credit, bills of credit or debit cards, financial transaction authorization
mechanisms, marketable securities, or any computer system representations of
any of them.
      (2)   As used in this definition, “trade secret” has the same meaning as
in Ohio R.C. 1333.61, and “telecommunications service” and “information
service” have the same meanings as in Ohio R.C. 2913.01.
      (3)   As used in this definition and in the definition of “contraband” in
this section, “cable television service,” “computer,” “computer network,”
“computer software,” “computer system,” “data,” and “telecommunications device”
have the same meanings as in Ohio R.C. 2913.01.
   (q)   “Provider agreement.” Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 5164.01.
   (r)   “Public official.”  Any elected or appointed officer, employee, or
agent of the state or any political subdivision thereof, whether in a temporary
or permanent capacity, and includes but is not limited to legislators, judges,
and law enforcement officers.  The term does not include an employee, officer,
or governor-appointed member of the board of directors of the nonprofit
corporation formed under Ohio R.C. 187.01.
   (s)   “Public servant.” 
      (1)   Any of the following:
         A.   Any public official.
         B.   Any person performing ad hoc a governmental function, including
but not limited to a juror, member of a temporary commission, master,
arbitrator, advisor, or consultant.
         C.   A person who is a candidate for public office, whether or not he
or she is elected or appointed to the office for which he or she is a
candidate.  A person is a candidate for purposes of this division if he or she
has been nominated according to law for election or appointment to public
office, or if he or she has filed a petition or petitions as required by law to
have his or her name placed on the ballot in a primary, general, or special
election, or if he or she campaigns as a write-in candidate in any primary,
general, or special election.
      (2)   The term does not include an employee, officer, or governor-
appointed member of the board of directors of the nonprofit corporation formed
under Ohio R.C. 187.01.
   (t)   “Risk.”  A significant possibility, as contrasted with a remote
possibility, that a certain result may occur or that certain circumstances may
exist.
   (u)   “School,” “school building,” and “school premises.”  Have the same
meanings as in Ohio R.C. 2925.01.
   (v)   “School activity.”  Any activity held under the auspices of a board of
education of a city, local, exempted village, joint vocational, or cooperative
education school district; a governing authority of a community school
established under Ohio R.C. Chapter 3314; a governing board of an educational
service center; or the governing body of a nonpublic school for which the State
Board of Education prescribes minimum standards under Ohio R.C. 3301.07.
   (w)   “School bus.”  Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 4511.01.
   (x)   “School safety zone.”  Consists of a school, school building, school
premises, school activity, and school bus.
   (y)   “Serious physical harm to persons.”  Any of the following:
      (1)   Any mental illness or condition of such gravity as would normally
require hospitalization or prolonged psychiatric treatment;
      (2)   Any physical harm that carries a substantial risk of death;
      (3)   Any physical harm that involves some permanent incapacity, whether
partial or total, or that involves some temporary, substantial incapacity;
      (4)   Any physical harm that involves some permanent disfigurement, or
that involves some temporary, serious disfigurement;
      (5)   Any physical harm that involves acute pain of such duration as to
result in substantial suffering, or that involves any degree of prolonged or
intractable pain.
   (z)   “Serious physical harm to property.”  Any physical harm to property
that does either of the following:
      (1)   Results in substantial loss to the value of the property, or
requires a substantial amount of time, effort, or money to repair or replace;
      (2)   Temporarily prevents the use or enjoyment of the property, or
substantially interferes with its use or enjoyment for an extended period of
time.
   (aa)   “Substantial risk.”  A strong possibility, as contrasted with a
remote or significant possibility, that a certain result may occur or that
certain circumstances may exist.
   (bb)   “Valuable thing” or “valuable benefit.”  Includes, but is not limited
to, a contribution.  This inclusion does not indicate or imply that a
contribution was not included in those terms before September 17, 1986.
(ORC 2901.01, 2921.01)
§ 606.02  CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENSES.
   As used in this General Offenses Code:
   (a)   Offenses include misdemeanors of the first, second, third, and fourth
degree, minor misdemeanors, and offenses not specifically classified.
   (b)   Regardless of the penalty that may be imposed, any offense
specifically classified as a misdemeanor is a misdemeanor.
   (c)   Any offense not specifically classified is a misdemeanor if
imprisonment for not more than one year may be imposed as a penalty.
   (d)   Any offense not specifically classified is a minor misdemeanor if the
only penalty that may be imposed is one of the following:
      (1)   For an offense committed prior to January 1, 2004, a fine not
exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00);
      (2)   For an offense committed on or after January 1, 2004, a fine not
exceeding one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00), community service under Ohio
R.C. 2929.27(D), or a financial sanction other than a fine under Ohio R.C.
2929.28.
(ORC 2901.02)
§ 606.03  OFFENSES DEFINED.
   (a)   No conduct constitutes a criminal offense against the municipality
unless it is defined as an offense in this General Offenses Code.
   (b)   An offense is defined when one or more sections of this General
Offenses Code state a positive prohibition or enjoin a specific duty, and
provide a penalty for violation of such prohibition or failure to meet such
duty.
   (c)   This section does not affect the power of a court to punish for
contempt or to employ any sanction authorized by law to enforce an order, civil
judgment or decree.
(ORC 2901.03)
§ 606.04  RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.
   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (c) or (d) of this section,
sections of this General Offenses Code defining offenses or penalties shall be
strictly construed against the municipality and liberally construed in favor of
the accused.
   (b)   Rules of criminal procedure and sections of this General Offenses Code
providing for criminal procedure shall be construed so as to effect the fair,
impartial, speedy, and sure administration of justice.
   (c)   Any provision of a section of this General Offenses Code that refers
to a previous conviction of or plea of guilty to a violation of a section of
this General Offenses Code, the Ohio Revised Code or a division of a section of
this General Offenses Code or the Ohio Revised Code shall be construed to also
refer to a previous conviction of or plea of guilty to a substantially
equivalent offense under an existing or former law of this municipality, state,
another state, or the United States or under an existing or former municipal
ordinance.
   (d)   Any provision of this Code that refers to a section, or to a division
of a section, of this Code that defines or specifies a criminal offense shall
be construed to also refer to an existing or former law of this state, another
state, or the United States, to an existing or former municipal ordinance, or
to an existing or former division of any such existing or former law or
ordinance that defines or specifies, or that defined or specified, a
substantially equivalent offense.
(ORC 2901.04)
§ 606.05  CRIMINAL LAW JURISDICTION.
   (a)   A person is subject to criminal prosecution and punishment in this
municipality if any of the following occur:
      (1)   The person commits an offense under the laws of this municipality,
any element of which takes place in this municipality;
      (2)   While in this municipality, the person attempts to commit, or is
guilty of complicity in the commission of, an offense in another jurisdiction,
which offense is an offense under both the laws of this municipality and the
other jurisdiction, or, while in this municipality, the person conspires to
commit an offense in another jurisdiction, which offense is an offense under
both the laws of this municipality and the other jurisdiction, and a
substantial overt act in furtherance of the conspiracy is undertaken in this
municipality by the person or another person involved in the conspiracy,
subsequent to the person’s entrance into the conspiracy. In any case in which a
person attempts to commit, is guilty of complicity in the commission of, or
conspires to commit an offense in another jurisdiction as described in this
division, the person is subject to criminal prosecution and punishment in this
municipality for the attempt, complicity, or conspiracy, and for any resulting
offense that is committed or completed in the other jurisdiction;
      (3)   While out of this municipality, the person conspires or attempts to
commit, or is guilty of complicity in the commission of, an offense in this
municipality;
      (4)   While out of this municipality, the person omits to perform a legal
duty imposed by the laws of this municipality, which omission affects a
legitimate interest of the municipality in protecting, governing or regulating
any person, property, thing, transaction, or activity in this municipality;
      (5)   While out of this municipality, the person unlawfully takes or
retains property and subsequently brings any of the unlawfully taken or
retained property into this municipality;
      (6)   While out of this municipality, the person unlawfully takes or
entices another person and subsequently brings the other person into this
municipality;
      (7)   The person, by means of a computer, computer system, computer
network, telecommunication, telecommunications device, telecommunications
service, or information service, causes or knowingly permits any writing, data,
image or other telecommunication to be disseminated or transmitted into this
municipality in violation of the law of this state or municipality.
   (b)   In homicide, the element referred to in division (a)(1) of this
section includes the act that causes death, the physical contact that causes
death, the death itself, or any other element that is set forth in the offense
in question. If any part of the body of a homicide victim is found in this
municipality, the death is presumed to have occurred within this municipality.
   (c)   (1)   This municipality includes the land and water within its
boundaries and the air space above that land and water, with respect to which
this municipality has either exclusive or concurrent legislative jurisdiction. 
Where the boundary between this municipality and another jurisdiction is
disputed, the disputed territory is conclusively presumed to be within this
municipality for purposes of this section.
      (2)   The courts of common pleas of Adams, Athens, Belmont, Brown,
Clermont, Columbiana, Gallia, Hamilton, Jefferson, Lawrence, Meigs, Monroe,
Scioto, and Washington counties have jurisdiction beyond the north or northwest
shore of the Ohio River extending to the opposite shore line, between the
extended boundary lines of any adjacent counties or adjacent state. Each of
those courts of common pleas has concurrent jurisdiction on the Ohio River with
any adjacent court of common pleas that borders on that river and with any
court of Kentucky or of West Virginia that borders on the Ohio River and that
has jurisdiction on the Ohio River under the law of Kentucky or the law of West
Virginia, whichever is applicable, or under federal law.
   (d)   When an offense is committed under the laws of this municipality, and
it appears beyond a reasonable doubt that the offense or any element of the
offense took place either in this municipality or in another jurisdiction or
jurisdictions, but it cannot reasonably be determined in which it took place,
the offense or element is conclusively presumed to have taken place in this
municipality for purposes of this section.
   (e)   When a person is subject to criminal prosecution and punishment in
this municipality for an offense committed or completed outside this
municipality, the person is subject to all specifications for that offense that
would be applicable if the offense had been committed within this municipality.
   (f)   Any act, conduct, or element that is a basis of a person being subject
under this section to criminal prosecution and punishment in this municipality
need not be committed personally by the person as long as it is committed by
another person who is in complicity or conspiracy with the person.
   (g)   This section shall be liberally construed, consistent with
constitutional limitations, to allow this municipality the broadest possible
jurisdiction over offenses and persons committing offenses in, or affecting,
this municipality.
   (h)   For purposes of division (a)(2) of this section, an overt act is
substantial when it is of a character that manifests a purpose on the part of
the actor that the object of the conspiracy should be completed.
   (i)   As used in this section, “computer,” “computer system,” “computer
network,” “information service,” “telecommunication,” “telecommunications
device,” “telecommunications service,” “data” and “writing” have the same
meanings as in Ohio R.C. 2913.01.
(ORC 2901.11)
§ 606.06  LIMITATION ON CRIMINAL PROSECUTIONS.
   (a)   (1)   Except as provided in division (a)(2), (a)(3) or (a)(4) of this
section or as otherwise provided in this section, a prosecution shall be barred
unless it is commenced within the following periods after an offense is
committed:
         A.   For a felony, six years;
         B.   For a misdemeanor other than a minor misdemeanor, two years;
         C.   For a minor misdemeanor, six months.
      (2)   There is no period of limitation for the prosecution of a violation
of Ohio R.C. 2903.01 or Ohio R.C. 2903.02.
      (3)   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (b) to (j) of this
section, a prosecution of any of the following offenses shall be barred unless
it is commenced within 20 years after the offense is committed:
         A.   A violation of Ohio R.C. 2903.03, 2903.04, 2905.01, 2905.32,
2907.04, 2907.05, 2907.21, 2909.02, 2909.22, 2909.23, 2909.24, 2909.26,
2909.27, 2909.28, 2909.29, 2911.01, 2911.02, 2911.11, 2911.12, or 2917.02, a
violation of Ohio R.C. 2903.11 or 2903.12 if the victim is a peace officer, a
violation of Ohio R.C. 2903.13 that is a felony, or a violation of former Ohio
R.C. 2907.12.
         B.   A conspiracy to commit, attempt to commit, or complicity in
committing a violation set forth in division (a)(3)A. of this section.
      (4)   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (d) to (l) of this
section, a prosecution of a violation of Ohio R.C. 2907.02 or 2907.03 or a
conspiracy to commit, attempt to commit, or complicity in committing a
violation of either section shall be barred unless it is commenced within 25
years after the offense is committed.
   (b)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (b)(2) of this section,
if the period of limitation provided in division (a)(1) or (a)(3) of this
section has expired, prosecution shall be commenced for an offense of which an
element is fraud or breach of fiduciary duty within one year after discovery of
the offense either by an aggrieved person or by the aggrieved person’s legal
representative who is not a party to the offense.
      (2)   If the period of limitation provided in division (a)(1) or (a)(3)
of this section has expired, prosecution for a violation of Ohio R.C. 2913.49
shall be commenced within five years after discovery of the offense either by
an aggrieved person or the aggrieved person’s legal representative who is not a
party to the offense.
   (c)   (1)   If the period of limitation provided in division (a)(1) or (a)
(3) of this section has expired, prosecution shall be commenced for the
following offenses during the following specified periods of time:
         A.   For an offense involving misconduct in office by a public servant
at any time while the accused remains a public servant, or within two years
thereafter;
         B.   For an offense by a person who is not a public servant but whose
offense is directly related to the misconduct in office of a public servant, at
any time while that public servant remains a public servant, or within two
years thereafter.
      (2)   As used in this division:
         A.   The phrase “offense is directly related to the misconduct in
office of a public servant” includes, but is not limited to, a violation of
Ohio R.C. 101.71, 101.91, 121.61 or 2921.13, 102.03(F) or (H), 2921.02(A),
2921.43(A) or (B), or 3517.13(F) or (G), that is directly related to an offense
involving misconduct in office of a public servant, or a violation of any
municipal ordinance substantially equivalent to those Ohio Revised Code
sections listed in this division (c)(2)A.
         B.   “Public servant” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2921.01.
   (d)   (1)   If a DNA record made in connection with the criminal
investigation of the commission of a violation of Ohio R.C. 2907.02 or 2907.03
is determined to match another DNA record that is of an identifiable person and
if the time of the determination is later than 25 years after the offense is
committed, prosecution of that person for a violation of the section may be
commenced within five years after the determination is complete.
      (2)   If a DNA record made in connection with the criminal investigation
of the commission of a violation of Ohio R.C. 2907.02 or 2907.03 is determined
to match another DNA record that is of an identifiable person and if the time
of the determination is within 25 years after the offense is committed,
prosecution of that person for a violation of the section may be commenced
within the longer of 25 years after the offense is committed or five years
after the determination is complete.
      (3)   As used in this division, “DNA record” has the same meaning as in
Ohio R.C. 109.573.
   (e)   An offense is committed when every element of the offense occurs.  In
the case of an offense of which an element is a continuing course of conduct,
the period of limitation does not begin to run until such course of conduct or
the accused’s accountability for it terminates, whichever occurs first.
   (f)   A prosecution is commenced on the date an indictment is returned or an
information filed, or on the date a lawful arrest without a warrant is made, or
on the date a warrant, summons, citation, or other process is issued, whichever
occurs first.  A prosecution is not commenced by the return of an indictment or
the filing of an information unless reasonable diligence is exercised to issue
and execute process on the same.  A prosecution is not commenced upon issuance
of a warrant, summons, citation, or other process unless reasonable diligence
is exercised to execute the same.
   (g)   The period of limitation shall not run during any time when the corpus
delicti remains undiscovered.
   (h)   The period of limitation shall not run during any time when the
accused purposely avoids prosecution.  Proof that the accused departed this
municipality or conceals the accused’s identity or whereabouts is prima facie
evidence of the accused’s purpose to avoid prosecution.
   (i)   The period of limitation shall not run during any time a prosecution
against the accused based on the same conduct is pending in this state, even
though the indictment, information, or process that commenced the prosecution
is quashed or the proceedings on the indictment, information, or process are
set aside or reversed on appeal.
   (j)   The period of limitation for a violation of this Part 6 or Title XXIX
of the Ohio Revised Code that involves a physical or mental wound, injury,
disability, or condition of a nature that reasonably indicates abuse or neglect
of a child under 18 years of age or of a child with a developmental disability
or physical impairment under 21 years of age shall not begin to run until
either of the following occurs:
      (1)   The victim of the offense reaches the age of majority.
      (2)   A public children services agency, or a municipal or county peace
officer that is not the parent or guardian of the child, in the county in which
the child resides or in which the abuse or neglect is occurring or has occurred
has been notified that abuse or neglect is known, suspected, or believed to
have occurred.
   (k)   As used in this section, “peace officer” has the same meaning as in
Ohio R.C. 2935.01.
   (l)   The amendments to divisions (a) and (d) of this section apply to a
violation of Ohio R.C. 2907.02 or 2907.03 committed on and after July 16, 2015,
and apply to a violation of either of those sections committed prior to July
16, 2015, if prosecution for that violation was not barred under this section
as it existed on July 15, 2015.
(ORC 2901.13)
§ 606.07  REQUIREMENTS FOR CRIMINAL LIABILITY; VOLUNTARY INTOXICATION.
   (a)   Except as provided in division (b) of this section, a person is not
guilty of an offense unless both of the following apply:
      (1)   The person’s liability is based on conduct that includes either a
voluntary act, or an omission to perform an act or duty that the person is
capable of performing;
      (2)   The person has the requisite degree of culpability for each element
as to which a culpable mental state is specified by the language defining the
offense.
   (b)   When the language defining an offense does not specify any degree of
culpability, and plainly indicates a purpose to impose strict criminal
liability for the conduct described in the section, then culpability is not
required for a person to be guilty of the offense. The fact that one division
of a section plainly indicates a purpose to impose strict liability for an
offense defined in that division does not by itself plainly indicate a purpose
to impose strict criminal liability for an offense defined in other divisions
of the section that do not specify a degree of culpability.
   (c)   (1)   When language defining an element of an offense that is related
to knowledge or intent or to which mens rea could fairly be applied neither
specifies culpability nor plainly indicates a purpose to impose strict
liability, the element of the offense is established only if a person acts
recklessly.
      (2)   Division (c)(1) of this section does not apply to offenses defined
in Ohio R.C. Title XLV.
      (3)   Division (c)(1) of this section does not relieve the prosecution of
the burden of proving the culpable mental state required by any definition
incorporated into the offense.
   (d)   Voluntary intoxication may not be taken into consideration in
determining the existence of a mental state that is an element of a criminal
offense.  Voluntary intoxication does not relieve a person of a duty to act if
failure to act constitutes a criminal offense.  Evidence that a person was
voluntarily intoxicated may be admissible to show whether or not the person was
physically capable of performing the act with which the person is charged.
   (e)   As used in this section:
      (1)   “Culpability.”  Purpose, knowledge, recklessness, or negligence, as
defined in Ohio R.C. 2901.22.
      (2)   “Intoxication.”  Includes but is not limited to intoxication
resulting from the ingestion of alcohol, a drug, or alcohol and a drug.
      (3)   “Involuntary acts.”  Reflexes, convulsions, body movements during
unconsciousness or sleep, and body movements that are not otherwise a product
of the actor’s volition are involuntary acts.
      (4)   “Possession.”  A voluntary act if the possessor knowingly procured
or received the thing possessed, or was aware of the possessor’s control of the
thing possessed for a sufficient time to have ended possession.
(ORC 2901.21)
§ 606.08  CULPABLE MENTAL STATES.
   (a)   A person acts purposely when it is the person’s specific intention to
cause a certain result, or, when the gist of the offense is a prohibition
against conduct of a certain nature, regardless of what the offender intends to
accomplish thereby, it is the offender’s specific intention to engage in
conduct of that nature.
   (b)   A person acts knowingly, regardless of purpose, when the person is
aware that the person’s conduct will probably cause a certain result or will
probably be of a certain nature. A person has knowledge of circumstances when
the person is aware that such circumstances probably exist. When knowledge of
the existence of a particular fact is an element of an offense, such knowledge
is established if a person subjectively believes that there is a high
probability of its existence and fails to make inquiry or acts with a conscious
purpose to avoid learning the fact.
   (c)   A person acts recklessly when, with heedless indifference to the
consequences, the person disregards a substantial and unjustifiable risk that
the person’s conduct is likely to cause a certain result or is likely to be of
a certain nature. A person is reckless with respect to circumstances when, with
heedless indifference to the consequences, the person disregards a substantial
and unjustifiable risk that such circumstances are likely to exist.
   (d)   A person acts negligently when, because of a substantial lapse from
due care, the person fails to perceive or avoid a risk that the person’s
conduct may cause a certain result or may be of a certain nature.  A person is
negligent with respect to circumstances when, because of a substantial lapse
from due care, the person fails to perceive or avoid a risk that such
circumstances may exist.
   (e)   When the section defining an offense provides that negligence suffices
to establish an element thereof, then recklessness, knowledge, or purpose is
also sufficient culpability for such element.  When recklessness suffices to
establish an element of an offense, then knowledge or purpose is also
sufficient culpability for such element.  When knowledge suffices to establish
an element of an offense, then purpose is also sufficient culpability for such
element.
(ORC 2901.22)
§ 606.09  ORGANIZATIONAL CRIMINAL LIABILITY.
   (a)   An organization may be convicted of an offense under any of the
following circumstances:
      (1)   The offense is a minor misdemeanor committed by an officer, agent,
or employee of the organization acting in its behalf and within the scope of
the officer's, agent's or employee's office or employment, except that if the
section defining the offense designates the officers, agents, or employees for
whose conduct the organization is accountable or the circumstances under which
it is accountable, those provisions shall apply.
      (2)   A purpose to impose organizational liability plainly appears in the
section defining the offense, and the offense is committed by an officer,
agent, or employee of the organization acting in its behalf and within the
scope of the officer's, agent's, or employee's office or employment, except
that if the section defining the offense designates the officers, agents, or
employees for whose conduct the organization is accountable or the
circumstances under which it is accountable, those provisions shall apply.
      (3)   The offense consists of an omission to discharge a specific duty
imposed by law on the organization.
      (4)   If, acting with the kind of culpability otherwise required for the
commission of the offense, its commission was authorized, requested, commanded,
tolerated, or performed by the board of directors, trustees, partners, or by a
high managerial officer, agent, or employee acting in behalf of the
organization and within the scope of such a board's or person's office or
employment.
   (b)   If strict liability is imposed for the commission of an offense, a
purpose to impose organizational liability shall be presumed, unless the
contrary plainly appears.
   (c)   In a prosecution of an organization for an offense other than one for
which strict liability is imposed, it is a defense that the high managerial
officer, agent, or employee having supervisory responsibility over the subject
matter of the offense exercised due diligence to prevent its commission.  This
defense is not available if it plainly appears inconsistent with the purpose of
the section defining the offense.
   (d)   As used in this section, “organization” means a corporation for profit
or not for profit, partnership, limited partnership, joint venture,
unincorporated nonprofit association, estate, trust, or other commercial or
legal entity.  “Organization” does not include an entity organized as or by a
governmental agency for the execution of a governmental program.
(ORC 2901.23)
§ 606.10  PERSONAL ACCOUNTABILITY FOR ORGANIZATIONAL CONDUCT.
   (a)   An officer, agent, or employee of an organization, as defined in Ohio
R.C. 2901.23, may be prosecuted for an offense committed by such organization,
if he or she acts with the kind of culpability required for the commission of
the offense, and any of the following apply:
      (1)   In the name of the organization or in its behalf, he or she engages
in conduct constituting the offense, or causes another to engage in such
conduct, or tolerates such conduct when it is of a type for which he or she has
direct responsibility;
      (2)   He or she has primary responsibility to discharge a duty imposed on
the organization by law, and such duty is not discharged.
   (b)   When a person is convicted of an offense by reason of this section, he
or she is subject to the same penalty as if he or she had acted in his or her
own behalf.
(ORC 2901.24)
§ 606.11  ATTEMPTS.
   (a)   No person, purposely or knowingly, and when purpose or knowledge is
sufficient culpability for the commission of an offense, shall engage in
conduct that, if successful, would constitute or result in the offense.
   (b)   It is no defense to a charge under this section that, in retrospect,
commission of the offense that was the object of the attempt was either
factually or legally impossible under the attendant circumstances, if that
offense could have been committed had the attendant circumstances been as the
actor believed them to be.
   (c)   No person who is convicted of committing a specific offense, of
complicity in the commission of an offense, or of conspiracy to commit an
offense, shall be convicted of an attempt to commit the same offense in
violation of this section.
   (d)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section that the
actor abandoned his or her effort to commit the offense or otherwise prevented
its commission, under circumstances manifesting a complete and voluntary
renunciation of his or her criminal purpose.
   (e)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of an attempt to commit
an offense.  An attempt to commit aggravated murder, murder, or an offense for
which the maximum penalty is imprisonment for life is a felony of the first
degree, to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. An attempt to commit a
drug abuse offense for which the penalty is determined by the amount or number
of unit doses of the controlled substance involved in the drug abuse offense is
an offense of the same degree as the drug abuse offense attempted would be if
that drug abuse offense had been committed and had involved an amount or number
of unit doses of the controlled substance that is within the next lower range
of controlled substance amounts than was involved in the attempt. An attempt to
commit any other offense is an offense of the next lesser degree than the
offense attempted.  In the case of an attempt to commit an offense other than a
violation of Ohio R.C. Chapter 3734 that is not specifically classified, an
attempt is a misdemeanor of the first degree if the offense attempted is a
felony, and a misdemeanor of the fourth degree if the offense attempted is a
misdemeanor.  In the case of an attempt to commit a violation of any provision
of Ohio R.C. Chapter 3734, other than Ohio R.C. 3734.18, that relates to
hazardous wastes, an attempt is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.  An attempt to commit a minor misdemeanor, or to engage in
conspiracy, is not an offense under this section.
   (f)   As used in this section:
      (1)   “Drug abuse offense” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2925.01.
      (2)   “Motor vehicle” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 4501.01.
(ORC 2923.02)
§ 606.12  COMPLICITY.
   (a)   No person, acting with the kind of culpability required for the
commission of an offense, shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Solicit or procure another to commit the offense;
      (2)   Aid or abet another in committing the offense;
      (3)   Conspire with another to commit the offense in violation of Ohio
R.C. 2923.01;
      (4)   Cause an innocent or irresponsible person to commit the offense.
   (b)   It is no defense to a charge under this section that no person with
whom the accused was in complicity has been convicted as a principal offender.
   (c)   No person shall be convicted of complicity under this section unless
an offense is actually committed, but a person may be convicted of complicity
in an attempt to commit an offense in violation of Ohio R.C. 2923.02 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (d)   If an alleged accomplice of the defendant testifies against the
defendant in a case in which the defendant is charged with complicity in the
commission of or an attempt to commit an offense, an attempt to commit an
offense, or an offense, the court shall charge the jury in accordance with Ohio
R.C. 2923.03(D).
   (e)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section that,
prior to the commission of or attempt to commit the offense, the actor
terminated his or her complicity, under circumstances manifesting a complete
and voluntary renunciation of his or her criminal purpose.
   (f)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of complicity in the
commission of an offense, and shall be prosecuted and punished as if he or she
were a principal offender.  A charge of complicity may be stated in terms of
this section, or in terms of the principal offense.
(ORC 2923.03)
§ 606.13  SELF DEFENSE: LIMITATIONS ON DUTY TO RETREAT PRIOR TO USING FORCE.
   (a)   As used in this section, “residence” and “vehicle” have the same
meanings as in Ohio R.C.  2901.05.
   (b)   For purposes of any section of this Code that sets forth a criminal
offense, a person who lawfully is in that person's residence has no duty to
retreat before using force in self defense, defense of another, or defense of
that person's residence, and a person who lawfully is an occupant of that
person's vehicle or who lawfully is an occupant in a vehicle owned by an
immediate family member of the person has no duty to retreat before using force
in self defense or defense of another.
(ORC 2901.09)
CHAPTER 608:  ADMINISTRATION, ENFORCEMENT AND PUBLIC SERVICE
Section
608.01   Falsification.
608.02   False report of child abuse or neglect.
608.03   Compounding a crime.
608.04   Failure to report a crime or death.
608.05   Failure to aid a law enforcement officer.
608.06   Obstructing official business.
608.07   Obstructing justice.
608.08   Resisting arrest.
608.09   Compliance with lawful order of police officer; fleeing.
608.10   Having an unlawful interest  in a public contract.
608.11   Soliciting or receiving improper compensation.
608.12   Dereliction of duty.
608.13   Interfering with civil rights.
608.14   Impersonating an officer.
608.145   Using sham legal process.
608.15   Display of law enforcement agency emblem.
608.16   Disposition of unclaimed or forfeited property held by Police
Department.
608.17   Detention of shoplifters and those committing motion picture piracy;
protection of institutional property.
608.18   Failure to disclose personal information.
608.19   Misuse of 9-1-1 system.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Arrest without warrant for misdemeanor - see Ohio R.C. 2935.03
   Procedure on affidavit or complaint; withdrawal of unexecuted warrants - see
Ohio R.C. 2935.10
   Right of trial by jury - see Ohio R.C. 2945.17
   Time within which hearing or trial must be held - see Ohio R.C. 2945.71
   Extension of time for hearing or trial - see Ohio R.C. 2945.72
   Discharge for delay in trial - see Ohio R.C. 2945.73
   Degree of offense; charge and verdict; prior conviction - see Ohio R.C.
2945.75
   Satisfaction of fine; credit for time served - see Ohio R.C. 2947.14
   Registration of sex offenders in cities and counties - see Ohio R.C. 2950.01
et seq.
   Criteria for probation; conditions of probation - see Ohio R.C. 2951.02
   Treatment of drug dependent persons in lieu of conviction - see Ohio R.C.
2951.041
   Registration of dogs - see GEN. OFF.
618.08
   Rabies quarantine - see GEN. OFF.
618.11
   Justifiable use of force to suppress riot - see GEN. OFF.
648.03
   Misconduct at an emergency - see GEN. OFF.
648.06
   Making false alarms - see GEN. OFF.
648.08
   Rules of evidence in sex related offenses - see GEN. OFF.
666.10
   Declaratory judgment in sex related offenses - see GEN. OFF.
666.15
   Injunction and abatement of nuisance in sex related offenses - see GEN. OFF.
666.16
   License or permit to possess dangerous ordnance - see GEN. OFF.
678.05
   Penalties and sentencing - see GEN. OFF.
Ch. 698
§ 608.01  FALSIFICATION.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly make a false statement, or knowingly swear
or affirm the truth of a false statement previously made, when any of the
following applies:
      (1)   The statement is made in any official proceeding.
      (2)   The statement is made with purpose to incriminate another.
      (3)   The statement is made with purpose to mislead a public official in
performing his or her official function.
      (4)   The statement is made with purpose to secure the payment of
unemployment compensation; Ohio Works First; prevention, retention and
contingency benefits and services; disability financial assistance; retirement
benefits or health care coverage from a state retirement system; economic
development assistance as defined in Ohio R.C. 9.66; or other benefits
administered by a governmental agency or paid out of a public treasury.
      (5)   The statement is made with purpose to secure the issuance by a
governmental agency of a license, permit, authorization, certificate,
registration, release, or provider agreement.
      (6)   The statement is sworn or affirmed before a notary public or
another person empowered to administer oaths.
      (7)   The statement is in writing on or in connection with a report or
return that is required or authorized by law.
      (8)   The statement is in writing, and is made with purpose to induce
another to extend credit to or employ the offender, or to confer any degree,
diploma, certificate of attainment, award of excellence, or honor on the
offender, or to extend to or bestow upon the offender any other valuable
benefit or distinction, when the person to whom the statement is directed
relies upon it to his or her detriment.
      (9)   The statement is made with purpose to commit or facilitate the
commission of a theft offense.
      (10)   The statement is knowingly made to a probate court in connection
with any action, proceeding, or other matter within its jurisdiction, either
orally or in a written document, including, but not limited to, an application,
petition, complaint, or other pleading, or an inventory, account, or report.
      (11)   The statement is made on an account, form, record, stamp, label or
other writing that is required by law.
      (12)   The statement is made in connection with the purchase of a
firearm, as defined in Ohio R.C. 2923.11, and in conjunction with the
furnishing to the seller of the firearm of a fictitious or altered driver’s or
commercial driver’s license or permit, a fictitious or altered identification
card, or any other document that contains false information about the
purchaser’s identity.
      (13)   The statement is made in a document or instrument of writing that
purports to be a judgment, lien, or claim of indebtedness and is filed or
recorded with the Secretary of State, a county recorder, or the clerk of a
court of record.
      (14)   The statement is made in an application filed with a county
sheriff pursuant to R.C. § 2923.125 in order to obtain or renew a concealed
handgun license or is made in an affidavit submitted to a county sheriff to
obtain a concealed handgun license on a temporary emergency basis under R.C. §
2923.1213.
      (15)   The statement is required under Ohio R.C. 5743.71 in connection
with the person’s purchase of cigarettes or tobacco products in a delivery
sale.
   (b)   No person, in connection with the purchase of a firearm as defined in
Ohio R.C. 2923.11, shall knowingly furnish to the seller of the firearm a
fictitious or altered driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit, a
fictitious or altered identification card, or any other document that contains
false information about the purchaser’s identity.
   (c)   No person, in an attempt to obtain a concealed handgun license under
R.C. § 2923.125, shall knowingly present to a sheriff a fictitious or altered
document that purports to be certification of the person’s competence in
handling a handgun as described in division (B)(3) of that section.
   (d)   It is no defense to a charge under division (a)(6) of this section
that the oath or affirmation was administered or taken in an irregular manner.
   (e)   If contradictory statements relating to the same fact are made by the
offender within the period of the statute of limitations for falsification, it
is not necessary for the prosecution to prove which statement was false, but
only that one or the other was false.
   (f)   (1)   Whoever violates division (a)(1), (2), (3), (4), (5), (6), (7),
(8), (10), (11), (13), or (15) of this section is guilty of falsification.
Except as otherwise provided in this division, falsification is a misdemeanor
of the first degree.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (a)(9) of this section is guilty of
falsification in a theft offense.  Except as otherwise provided in this
division, falsification in a theft offense is a misdemeanor of the first
degree.  If the value of the property or services stolen is one thousand
dollars ($1,000) or more, falsification in a theft offense is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (3)   Whoever violates division (a)(12) or (b) of this section is guilty
of falsification to purchase a firearm, a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
      (4)   Whoever violates division (a)(14) or (c) of this section is guilty
of falsification to obtain a concealed handgun license, a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (5)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section in removal
proceedings under Ohio R.C. 319.26, 321.37, 507.13 or 733.78 is guilty of
falsification regarding a removal proceeding, a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
(ORC 2921.13)
   (g)   (1)   No person who has knowingly failed to maintain proof of
financial responsibility in accordance with Ohio R.C. 4509.101 shall produce
any document or present to a peace officer an electronic wireless
communications device that is displaying any text or images with the purpose to
mislead a peace officer upon the request of a peace officer for proof of
financial responsibility made in accordance with Ohio R.C. 4509.101(D)(2).
      (2)   Whoever violates this division (g) is guilty of falsification, a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(ORC 4509.102)
Statutory reference:
   Civil liability for violations of this section, see Ohio R.C. 2921.13(G)
§ 608.02  FALSE REPORT OF CHILD ABUSE OR NEGLECT.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly make or cause another person to make a false
report under Ohio R.C. 2151.421(B) alleging that any person has committed an
act or omission that resulted in a child being an abused child as defined in
Ohio R.C. 2151.031 or a neglected child as defined in Ohio R.C. 2151.03.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of making or causing a false
report of child abuse or child neglect, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(ORC 2921.14)
§ 608.03  COMPOUNDING A CRIME.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly demand, accept, or agree to accept anything
of value in consideration of abandoning or agreeing to abandon a pending
criminal prosecution.
   (b)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section when both
of the following apply:
      (1)   The pending prosecution involved is for a violation of Ohio R.C.
2913.02, 2913.11, 2913.21(B)(2), or 2913.47, or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, of which the actor under this section was the victim.
      (2)   The thing of value demanded, accepted, or agreed to be accepted, in
consideration of abandoning or agreeing to abandon the prosecution, did not
exceed an amount that the actor reasonably believed due him or her as
restitution for the loss caused him or her by the offense.
   (c)   When a prosecuting witness abandons or agrees to abandon a prosecution
under division (b) of this section, the abandonment or agreement in no way
binds the state to abandoning the prosecution.
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of compounding a crime, a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(ORC 2921.21)
§ 608.04  FAILURE TO REPORT A CRIME OR DEATH.
   (a)   (1)   Except as provided in division (a)(2) of this section, no
person, knowing that a felony has been or is being committed, shall knowingly
fail to report the information to law enforcement authorities.
      (2)   No person, knowing that a violation of Ohio R.C. 2913.04(B) has
been or is being committed or that the person has received information derived
from such a violation, shall knowingly fail to report the violation to law
enforcement authorities.
   (b)   Except for conditions that are within the scope of division (e) of
this section, no person giving aid to a sick or injured person shall
negligently fail to report to law enforcement authorities any gunshot or stab
wound treated or observed by the person, or any serious physical harm to
persons that the person knows or has reasonable cause to believe resulted from
an offense of violence.
   (c)   No person who discovers the body or acquires the first knowledge of
the death of a person shall fail to report the death immediately to a physician
or advanced practice registered nurse whom the person knows to be treating the
deceased for a condition from which death at such time would not be unexpected,
or to a law enforcement officer, an ambulance service, an emergency squad, or
the coroner in a political subdivision in which the body is discovered, the
death is believed to have occurred, or knowledge concerning the death is
obtained. For purposes of this division, “advanced practice registered nurse”
does not include a certified registered nurse anesthetist.
   (d)   No person shall fail to provide upon request of the person to whom a
report required by division (c) of this section was made, or to any law
enforcement officer who has reasonable cause to assert the authority to
investigate the circumstances surrounding the death, any facts within his or
her knowledge that may have a bearing on the investigation of the death.
   (e)   (1)   As used in this section, “burn injury” means any of the
following:
         A.   Second or third degree burns;
         B.   Any burns to the upper respiratory tract or laryngeal edema due
to the inhalation of super-heated air;
         C.   Any burn injury or wound that may result in death.
         D.   Any physical harm to persons caused by or as the result of the
use of fireworks, novelties and trick noisemakers, and wire sparklers, as each
is defined by Ohio R.C. 3743.01.
      (2)   No physician, nurse, or limited practitioner who, outside a
hospital, sanitarium, or other medical facility, attends or treats a person who
has sustained a burn injury inflicted by an explosion or other incendiary
device, or that shows evidence of having been inflicted in a violent,
malicious, or criminal manner, shall fail to report the burn injury immediately
to the local arson bureau, if there is such a bureau in the jurisdiction in
which the person is attended or treated, or otherwise to local law enforcement
authorities.
      (3)   No manager, superintendent, or other person in charge of a
hospital, sanitarium, or other medical facility in which a person is attended
or treated for any burn injury inflicted by an explosion or other incendiary
device, or that shows evidence of having been inflicted in a violent,
malicious, or criminal manner, shall fail to report the burn injury immediately
to the local arson bureau, if there is such a bureau in the jurisdiction in
which the person is attended or treated, or otherwise to local law enforcement
authorities.
      (4)   No person who is required to report any burn injury under division
(e)(2) or (3) of this section shall fail to file, within three working days
after attending or treating the victim, a written report of the burn injury
with the office of the State Fire Marshal.  The report shall be made on a form
provided by the State Fire Marshal.
      (5)   Anyone participating in the making of reports under division (e) of
this section or anyone participating in a judicial proceeding resulting from
the reports is immune from any civil or criminal liability that otherwise might
be incurred or imposed as a result of such actions. Notwithstanding R.C. §
4731.22, the physician-patient relationship or advanced practice registered
nurse-patient relationship is not a ground for excluding evidence regarding a
person’s burn injury or the cause of the burn injury in any judicial proceeding
resulting from a report submitted under division (e) of this section.
   (f)   (1)   Any doctor of medicine or osteopathic medicine, hospital intern
or resident, nurse, psychologist, social worker, independent social worker,
social work assistant, licensed professional clinical counselor, licensed
professional counselor, independent marriage and family therapist, or marriage
and family therapist who knows or has reasonable cause to believe that a
patient or client has been the victim of domestic violence, as defined in R.C.
§ 3113.31, shall note that knowledge or belief and the basis for it in the
patient’s or client’s records.
      (2)   Notwithstanding R.C. § 4731.22, the physician-patient privilege or
advanced practice registered nurse-patient privilege shall not be a ground for
excluding any information regarding the report containing the knowledge or
belief noted under division (f)(1) of this section, and the information may be
admitted as evidence in accordance with the Rules of Evidence.
   (g)   Division (a) or (d) of this section does not require disclosure of
information, when any of the following applies:
      (1)   The information is privileged by reason of the relationship between
attorney and client; physician and patient; advanced practice registered nurse
and patient; licensed psychologist or licensed school psychologist and client;
licensed professional clinical counselor, licensed professional counselor,
independent social worker, social worker, independent marriage and family
therapist, or marriage and family therapist and client; member of the clergy,
rabbi, minister, or priest and any person communicating information
confidentially to the member of the clergy, rabbi, minister, or priest for a
religious counseling purpose of a professional character; husband and wife; or
a communications assistant and those who are a party to a telecommunications
relay service call.
      (2)   The information would tend to incriminate a member of the actor’s
immediate family.
      (3)   Disclosure of the information would amount to revealing a news
source, privileged under Ohio R.C. 2739.04 or 2739.12.
      (4)   Disclosure of the information would amount to disclosure by a
member of the ordained clergy of an organized religious body of a confidential
communication made to him or her in his or her capacity as such by a person
seeking his or her aid or counsel.
      (5)   Disclosure would amount to revealing information acquired by the
actor in the course of his or her duties in connection with a bona fide program
of treatment or services for drug dependent persons or persons in danger of
drug dependence, which program is maintained or conducted by a hospital,
clinic, person, agency, or community addiction services provider whose alcohol
and drug addiction services are certified pursuant to Ohio R.C. 5119.36.
      (6)   Disclosure would amount to revealing information acquired by the
actor in the course of his or her duties in connection with a bona fide program
for providing counseling services to victims of crimes that are violations of
Ohio R.C. 2907.02 or 2907.05, or to victims of felonious sexual penetration in
violation of former Ohio R.C. 2907.12.  As used in this division, “counseling
services” include services provided in an informal setting by a person who, by
education or experience, is competent to provide such services.
   (h)   No disclosure of information pursuant to this section gives rise to
any liability or recrimination for a breach of privilege or confidence.
   (i)   Whoever violates division (a) or (b) of this section is guilty of
failure to report a crime.  Violation of division (a)(1) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.  Violation of division (a)(2) or (b) of this
section is a misdemeanor of the second degree.
   (j)   Whoever violates division (c) or (d) of this section is guilty of
failure to report knowledge of a death, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
   (k)   (1)   Whoever negligently violates division (e) of this section is
guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
      (2)   Whoever knowingly violates division (e) of this section is guilty
of a misdemeanor of the second degree.
   (l)   As used in this section, “nurse” includes an advanced practice
registered nurse, registered nurse, and licensed practical nurse.
(ORC 2921.22)
§ 608.05  FAILURE TO AID A LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.
   (a)   No person shall negligently fail or refuse to aid a law enforcement
officer, when called upon for assistance in preventing or halting the
commission of an offense, or in apprehending or detaining an offender, when the
aid can be given without a substantial risk of physical harm to the person
giving it.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of failure to aid a law
enforcement officer, a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 2921.23)
§ 608.06  OBSTRUCTING OFFICIAL BUSINESS.
   (a)   No person, without privilege to do so and with purpose to prevent,
obstruct, or delay the performance by a public official of any authorized act
within the public official’s official capacity, shall do any act that hampers
or impedes a public official in the performance of the public official’s lawful
duties.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of obstructing official
business.  Except as otherwise provided in this division, obstructing official
business is a misdemeanor of the second degree.  If a violation of this section
creates a risk of physical harm to any person, obstructing official business is
a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(ORC 2921.31)
§ 608.07  OBSTRUCTING JUSTICE.
   (a)   No person, with purpose to hinder the discovery, apprehension,
prosecution, conviction, or punishment of another for crime, or to assist
another to benefit from the commission of a crime, and no person, with purpose
to hinder the discovery, apprehension, prosecution, adjudication as a
delinquent child, or disposition of a child for an act that if committed by an
adult would be a crime or to assist a child to benefit from the commission of
an act that if committed by an adult would be a crime, shall do any of the
following:
      (1)   Harbor or conceal the other person or child.
      (2)   Provide the other person or child with money, transportation, a
weapon, a disguise, or other means of avoiding discovery or apprehension.
      (3)   Warn the other person or child of impending discovery or
apprehension.
      (4)   Destroy or conceal physical evidence of the crime or act, or induce
any person to withhold testimony or information or to elude legal process
summoning him or her to testify or supply evidence.
      (5)   Communicate false information to any person.
      (6)   Prevent or obstruct any person, by means of force, intimidation, or
deception, from performing any act to aid in the discovery, apprehension, or
prosecution of the other person or child.
   (b)   A person may be prosecuted for, and may be convicted of or adjudicated
a delinquent child for committing, a violation of division (a) of this section
regardless of whether the person or child aided ultimately is apprehended for,
is charged with, is convicted of, pleads guilty to, or is adjudicated a
delinquent child for committing the crime or act the person or child aided
committed.  The crime or act the person or child aided committed shall be used
under division (c) of this section in determining the penalty for violation of
division (a) of this section, regardless of whether the person or child aided
ultimately is apprehended for, is charge with, is convicted of, pleads guilty
to, or is adjudicated a delinquent child for committing the crime or act the
person or child aided committed.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of obstructing justice.
      (1)   If the crime committed by the person aided is a misdemeanor or if
the act committed by the child aided would be a misdemeanor if committed by an
adult, obstructing justice is a misdemeanor of the same degree as the crime
committed by the person aided or a misdemeanor of the same degree that the act
committed by the child aided would be if committed by an adult.
      (2)   If the crime committed by the person aided is a felony or if the
act committed by the child aided would be a felony if committed by an adult, or
if the crime or act committed by the person or child aided is an act of
terrorism, obstructing justice is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
   (d)   As used in this section:
      (1)   “Act of terrorism” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2909.21.
      (2)   “Adult” and “child” have the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2151.011.
      (3)   “Delinquent child” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2152.02.
(ORC 2921.32)
§ 608.08  RESISTING ARREST.
   (a)   No person, recklessly or by force, shall resist or interfere with a
lawful arrest of himself, herself or another.
   (b)   No person, recklessly or by force, shall resist or interfere with a
lawful arrest of the person or another person and, during the course of or as a
result of the resistance or interference, cause physical harm to a law
enforcement officer.
   (c)   No person, recklessly or by force, shall resist or interfere with a
lawful arrest of the person or another person if either of the following
applies:
      (1)   The offender, during the course of or as a result of the resistance
or interference, recklessly causes physical harm to a law enforcement officer
by means of a deadly weapon; or
      (2)   The offender, during the course of the resistance or interference,
brandishes a deadly weapon.
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of resisting arrest.  A
violation of division (a) of this section is a misdemeanor of the second
degree.  A violation of division (b) of this section is a misdemeanor of the
first degree.  A violation of division (c) of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (e)   As used in this section, “deadly weapon” has the same meaning as in
Ohio R.C. 2923.11.
(ORC 2921.33)
Statutory reference:
   Unlawful taking of deadly weapon from law enforcement officer, felony, see
Ohio R.C. 2911.01
§ 608.09  COMPLIANCE WITH LAWFUL ORDER OF POLICE OFFICER; FLEEING.
   (a)   No person shall fail to comply with any lawful order or direction of
any police officer invested with authority to direct, control, or regulate
traffic.
   (b)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle so as willfully to elude or
flee a police officer after receiving a visible or audible signal from a police
officer to bring the person’s motor vehicle to a stop.
   (c)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of failure to comply
with an order or signal of a police officer.
      (2)   A violation of division (a) of this section is a misdemeanor of the
first degree.
      (3)   Except as provided in divisions (c)(4) and (5) of this section, a
violation of division (b) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (4)   Except as provided in division (c)(5) of this section, a violation
of division (b) of this section is a felony and shall be prosecuted under
appropriate state law if the jury or judge as trier of fact finds by proof
beyond a reasonable doubt that in committing the offense, the offender was
fleeing immediately after the commission of a felony.
      (5)   A.   A violation of division (b) of this section is a felony and
shall be prosecuted under appropriate state law if the jury or judge as trier
of fact finds any of the following by proof beyond a reasonable doubt:
            1.   The operation of the motor vehicle by the offender was a
proximate cause of serious physical harm to persons or property.
            2.   The operation of the motor vehicle by the offender caused a
substantial risk of serious physical harm to persons or property.
         B.   If a police officer pursues an offender who is violating division
(b) of this section and division (c)(5)A. of this section applies, the
sentencing court, in determining the seriousness of an offender’s conduct for
purposes of sentencing the offender for a violation of division (b) of this
section, shall consider, along with the factors set forth in Ohio R.C. 2929.12
and 2929.13 that are required to be considered, all of the following:
            1.   The duration of the pursuit;
            2.   The distance of the pursuit;
            3.   The rate of speed at which the offender operated the motor
vehicle during the pursuit;
            4.   Whether the offender failed to stop for traffic lights or stop
signs during the pursuit;
            5.   The number of traffic lights or stop signs for which the
offender failed to stop during the pursuit;
            6.   Whether the offender operated the motor vehicle during the
pursuit without lighted lights during a time when lighted lights are required;
            7.   Whether the offender committed a moving violation during the
pursuit;
            8.   The number of moving violations the offender committed during
the pursuit;
            9.   Any other relevant factors indicating that the offender’s
conduct is more serious than conduct normally constituting the offense.
   (d)   In addition to any other sanction imposed for a violation of division
(a) of this section or a misdemeanor violation of division (b) of this section,
the court shall impose a class five suspension from the range specified in Ohio
R.C. 4510.02(A)(5). If the offender previously has been found guilty of an
offense under this section or under Ohio R.C. 2921.331 or any other
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, in addition to any other sanction
imposed for the offense, the court shall impose a class one suspension as
described in Ohio R.C. 4510.02(A)(1). The court may grant limited driving
privileges to the offender on a suspension imposed for a misdemeanor violation
of this section as set forth in Ohio R.C. 4510.021. No judge shall suspend any
portion of the suspension under a class one suspension of an offender’s
license, permit, or privilege required by this division.
   (e)   As used in this section:
      (1)   “Moving violation” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2743.70.
      (2)   “Police officer” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 4511.01.
(ORC 2921.331(A) - (C), (E), (F))
§ 608.10  HAVING AN UNLAWFUL INTEREST IN A PUBLIC CONTRACT.
   (a)   No public official shall knowingly do any of the following:
      (1)   Authorize or employ the authority of the public official’s office
to secure authorization of any public contract in which the public official, a
member of the public official’s family, or any of the public official’s
business associates has an interest.
      (2)   Authorize or employ the authority or influence of the public
official’s office to secure the investment of public funds in any share, bond,
mortgage, or other security with respect to which the public official, a member
of the public official’s family, or any of the public official’s business
associates either has an interest, is an underwriter, or receives any
brokerage, origination, or servicing fees.
      (3)   During the public official’s term of office or within one year
thereafter, occupy any position of profit in the prosecution of a public
contract authorized by the public official or by a legislative body,
commission, or board of which the public official was a member at the time of
authorization, unless the contract was let by competitive bidding to the lowest
and best bidder.
      (4)   Have an interest in the profits or benefits of a public contract
entered into by or for the use of the political subdivision or governmental
agency or instrumentality with which the public official is connected.
      (5)   Have an interest in the profits or benefits of a public contract
that is not let by competitive bidding when required by law, and that involves
more than one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00).
   (b)   In the absence of bribery or a purpose to defraud, a public official,
member of a public official’s family, or any of a public official’s business
associates shall not be considered as having an interest in a public contract
or the investment of public funds, if all of the following apply:
      (1)   The interest of that person is limited to owning or controlling
shares of the corporation, or being a creditor of the corporation or other
organization, that is the contractor on the public contract involved, or that
is the issuer of the security in which public funds are invested.
      (2)   The shares owned or controlled by that person do not exceed 5% of
the outstanding shares of the corporation, and the amount due that person as
creditor does not exceed 5% of the total indebtedness of the corporation or
other organization.
      (3)   That person, prior to the time the public contract is entered into,
files with the political subdivision or governmental agency or instrumentality
involved, an affidavit giving that person’s exact status in connection with the
corporation or other organization.
   (c)   This section does not apply to a public contract in which a public
official, member of a public official’s family, or one of a public official’s
business associates has an interest, when all of the following apply:
      (1)   The subject of the public contract is necessary supplies or
services for the political subdivision or governmental agency or
instrumentality involved.
      (2)   The supplies or services are unobtainable elsewhere for the same or
lower cost, or are being furnished to the political subdivision or governmental
agency or instrumentality as part of a continuing course of dealing established
prior to the public official’s becoming associated with the political
subdivision or governmental agency or instrumentality involved.
      (3)   The treatment accorded the political subdivision or governmental
agency or instrumentality is either preferential to or the same as that
accorded other customers or clients in similar transactions.
      (4)   The entire transaction is conducted at arm’s length, with full
knowledge by the political subdivision or governmental agency or
instrumentality involved, of the interest of the public official, member of the
public official’s family, or business associate, and the public official takes
no part in the deliberations or decision of the political subdivision or
governmental agency or instrumentality with respect to the public contract.
   (d)   Division (a)(4) of this section does not prohibit participation by a
public employee in any housing program funded by public monies if the public
employee otherwise qualifies for the program and does not use the authority or
influence of the public employee’s office or employment to secure benefits from
the program and if the monies are to be used on the primary residence of the
public employee.  Such participation does not constitute an unlawful interest
in a public contract in violation of this section.
   (e)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of having an unlawful interest
in a public contract.  Violation of division (a)(1) or (2) of this section is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.  Violation of division (a)
(3), (4), or (5) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
   (f)   It is not a violation of this section for a prosecuting attorney to
appoint assistants and employees in accordance with Ohio R.C. 309.06 and
2921.421, or for a chief legal officer of a municipality or an official
designated as prosecutor in a municipality to appoint assistants and employees
in accordance with Ohio R.C. 733.621 and 2921.421, or for a township law
director appointed under Ohio R.C. 504.15 to appoint assistants and employees
in accordance with Ohio R.C. 504.151 and 2921.421.
   (g)   Any public contract in which a public official, a member of the public
official’s family, or any of the public official’s business associates has an
interest in violation of this section is void and unenforceable. Any contract
securing the investment of public funds in which a public official, a member of
the public official’s family, or any of the public official’s business
associates has an interest, is an underwriter, or receives any brokerage,
origination or servicing fees and that was entered into in violation of this
section is void and unenforceable.
   (h)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   “Chief legal officer” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 733.621.
      (2)   “Public contract” means any of the following:
         A.   The purchase or acquisition, or a contract for the purchase or
acquisition, of property or services by or for the use of the state or any of
its political subdivisions, or any agency or instrumentality of either,
including the employment of an individual by the state, any of its political
subdivisions, or any agency or instrumentality of either.
         B.   A contract for the design, construction, alteration, repair, or
maintenance of any public property.
(ORC 2921.42)
§ 608.11  SOLICITING OR RECEIVING IMPROPER COMPENSATION.
   (a)   No public servant shall knowingly solicit or accept and no person
shall knowingly promise or give to a public servant either of the following:
      (1)   Any compensation, other than as allowed by Ohio R.C. 102.03(G),
(H), (I), or other provisions of law, to perform the public servant’s official
duties, to perform any other act or service in the public servant’s public
capacity, for the general performance of the duties of the public servant’s
public office or public employment, or as a supplement to the public servant’s
public compensation.
      (2)   Additional or greater fees or costs than are allowed by law to
perform the public servant’s official duties.
   (b)   No public servant for the public servant’s own personal or business
use and no person for the person’s own personal or business use or for the
personal or business use of a public servant or party official, shall solicit
or accept anything of value in consideration of either of the following:
      (1)   Appointing or securing, maintaining, or renewing the appointment of
any person to any public office, employment, or agency.
      (2)   Preferring, or maintaining the status of, any public employee with
respect to compensation, duties, placement, location, promotion, or other
material aspects of employment.
   (c)   No person for the benefit of a political party, campaign committee,
legislative campaign fund, political action committee or political contributing
entity shall coerce any contribution in consideration of either of the
following:
      (1)   Appointing or securing, maintaining, or renewing the appointment of
any person to any public office, employment, or agency.
      (2)   Preferring, or maintaining the status of, any public employee with
respect to compensation, duties, placement, location, promotion, or other
material aspects of employment.
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of soliciting improper
compensation, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
   (e)   A public servant who is convicted of a violation of this section is
disqualified from holding any public office, employment, or position of trust
in this state for a period of seven years from the date of conviction.
   (f)   Divisions (a), (b), and (c) of this section do not prohibit any person
from making voluntary contributions to a political party, campaign committee,
legislative campaign fund, political action committee or political contributing
entity or prohibit a political party, campaign committee, legislative campaign
fund, political action committee or political contributing entity from
accepting voluntary contributions.
(ORC 2921.43)
§ 608.12  DERELICTION OF DUTY.
   (a)   No law enforcement officer shall negligently do any of the following:
      (1)   Fail to serve a lawful warrant without delay.
      (2)   Fail to prevent or halt the commission of an offense or to
apprehend an offender, when it is in the law enforcement officer’s power to do
so alone or with available assistance.
   (b)   No law enforcement, ministerial, or judicial officer shall negligently
fail to perform a lawful duty in a criminal case or proceeding.
   (c)   No officer, having charge of a detention facility, shall negligently
do any of the following:
      (1)   Allow the detention facility to become littered or unsanitary.
      (2)   Fail to provide persons confined in the detention facility with
adequate food, clothing, bedding, shelter, and medical attention.
      (3)   Fail to control an unruly prisoner, or to prevent intimidation of
or physical harm to a prisoner by another.
      (4)   Allow a prisoner to escape.
      (5)   Fail to observe any lawful and reasonable regulation for the
management of the detention facility.
   (d)   No public official shall recklessly create a deficiency, incur a
liability, or expend a greater sum than is appropriated by the Council for the
use in any one year of the department, agency, or institution with which the
public official is connected.
   (e)   No public servant shall recklessly fail to perform a duty expressly
imposed by law with respect to the public servant’s office, or recklessly do
any act expressly forbidden by law with respect to the public servant’s office.
   (f)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of dereliction of duty, a
misdemeanor of the second degree.
   (g)   Except as otherwise provided by law, a public servant who is a county
treasurer; county auditor; township fiscal officer; city auditor; city
treasurer; village fiscal officer; village clerk-treasurer; village clerk; in
the case of a municipal corporation having a charter that designates an officer
who, by virtue of the charter, has duties and functions similar to those of the
city or village officers referred to in this section, the officer so designated
by the charter; school district treasurer; fiscal officer of a community school
established under Ohio R.C. Chapter 3314; treasurer of a science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics school established under Ohio R.C. Chapter 3326;
or fiscal officer of a college-preparatory boarding school established under
Ohio R.C. Chapter 3328 and is convicted of or pleads guilty to dereliction of
duty is disqualified from holding any public office, employment, or position of
trust in this state for four years following the date of conviction or of entry
of the plea, and is not entitled to hold any public office until any repayment
or restitution required by the court is satisfied.
   (h)   As used in this section, “public servant” includes the following:
      (1)   An officer or employee of a contractor as defined in Ohio R.C.
9.08;
      (2)   A fiscal officer employed by the operator of a community school
established under Ohio R.C. Chapter 3314 or by the operator of a college-
preparatory boarding school established under Ohio R.C. Chapter 3328.
(ORC 2921.44)
§ 608.13  INTERFERING WITH CIVIL RIGHTS.
   (a)   No public servant, under color of his or her office, employment, or
authority, shall knowingly deprive, conspire or attempt to deprive any person
of a constitutional or statutory right.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of interfering with civil
rights, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(ORC 2921.45)
§ 608.14  IMPERSONATING AN OFFICER.
   (a)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   “Federal law enforcement officer.” An employee of the United States
who serves in a position the duties of which are primarily the investigation,
apprehension, or detention of individuals suspected or convicted of offenses
under the criminal laws of the United States.
      (2)   “Impersonate.”  To act the part of, assume the identity of, wear
the uniform or any part of the uniform of, or display the identification of a
particular person or of a member of a class of persons with purpose to make
another person believe that the actor is that particular person or is a member
of that class of persons.
      (3)   “Investigator of the Bureau of Criminal Identification and
Investigation.” Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2903.11.
      (4)   “Peace officer.”  A Sheriff, Deputy Sheriff, Marshal, Deputy
Marshal, member of the organized police department of a municipal corporation
or township constable, who is employed by a political subdivision of this
state; a member of a police force employed by a metropolitan housing authority
under Ohio R.C. 3735.31(D); a member of a police force employed by a regional
transit authority under Ohio R.C. 306.35(Y); a state university law enforcement
officer appointed under Ohio R.C. 3345.04; a veterans’ home police officer
appointed under Ohio R.C. 5907.02; a special police officer employed by a port
authority under Ohio R.C. 4582.04 or 4582.28; an officer, agent or employee of
the state or any of its agencies, instrumentalities or political subdivisions,
upon whom, by statute, a duty to conserve the peace or to enforce all or
certain laws is imposed and the authority to arrest violators is conferred,
within limits of that statutory duty and authority; or a State Highway Patrol
trooper whose primary duties are to preserve the peace, to protect life and
property and to enforce the laws, ordinances or rules of the state or any of
its political subdivisions.
      (5)   “Private police officer.”  Any security guard, special police
officer, private detective, or other person who is privately employed in a
police capacity.
   (b)   No person shall impersonate a peace officer, private police officer,
investigator of the Bureau of Criminal Identification and Investigation, or
federal law enforcement officer.
   (c)   No person, by impersonating a peace officer, private police officer,
investigator of the Bureau of Criminal Identification and Investigation, or
federal law enforcement officer, shall arrest or detain any person, search any
person, or search the property of any person.
   (d)   No person, with purpose to commit or facilitate the commission of an
offense, shall impersonate a peace officer, a private police officer, federal
law enforcement officer, an officer, agent or employee of the municipality or
the state, or investigator of the Bureau of Criminal Identification and
Investigation.
   (e)   No person shall commit a felony while impersonating a peace officer,
private police officer, federal law enforcement officer, an officer, agent or
employee of the municipality or of the state, or investigator of the Bureau of
Criminal Identification and Investigation.
   (f)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (b) of this
section that the impersonation of the peace officer, private police officer,
federal law enforcement officer, an officer, agent or employee of the
municipality or of the state, or investigator of the Bureau of Criminal
Identification and Investigation was for a lawful purpose.
   (g)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.  Whoever violates division (c) or (d) of this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.  If the purpose of a
violation of division (d) of this section is to commit or facilitate the
commission of a felony, a violation of division (d) is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.  Whoever violates division (e) of this
section is guilty of a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(ORC 2921.51)
§ 608.145  USING SHAM LEGAL PROCESS.
   (a)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall
apply:
      (1)   “Lawfully issued.”  Adopted, issued, or rendered in accordance with
the United States Constitution, the constitution of a state, and the applicable
statutes, rules, regulations and ordinances of the United States, a state, and
the political subdivisions of a state.
      (2)   “Political subdivisions.”  Municipal corporations, townships,
counties, school districts, and all other bodies corporate and politic that are
organized under state law and are responsible for governmental activities only
in geographical areas smaller than that of a state.
      (3)   “Sham legal process.”  An instrument that meets all of the
following conditions:
         A.   It is not lawfully issued.
         B.   It purports to do any of the following:
            1.   To be a summons, subpoena, judgment, or order of a court, a
law enforcement officer, or a legislative, executive or administrative body.
            2.   To assert jurisdiction over or determine the legal or
equitable status, rights, duties, powers, or privileges of any person or
property.
            3.   To require or authorize the search, seizure, indictment,
arrest, trial, or sentencing of any person or property.
         C.   It is designed to make another person believe that it is lawfully
issued.
      (4)   “State.”  A state of the United States, including without
limitation the state legislature, the highest court of the state that has
statewide jurisdiction, the offices of all elected state officers, and all
departments, boards, offices, commissions, agencies, institutions, and other
instrumentalities of the state.  “State” does not include the political
subdivisions of the state.
   (b)   No person shall, knowing the sham legal process to be a sham legal
process, do any of the following:
      (1)   Knowingly issue, display, deliver, distribute, or otherwise use
sham legal process.
      (2)   Knowingly use sham legal process to arrest, detain, search or seize
any person or the property of another person.
      (3)   Knowingly commit or facilitate the commission of an offense using
sham legal process.
      (4)   Knowingly commit a felony by using sham legal process.
   (c)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (b)(1) or (2)
of this section that the use of sham legal process was for a lawful purpose.
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of using sham legal process. 
A violation of division (b)(1) of this section is a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.  A violation of division (b)(2) or (b)(3) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the first degree, except that if the purpose of a violation of
division (b)(3) of this section is to commit or facilitate the commission of a
felony, a violation of division (b)(3) of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.  A violation of division (b)(4) of this
section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(ORC 2921.52(A) - (D))
§ 608.15  DISPLAY OF LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY EMBLEM.
   (a)   No person who is not entitled to do so shall knowingly display on a
motor vehicle the emblem of a law enforcement agency or an organization of law
enforcement officers.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of the unlawful display of the
emblem of a law enforcement agency or an organization of law enforcement
officers, a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 2913.441)
§ 608.16  DISPOSITION OF UNCLAIMED OR FORFEITED PROPERTY HELD BY POLICE
DEPARTMENT.
   (a)   Safekeeping of property in custody.
      (1)   A.   Any property that has been lost, abandoned, stolen, seized
pursuant to a search warrant, or otherwise lawfully seized or forfeited and
that is in the custody of the Police Department shall be kept safely by the
Police Department, pending the time it no longer is needed as evidence or for
another lawful purpose, and shall be disposed of pursuant to this section or
Ohio R.C. 2981.12 and 2981.13.
         B.   This section does not apply to the custody and disposal of any of
the following:
            1.   Vehicles subject to forfeiture under Ohio R.C. Title 45,
except as provided in division (b)(1)F. of this section;
            2.   Abandoned junk motor vehicles or other property of negligible
value;
            3.   Property held by a department of rehabilitation and correction
institution that is unclaimed, that does not have an identified owner, that the
owner agrees to dispose of, or that is identified by the department as having
little value;
            4.   Animals taken, and devices used in unlawfully taking animals,
under Ohio R.C. 1531.20;
            5.   Controlled substances sold by a peace officer in the
performance of the officer’s official duties under Ohio R.C. 3719.141;
            6.   Property recovered by a township law enforcement agency under
Ohio R.C. 505.105 to 505.109;
            7.   Property held and disposed of under an ordinance of the
municipality or under Ohio R.C. 737.29 to 737.33, except that if the
municipality has received notice of a citizens’ reward program as provided in
division (b)(5) of this section and disposes of property under an ordinance
shall pay 25% of any monies acquired from any sale or auction to the citizens’
reward program.
      (2)   A.   The Police Department shall adopt and comply with a written
internal control policy that does all of the following:
            1.   Provides for keeping detailed records as to the amount of
property acquired by the Police Department and the date property was acquired;
            2.   Provides for keeping detailed records of the disposition of
the property, which shall include, but not be limited to, both of the
following:
               a.   The manner in which it was disposed, the date of
disposition, detailed financial records concerning any property sold, and the
name of any person who received the property. The record shall not identify or
enable identification of the individual officer who seized any item of
property.
               b.   An itemized list of the specific expenditures made with
amounts that are gained from the sale of the property and that are retained by
the agency, including the specific amount expended on each expenditure, except
that the policy shall not provide for or permit the identification of any
specific expenditure that is made in an ongoing investigation.
            3.   Complies with Ohio R.C. 2981.13 if the Police Department has a
law enforcement trust fund or similar fund created under that section.
         B.   The records kept under the internal control policy shall be open
to public inspection during the Police Department’s regular business hours. The
policy adopted under this section is a public record open for inspection under
Ohio R.C. 149.43.
      (3)   The Police Department, with custody of property to be disposed of
under this section or Ohio R.C. 2981.12 or 2981.13, shall make a reasonable
effort to locate persons entitled to possession of the property, to notify them
of when and where it may be claimed, and to return the property to them at the
earliest possible time. In the absence of evidence identifying persons entitled
to possession, it is sufficient notice to advertise in a newspaper of general
circulation in the county and to briefly describe the nature of the property in
custody and inviting persons to view and establish their right to it.
      (4)   As used in this section:
         A.   “Citizens’ reward program” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C.
9.92.
         B.   “Law enforcement agency” includes correctional institutions.
         C.   “Township law enforcement agency” means an organized police
department of a township, a township police district, a joint police district,
or the office of a township constable.
(ORC 2981.11)
   (b)   Disposition of unclaimed or forfeited property.
      (1)   Unclaimed or forfeited property in the custody of the Police
Department, other than property described in division (a)(1)B. of this section,
shall be disposed of by order of any court of record that has territorial
jurisdiction over the municipality, as follows:
         A.   Drugs shall be disposed of pursuant to Ohio R.C. 3719.11 or
placed in the custody of the Secretary of the Treasury of the United States for
disposal or use for medical or scientific purposes under applicable federal
law.
         B.   Firearms and dangerous ordnance suitable for police work may be
given to a law enforcement agency for that purpose. Firearms suitable for
sporting use or as museum pieces or collectors’ items may be sold at public
auction pursuant to division (b)(2) of this section. The Police Department may
sell other firearms and dangerous ordnance to a federally licensed firearms
dealer in a manner that the court considers proper. The Police Department shall
destroy any firearms or dangerous ordnance not given to a law enforcement
agency or sold or shall send them to the Bureau of Criminal Identification and
Investigation for destruction by the Bureau.
         C.   Obscene materials shall be destroyed.
         D.   Beer, intoxicating liquor, or alcohol seized from a person who
does not hold a permit issued under Ohio R.C. Chapters 4301 and 4303 or
otherwise forfeited to the state for an offense under Ohio R.C. 4301.45 or Ohio
R.C. 4301.53 shall be sold by the Division of Liquor Control if the Division
determines that it is fit for sale or shall be placed in the custody of the
Investigations Unit in the Ohio Department of Public Safety and be used for
training relating to law enforcement activities. The Ohio Department of Public
Safety, with the assistance of the Division of Liquor Control, shall adopt
rules in accordance with Ohio R.C. Chapter 119 to provide for the distribution
to state or local law enforcement agencies upon their request. If any tax
imposed under Ohio R.C. Title 43 has not been paid in relation to the beer,
intoxicating liquor, or alcohol, any monies acquired from the sale shall first
be used to pay the tax. All other money collected under this division (b)(1)D.
shall be paid into the State Treasury. Any beer, intoxicating liquor, or
alcohol that the Division determines to be unfit for sale shall be destroyed.
         E.   Money received by an inmate of a correctional institution from an
unauthorized source or in an unauthorized manner shall be returned to the
sender, if known, or deposited in the inmates’ industrial and entertainment
fund of the institution if the sender is not known.
         F.   1.   Any mobile instrumentality forfeited under Ohio R.C. Chapter
2981 may be given to the law enforcement agency that initially seized the
mobile instrumentality for use in performing its duties, if the agency wants
the mobile instrumentality. The agency shall take the mobile instrumentality
subject to any security interest or lien on the mobile instrumentality.
            2.   Vehicles and vehicle parts forfeited under Ohio R.C. 4549.61
to 4549.63 may be given to a law enforcement agency for use in performing its
duties. Those parts may be incorporated into any other official vehicle. Parts
that do not bear vehicle identification numbers or derivatives of them may be
sold or disposed of as provided by rules of the Director of Public Safety.
Parts from which a vehicle identification number or derivative of it has been
removed, defaced, covered, altered, or destroyed and that are not suitable for
police work or incorporation into an official vehicle shall be destroyed and
sold as junk or scrap.
         G.   Computers, computer networks, computer systems, and computer
software suitable for police work may be given to a law enforcement agency for
that purpose or disposed of under division (b)(2) of this section.
         H.   Money seized in connection with a violation of Ohio R.C. 2905.32,
2907.21, or 2907.22 shall be deposited in the Victims of Human Trafficking Fund
created by Ohio R.C. 5101.87.
      (2)   Unclaimed or forfeited property that is not described in division
(b)(1) of this section or division (a)(1)B. of this section, with court
approval, may be used by the law enforcement agency in possession of it. If it
is not used by the agency, it may be sold without appraisal at a public auction
to the highest bidder for cash or disposed of in another manner that the court
considers proper.
      (3)   Except as provided in divisions (b)(1) and (b)(5) of this section
and after compliance with division (b)(4) of this section when applicable, any
monies acquired from the sale of property disposed of pursuant to this section
shall be placed in the general revenue fund of the state, or the general fund
of the municipality.
      (4)   If the property was in the possession of the Police Department in
relation to a delinquent child proceeding in a juvenile court, 10% of any
moneys acquired from the sale of property disposed of under this section shall
be applied to one or more community addiction services providers, as defined in
Ohio R.C. 5119.01. A juvenile court shall not specify a services provider,
except as provided in this division, unless the services provider is in the
same county as the court or in a contiguous county. If no services provider is
located in any of those counties, the juvenile court may specify a services
provider anywhere in Ohio. The remaining 90% of the proceeds or cash shall be
applied as provided in division (b)(3) of this section.
      (5)   A.   If the Board of County Commissioners recognizes a citizens’
reward program under Ohio R.C. 9.92, the Board shall notify the Police
Department of the recognition by filing a copy of its resolution conferring
that recognition with the Police Department. When the Board recognizes a
citizens’ reward program and the county includes a part, but not all, of the
territory of the municipality, the Board shall so notify the Police Department
of the recognition of the citizens’ reward program only if the county contains
the highest percentage of the municipality’s population.
         B.   Upon being so notified, the Police Department shall pay 25% of
any forfeited proceeds or cash derived from each sale of property disposed of
pursuant to this section to the citizens’ reward program for use exclusively to
pay rewards. No part of the funds may be used to pay expenses associated with
the program. If a citizens’ reward program that operates in more than one
county or in another state in addition to this state receives funds under this
section, the funds shall be used to pay rewards only for tips and information
to law enforcement agencies concerning offenses committed in the county from
which the funds were received.
      (6)   Any property forfeited under Ohio R.C. Chapter 2981 not be used to
pay any fine imposed upon a person who is convicted of or pleads guilty to an
underlying criminal offense or a different offense arising out of the same
facts and circumstances.
      (7)   Any moneys acquired from the sale of personal effects, tools, or
other property seized because the personal effects, tools, or other property
were used in the commission of a violation of Ohio R.C. 2905.32, 2907.21, or
2907.22 or derived from the proceeds of the commission of a violation of Ohio
R.C. 2905.32, 2907.21, or 2907.22 and disposed of pursuant to this division (b)
shall be placed in the Victims of Human Trafficking Fund created by Ohio R.C.
5101.87.
(ORC 2981.12)
   (c)   Disposition of contraband, proceeds, or instrumentalities.  Except as
otherwise provided in Ohio R.C. 2981.13, property ordered forfeited as
contraband, proceeds, or an instrumentality pursuant to Ohio R.C. Chapter 2981
shall be disposed of, used, or sold pursuant to division (b) of this section or
Ohio R.C. 2981.12. If the property is to be sold under division (b) of this
section or Ohio R.C. 2981.12, the prosecutor shall cause notice of the proposed
sale to be given in accordance with law.
(ORC 2981.13(A))
Statutory reference:
   Forfeiture of property generally, see R.C. Chapter 2981
§ 608.17  DETENTION OF SHOPLIFTERS AND THOSE COMMITTING MOTION PICTURE PIRACY;
PROTECTION OF INSTITUTIONAL PROPERTY.
   (a)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall
apply.
      (1)   “Archival institution.”  Any public or private building, structure,
or shelter in which are stored historical documents, devices, records,
manuscripts, or items of public interest, which historical materials are stored
to preserve the materials or the information in the materials, to disseminate
the information contained in the materials, or to make the materials available
for public inspection or for inspection by certain persons who have a
particular interest in, use for, or knowledge concerning the materials.
      (2)   “Audiovisual recording function “ and “facility.” Have the same
meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2913.07.
      (3)   “Museum.”  Any public or private nonprofit institution that is
permanently organized for primarily educational or aesthetic purposes, owns or
borrows objects or items of public interest, and cares for and exhibits to the
public the objects or items.
      (4)   “Pretrial diversion program.”  A rehabilitative, educational
program designed to reduce recidivism and promote personal responsibility that
is at least four hours in length and that has been approved by any court in
this state.
   (b)   A merchant, or an employee or agent of a merchant, who has probable
cause to believe that things offered for sale by a mercantile establishment
have been unlawfully taken by a person, may, for the purposes set forth in
division (d) below, detain the person in a reasonable manner for a reasonable
length of time within the mercantile establishment or its immediate vicinity.
   (c)   Any officer, employee, or agent of a library, museum, or archival
institution may, for the purposes set forth in division (d) below or for the
purpose of conducting a reasonable investigation of a belief that the person
has acted in a manner described in divisions (c)(1) and (2) below, detain a
person in a reasonable manner for a reasonable length of time within, or in the
immediate vicinity of, the library, museum, or archival institution, if the
officer, employee, or agent has probable cause to believe that the person has:
      (1)   Without privilege to do so, knowingly moved, defaced, damaged,
destroyed, or otherwise improperly tampered with property owned by or in the
custody of the library, museum, or archival institution; or
      (2)   With purpose to deprive the library, museum, or archival
institution of property owned by it or in its custody, knowingly obtained or
exerted control over the property without the consent of the owner or person
authorized to give consent, beyond the scope of the express or implied consent
of the owner or person authorized to give consent, by deception, or by threat.
   (d)   An officer, agent, or employee of a library, museum, or archival
institution pursuant to division (c) above or a merchant or an employee or
agent of a merchant pursuant to division (b) above may detain another person
for any of the following purposes:
      (1)   To recover the property that is the subject of the unlawful taking,
criminal mischief, or theft;
      (2)   To cause an arrest to be made by a peace officer;
      (3)   To obtain a warrant of arrest;
      (4)   To offer the person, if the person is suspected of the unlawful
taking, criminal mischief, or theft and notwithstanding any other provision of
this Code or the Ohio Revised Code, an opportunity to complete a pretrial
diversion program and to inform the person of the other legal remedies
available to the library, museum, archival institution, or merchant.
   (e)   The owner or lessee of a facility in which a motion picture is being
shown, or the owner’s or lessee’s employee or agent, who has probable cause to
believe that a person is or has been operating an audiovisual recording
function of a device in violation of Ohio R.C. 2917.07 may, for the purpose of
causing an arrest to be made by a peace officer or of obtaining an arrest
warrant, detain the person in a reasonable manner for a reasonable length of
time within the facility or its immediate vicinity.
   (f)   The officer, agent, or employee of the library, museum, or archival
institution, the merchant or an employee or agent of a merchant, or the owner,
lessee, employee, or agent of the facility acting under divisions (b), (c) or
(e) above shall not search the person detained, search or seize any property
belonging to the person detained without the person’s consent, or use undue
restraint upon the person detained.
   (g)   Any peace officer may arrest without a warrant any person that the
officer has probable cause to believe has committed any act described in
division (c)(1) or (2) above, that the officer has probable cause to believe
has committed an unlawful taking in a mercantile establishment, or that the
officer has reasonable cause to believe has committed an act prohibited by Ohio
R.C. 2913.07.  An arrest under this division shall be made within a reasonable
time after the commission of the act or unlawful taking.
(ORC 2935.041)
§ 608.18  FAILURE TO DISCLOSE PERSONAL INFORMATION.
   (a)   No person who is in a public place shall refuse to disclose the
person’s name, address, or date of birth, when requested by a law enforcement
officer who reasonably suspects either of the following:
      (1)   The person is committing, has committed, or is about to commit a
criminal offense.
      (2)   The person witnessed any of the following:
         A.   An offense of violence that would constitute a felony under the
laws of this state;
         B.   A felony offense that causes or results in, or creates a
substantial risk of, serious physical harm to another person or property;
         C.   Any attempt or conspiracy to commit, or complicity in committing,
any offenses identified in division (a)(2)A. or (a)(2)B. of this section;
         D.   Any conduct reasonably indicating that any offense identified in
division (a)(2)A. or (a)(2)B. of this section or any attempt, conspiracy, or
complicity described in division (a)(2)C. of this section has been, is being,
or is about to be committed.
   (b)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of failure to
disclose one’s personal information, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
   (c)   Nothing in division (a) of this section requires a person to answer
any questions beyond that person’s name, address, or date of birth. Nothing in
division (a) of this section authorizes a law enforcement officer to arrest a
person for not providing any information beyond the person’s name, address, or
date of birth or for refusing to describe the offense observed.
   (d)   It is not a violation of division (a) of this section to refuse to
answer a question that would reveal a person’s age or date of birth if age is
an element of the crime that the person is suspected of committing.
(ORC 2921.29)
   (e)   No person entering an airport, train station, port, or other similar
critical transportation infrastructure site shall refuse to show identification
when requested by a law enforcement officer when there is a threat to security
and the law enforcement officer is requiring identification of all persons
entering the site.
   (f)   A law enforcement officer may prevent any person who refuses to show
identification when asked under the circumstances described in division (e) of
this section from entering the critical transportation infrastructure site.
(ORC 2909.31)
§ 608.19  MISUSE OF 9-1-1 SYSTEM.
   (a)   As used in this section, “9-1-1 system” means a system through which
individuals can request emergency service using the telephone number 9-1-1.
(ORC 128.01(A))
   (b)   No person shall knowingly use the telephone number of a 9-1-1 system
established under Ohio R.C. Chapter 128 to report an emergency if the person
knows that no emergency exists.
   (c)   No person shall knowingly use a 9-1-1 system for a purpose other than
obtaining emergency service.
   (d)   No person shall disclose or use any information concerning telephone
numbers, addresses, or names obtained from the database that serves the public
safety answering point of a 9-1-1 system established under Ohio R.C. Chapter
128, except for any of the following purposes or under any of the following
circumstances:
      (1)   For the purpose of the 9-1-1 system;
      (2)   For the purpose of responding to an emergency call to an emergency
service provider;
      (3)   In the circumstance of the inadvertent disclosure of such
information due solely to technology of the wireless telephone network portion
of the 9-1-1 system not allowing access to the database to be restricted to 9-
1-1 specific answering lines at a public safety answering point;
      (4)   In the circumstance of access to a database being given by a
telephone company that is a wireless service provider to a public utility or
municipal utility in handling customer calls in times of public emergency or
service outages. The charge, terms, and conditions for the disclosure or use of
such information for the purpose of such access to a database shall be subject
to the jurisdiction of the Steering Committee;
      (5)   In the circumstance of access to a database given by a telephone
company that is a wireline service provider to a state and local government in
warning of a public emergency, as determined by the Steering Committee. The
charge, terms and conditions for the disclosure or use of that information for
the purpose of access to a database is subject to the jurisdiction of the
Steering Committee.
(ORC 128.32(E) - (G))
   (e)   (1)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (c) or (d) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree on a first offense and a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law on each subsequent offense.
(ORC 128.99(A), (B))
CHAPTER 612:  ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Section
612.01   Definitions.
612.02   Sales to underage persons; prohibitions and misrepresentations.
612.03   Sales to intoxicated persons.
612.04   Liquor consumption in motor vehicle.
612.05   Permit required.
612.06   Posting liquor age and firearm warning signs.
612.07   Open container prohibited.
612.08   Hours of sale or consumption.
612.09   Conveying intoxicating liquor or cash onto grounds of detention
facilities or other specified governmental facilities.
612.10   Sales of low-alcohol beverages to underage persons; prohibitions and
misrepresentations.
612.11   Alcohol vaporizing devices prohibited.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   See section histories for similar state law
   Liquor Control Law - see Ohio R.C. Ch. 4301
   Suspension of beer and liquor sales by Ohio Director of Liquor
   Control during emergency - see Ohio R.C. 4301.251
   Liquor permits - see Ohio R.C. Ch. 4303
   Local option - see Ohio R.C. 4303.29
   Driving or physical control while intoxicated - see TRAF.
434.01
   Definitions generally - see GEN. OFF.
606.01
   Disorderly conduct while voluntarily intoxicated - see GEN. OFF.
648.04
   Using weapons while intoxicated - see GEN. OFF.
678.03
§ 612.01  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   (a)   “Alcohol.”  Ethyl alcohol, whether rectified or diluted with water or
not, whatever its origin may be, and includes synthetic ethyl alcohol.  The
term does not include denatured alcohol and wood alcohol.
   (b)   “At retail.”  For use or consumption by the purchaser and not for
resale.
   (c)   “Beer.” 
      (1)   Includes all beverages brewed or fermented wholly or in part from
malt products and containing 0.5% or more of alcohol by volume.
      (2)   Beer, regardless of the percent of alcohol by volume, is not
intoxicating liquor for purposes of this code, the Ohio Revised Code, or any
rules adopted under it.
   (d)   “Cider.”  All liquids that are fit to use for beverage purposes that
contain 0.5% of alcohol by volume, but not more than 6% of alcohol by weight
that are made through the normal alcoholic fermentation of the juice of sound,
ripe apples, including, without limitation, flavored, sparkling, or carbonated
cider and cider made from pure condensed apple must.
   (e)   “Club.”  A corporation or association of individuals organized in good
faith for social, recreational, benevolent, charitable, fraternal, political,
patriotic, or athletic purposes, which is the owner, lessor, or occupant of a
permanent building or part of a permanent building operated solely for such
purposes, membership in which entails the prepayment of regular dues, and
includes the place so operated.
   (f)   “Community facility.”  Means either of the following:
      (1)   Any convention, sports or entertainment facility or complex, or any
combination of these, that is used by or accessible to the general public and
that is owned or operated in whole or in part by the state, a state agency, or
a political subdivision of the state or that is leased from, or located on
property owned by or leased from, the state, a state agency, a political
subdivision of the state, or a convention facilities authority created pursuant
to Ohio R.C. 351.02;
      (2)   An area designated as a community entertainment district pursuant
to Ohio R.C. 4301.80.
   (g)   “Controlled access alcohol and beverage cabinet.”  A closed container,
either refrigerated, in whole or in part, or nonrefrigerated, access to the
interior of which is restricted by means of a device that requires the use of a
key, magnetic card, or similar device and from which beer, intoxicating liquor,
other beverages, or food may be sold.
   (h)   “Hotel.”  The same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 3731.01, subject to the
exceptions mentioned in Ohio R.C. 3731.03.
   (i)   “Intoxicating liquor” and “liquor.”  All liquids and compounds, other
than beer, containing 0.5% or more of alcohol by volume which are fit to use
for beverage purposes, from whatever source and by whatever process produced,
by whatever name called, and whether they are medicated, proprietary, or
patented.  “Intoxicating liquor” and “liquor” include cider and alcohol, and
all solids and confections which contain 0.5% or more of alcohol by volume.
   (j)   “Low-alcohol beverage.”  Any brewed or fermented malt product or any
product made from the fermented juices of grapes, fruits, or other agricultural
products that contains either no alcohol or less than 0.5% of alcohol by
volume.  The beverages described in this definition do not include a soft drink
such as root beer, birch beer, or ginger beer.
   (k)   “Manufacture.”  All processes by which beer or intoxicating liquor is
produced, whether by distillation, rectifying, fortifying, blending,
fermentation, brewing, or in any other manner.
   (l)   “Manufacturer.”  Any person engaged in the business of manufacturing
beer or intoxicating liquor.
   (m)   “Mixed beverages.”  Includes bottled and prepared cordials, cocktails,
highballs, and solids and confections that are obtained by mixing any type of
whiskey, neutral spirits, brandy, gin or other distilled spirits with, or over,
carbonated or plain water, pure juices from flowers and plants, and other
flavoring materials.  The completed product shall contain not less than 0.5% of
alcohol by volume and not more than 21% of alcohol by volume.
   (n)   “Nightclub.”  A place habitually operated for profit, where food is
served for consumption on the premises, and one or more forms of amusement are
provided or permitted for a consideration that may be in the form of a cover
charge or may be included in the price of the food and beverages, or both,
purchased by patrons.
   (o)   “Person.”  Includes firms and corporations.
   (p)   “Pharmacy.”  An establishment as defined in Ohio R.C. 4729.01, that is
under the management or control of a licensed pharmacist in accordance with
Ohio R.C. 4729.27.
   (q)   “Restaurant.”  A place located in a permanent building provided with
space and accommodations wherein, in consideration of the payment of money, hot
meals are habitually prepared, sold, and served at noon and evening, as the
principal business of the place.  The term does not include pharmacies,
confectionery stores, lunch stands, nightclubs, and filling stations.
   (r)   “Sale” and “sell.”  The exchange, barter, gift, offer for sale, sale,
distribution, and delivery of any kind, and the transfer of title or possession
of beer and intoxicating liquor either by constructive or actual delivery by
any means or devices whatever, including the sale of beer or intoxicating
liquor by means of a controlled access alcohol and beverage cabinet pursuant to
Ohio R.C. 4301.21.  Such terms do not include the mere solicitation of orders
for beer or intoxicating liquor from the holders of permits issued by the
Division of Liquor Control authorizing the sale of the beer or intoxicating
liquor, but no solicitor shall solicit any orders until the solicitor has been
registered with the Division pursuant to Ohio R.C. 4303.25.
   (s)   “Sales area or territory.” An exclusive geographic area or territory
that is assigned to a particular A or B permit holder and that either has one
or more political subdivisions as its boundaries or consists of an area of land
with readily identifiable geographic boundaries.  “Sales area or territory”
does not include, however, any particular retail location in an exclusive
geographic area or territory that had been assigned to another A or B permit
holder before April 9, 2001.
   (t)   “Sealed container.”  Any container having a capacity of not more than
128 fluid ounces, the opening of which is closed to prevent the entrance of
air.
   (u)   “Spirituous liquor.”  All intoxicating liquors containing more than
21% of alcohol by volume.
   (v)   “Vehicle.”  All means of transportation by land, by water, or by air,
and everything made use of in any way for such transportation.
   (w)   “Wholesale distributor” and “distributor.”  A person engaged in the
business of selling to retail dealers for purposes of resale.
   (x)   “Wine.”  All liquids fit to use for beverage purposes containing not
less than 0.5% of alcohol by volume and not more than 21% of alcohol by volume,
which is made from the fermented juices of grapes, fruits, or other
agricultural products.  Except as provided in Ohio R.C. 4301.01(B)(3), the term
does not include cider.
(ORC 4301.01, 4301.244)
§ 612.02  SALES TO UNDERAGE PERSONS; PROHIBITIONS AND MISREPRESENTATIONS.
   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter or in Ohio R.C. Chapter
4301, no person shall sell beer or intoxicating liquor to an underage person,
shall buy beer or intoxicating liquor for an underage person, or shall furnish
it to an underage person unless given by a physician in the regular line of the
physician’s practice or given for established religious purposes or unless the
underage person is supervised by a parent, spouse who is not an underage
person, or legal guardian.  In proceedings before the Liquor Control
Commission, no permit holder, or no employee or agent of a permit holder,
charged with a violation of this division shall be charged, for the same
offense, with a violation of Ohio R.C. 4301.22(A)(1) or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (b)   No person who is the owner or occupant of any public or private place
shall knowingly allow any underage person to remain in or on the place while
possessing or consuming beer or intoxicating liquor, unless the intoxicating
liquor or beer is given to the person possessing or consuming it by that
person’s parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal guardian and
the parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal guardian is present
at the time of the person’s possession or consumption of the beer or
intoxicating liquor.  An owner of a public or private place is not liable for
acts or omissions in violation of this division that are committed by a lessee
of that place, unless the owner authorizes or acquiesces in the lessee’s acts
or omissions.
   (c)   No person shall engage or use accommodations at a hotel, inn, cabin,
campground, or restaurant when the person knows or has reason to know either of
the following:
      (1)   That beer or intoxicating liquor will be consumed by an underage
person on the premises of the accommodations that the person engages or uses,
unless the person engaging or using the accommodations is the spouse of the
underage person and who is not an underage person, or is the parent or legal
guardian of all of the underage persons, who consume beer or intoxicating
liquor on the premises and that person is on the premises at all times when
beer or intoxicating liquor is being consumed by an underage person.
      (2)   That a drug of abuse will be consumed on the premises of the
accommodations by any person, except a person who obtained the drug of abuse
pursuant to a prescription issued by a licensed health professionals authorized
to prescribe drugs and has the drug of abuse in the original container in which
it was dispensed to the person.
   (d)   (1)   No person is required to permit the engagement of accommodations
at any hotel, inn, cabin, or campground by an underage person or for an
underage person, if the person engaging the accommodations knows or has reason
to know that the underage person is intoxicated, or that the underage person
possesses any beer or intoxicating liquor and is not supervised by a parent,
spouse who is not an underage person, or legal guardian who is or will be
present at all times when the beer or intoxicating liquor is being consumed by
the underage person.
      (2)   No underage person shall knowingly engage or attempt to engage
accommodations at any hotel, inn, cabin, or campground by presenting
identification that falsely indicates that the underage person is 21 years of
age or older for the purpose of violating this section.
   (e)   (1)   No underage person shall knowingly order, pay for, share the
cost of, attempt to purchase, possess, or consume any beer or intoxicating
liquor in any public or private place.  No underage person shall knowingly be
under the influence of any beer or intoxicating liquor in any public place. 
The prohibitions set forth in this division against an underage person
knowingly possessing, consuming, or being under the influence of any beer or
intoxicating liquor shall not apply if the underage person is supervised by a
parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal guardian, or the beer or
intoxicating liquor is given by a physician in the regular line of the
physician’s practice or given for established religious purposes.
      (2)   A.   If a person is charged with violating division (e)(1) of this
section in a complaint filed under Ohio R.C. 2151.27, the court may order the
child into a diversion program specified by the court and hold the complaint in
abeyance pending successful completion of the diversion program.  A child is
ineligible to enter into a diversion program under this division if the child
previously has been diverted pursuant to this division.  If the child completes
the diversion program to the satisfaction of the court, the court shall dismiss
the complaint and order the child’s record in the case sealed under Ohio R.C.
2151.356 through 2151.358.  If the child fails to satisfactorily complete the
diversion program, the court shall proceed with the complaint.
         B.   If a person is charged in a criminal complaint with violating
division (e)(1) of this section, Ohio R.C. 2935.36 shall apply to the offense,
except that a person is ineligible for diversion under that section if the
person previously has been diverted pursuant to divisions (e)(2)A. or (e)(2)B.
of this section.  If the person completes the diversion program to the
satisfaction of the court, the court shall dismiss the complaint and order the
record in the case sealed under Ohio R.C. 2953.52.  If the person fails to
satisfactorily complete the diversion program, the court shall proceed with the
complaint.
   (f)   No parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal guardian of
a minor shall knowingly permit the minor to violate this section or Ohio R.C.
4301.63, 4301.633, or 4301.634, or any substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance.
   (g)   The operator of any hotel, inn, cabin, or campground shall make the
provisions of this section available in writing to any person engaging or using
accommodations at the hotel, inn, cabin, or campground.
   (h)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   “Drug of abuse” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 3719.011.
      (2)   “Hotel” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 3731.01.
      (3)   “Licensed health professional authorized to prescribe drugs” and
“prescription” have the same meanings as in Ohio R.C. 4729.01.
      (4)   “Minor” means a person under the age of 18 years.
      (5)   “Underage person” means a person under the age of 21 years.
(ORC 4301.69)
   (i)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter or in Ohio R.C. Chapter
4301, no person under the age of 21 years shall purchase beer or intoxicating
liquor.
(ORC 4301.63)
   (j)   (EDITOR’S NOTE: Division (j) was repealed because substantially
equivalent state law, Ohio R.C. 4301.632, was repealed in 2002.)
   (k)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter or in Ohio R.C. Chapter
4301, no person shall knowingly furnish any false information as to the name,
age, or other identification of any person under 21 years of age, for the
purpose of obtaining, or with the intent to obtain, beer or intoxicating liquor
for a person under 21 years of age, by purchase, or as a gift.
(ORC 4301.633)
   (l)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter or in Ohio R.C. Chapter
4301, no person under the age of 21 years shall knowingly show or give false
information concerning his or her name, age, or other identification for the
purpose of purchasing or otherwise obtaining beer or intoxicating liquor in any
place in this municipality where beer or intoxicating liquor is sold under a
permit issued by the Division of Liquor Control, or sold by the Division of
Liquor Control.
(ORC 4301.634)
   (m)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor, shall be fined not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) nor
more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), and in addition to the fine, may be
imprisoned for a definite term of not more than six months.
(ORC 4301.99(I))
   (n)   Whoever violates division (b), (c), (d), (e)(1), (f), (g) or (k) of
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.  If an offender
who violates division (e)(1) of this section was under the age of 18 years at
the time of the offense and the offense occurred while the offender was the
operator of or a passenger in a motor vehicle, the court, in addition to any
other penalties it imposes upon the offender, shall suspend the offender’s
temporary instruction permit or probationary driver’s license for a period of
six months.  If the offender is 15 years and 6 months of age or older and has
not been issued a temporary instruction permit or probationary driver’s
license, the offender shall not be eligible to be issued such a license or
permit for a period of six months.  If the offender has not attained the age of
15 years and 6 months, the offender shall not be eligible to be issued a
temporary instruction permit until the offender attains the age of 16 years.
(ORC 4301.99(C))
   (o)   Whoever violates division (i) of this section shall be fined not less
than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
The court imposing a fine for a violation of this section may order that the
fine be paid by the performance of public work at a reasonable hour rate
established by the court.  The court shall designate the time within which the
public work shall be completed.
(ORC 4301.99(E))
   (p)   (EDITOR’S NOTE:  Division (p) was repealed because the penalty for a
substantially equivalent state law, Ohio R.C. 4301.632, was repealed in 2002.)
   (q)   (1)   Whoever violates division (l) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.  If, in committing a first violation of
division (l), the offender presented to the permit holder or his or her
employee or agent a false, fictitious, or altered identification card, a false
or fictitious driver’s license purportedly issued by any state, or a driver’s
license issued by any state that has been altered, the offender is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree and shall be fined not less than two hundred
fifty dollars ($250.00) and not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), and
may be sentenced to a term of imprisonment of not more than six months.
      (2)   On a second violation in which, for the second time, the offender
presented to the permit holder or his or her employee or agent a false,
fictitious, or altered identification card, a false or fictitious driver’s
license purportedly issued by any state, or a driver’s license issued by any
state that has been altered, the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
first degree and shall be fined not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00)
nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), and may be sentenced to a term
of imprisonment of not more than six months.  The court also may impose a class
seven suspension of the offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or
permit or nonresident operation privilege from the range specified in Ohio R.C.
4510.02(A)(7).
      (3)   On a third or subsequent violation in which, for the third or
subsequent time, the offender presented to the permit holder or his or her
employee or agent a false, fictitious, or altered identification card, a false
or fictitious driver’s license purportedly issued by any state, or a driver’s
license issued by any state that has been altered, the offender is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree and shall be fined not less than five hundred
dollars ($500.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), and may be
sentenced to a term of imprisonment of not more than six months.  Except as
provided in this division, the court also may impose a class six suspension of
the offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit or nonresident
operating privilege from the range specified in Ohio R.C. 4510.02(A)(6), and
the court may order that the suspension or denial remain in effect until the
offender attains the age of 21 years.  The court, in lieu of suspending the
offender's temporary instruction permit, probationary driver's license, or
driver's license, instead may order the offender to perform a determinate
number of hours of community service, with the court determining the actual
number of hours and the nature of the community service the offender shall
perform.
(ORC 4301.99(F))
§ 612.03  SALES TO INTOXICATED PERSONS.
   (a)   No permit holder and no agent or employee of a permit holder shall
sell or furnish beer or intoxicating liquor to an intoxicated person.
(ORC 4301.22(B))
   (b)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(ORC 4301.99(D), (H))  (1974 Code, § 529.03(c))
§ 612.04  LIQUOR CONSUMPTION IN MOTOR VEHICLE.
   (a)   No person shall consume any beer or intoxicating liquor in a motor
vehicle.  This section does not apply to persons described in Ohio R.C. 4301.62
(D) or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
(ORC 4301.64)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.  If an offender who violates this section was under the age of 18 years
at the time of the offense, the court, in addition to any other penalties it
imposes upon the offender, may suspend the offender’s temporary instruction
permit, probationary driver’s license or driver’s license for a period of not
less than six months and not more than one year.  In lieu of suspending the
offender’s temporary instruction permit, probationary driver’s license, or
driver’s license, the court instead may require the offender to perform
community service for a number of hours determined by the court. If the
offender is 15 years and 6 months of age or older and has not been issued a
temporary instruction permit or probationary driver’s license, the offender
shall not be eligible to be issued such a license or permit for a period of six
months.  If the offender has not attained the age of 15 years and 6 months, the
offender shall not be eligible to be issued a temporary instruction permit
until the offender attains the age of 16 years.
(ORC 4301.99(B))
§ 612.05  PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (a)   (1)   No person personally or by the person’s clerk, agent, or
employee, shall manufacture, manufacture for sale, offer, keep, or possess for
sale, furnish or sell, or solicit the purchase or sale of any beer or
intoxicating liquor in this state, or transport, import, or cause to be
transported or imported any beer, intoxicating liquor, or alcohol in or into
this municipality for delivery, use or sale, unless the person has fully
complied with Ohio R.C. Chapters 4301 and 4303 or is the holder of a permit
issued by the Division of Liquor Control and in force at the time.
      (2)   No manufacturer, supplier, wholesale distributor, broker, or
retailer of beer or intoxicating liquor, or other person shall employ, retain,
or otherwise utilize any person in this state to act as an employee, agent,
solicitor, or salesperson, or act in any other representative capacity to sell,
solicit, take orders, or receive offers to purchase or expressions of interest
to purchase beer or intoxicating liquor from any person, at any location other
than a liquor permit premises, except as specifically authorized by Ohio R.C.
Chapters 4301 or 4303 or rules adopted thereunder. No function, event, or party
shall take place at any location other than a liquor permit premises where any
person acts in any manner to sell, solicit, take orders, or receive offers to
purchase or expressions of intent to purchase beer or intoxicating liquor to or
from any person, except as specifically authorized by Ohio R.C. Chapters 4301
or 4303 or rules adopted thereunder.
(ORC 4303.25)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. A
separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a
violation occurs or continues.
§ 612.06  POSTING LIQUOR AGE AND FIREARM WARNING SIGNS.
   (a)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in Ohio R.C. 4301.691, every place
in this municipality where beer, intoxicating liquor, or any low-alcohol
beverage is sold for beverage purposes shall display at all times, in a
prominent place on the premises thereof, a printed card, which shall be
furnished by the Division of Liquor Control and which shall read substantially
as follows:
   WARNING TO PERSONS UNDER AGE
   If you are under the age of 21
Under the statutes of the State of Ohio, if you order, pay for, share the cost
of, or attempt to purchase, or possess or consume beer or intoxicating liquor
in any public place, or furnish false information as to name, age, or other
identification, you are subject to a fine of up to $1,000, or imprisonment up
to 6 months, or both.
   If you are under the age of 18
Under the statutes of the State of Ohio, if you order, pay for, share the cost
of, or attempt to purchase, or posses or consume, any type of beer or wine that
contains either no alcohol or less than one-half of one per cent of alcohol by
volume in any public place, or furnish false information as to the name, age,
or other identification, you are subject to a fine of up to $250 or to
imprisonment up to 30 days, or both.
      (2)   No person shall be subject to any criminal prosecution or any
proceedings before the Department or the Liquor Control Commission for failing
to display this card.  No permit issued by the Department shall be suspended,
revoked, or canceled because of the failure of the permit holder to display
this card.
   (b)   (1)   Every place in this municipality for which a D permit has been
issued under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4303 shall be issued a printed card by the
Division of Liquor Control that shall read substantially as follows:
   WARNING
   If you are carrying a firearm
Under the statutes of Ohio, if you possess a firearm in any room in which
liquor is being dispensed in premises for which a D permit has been issued
under Chapter 4303 of the Revised Code, you may be guilty of a felony and may
be subjected to a prison term of up to one year.
      (2)   No person shall be subject to any criminal prosecution or any
proceedings before the Division of Liquor Control or the Liquor Control
Commission for failing to display this card.  No permit issued by the
Department shall be suspended, revoked, or canceled because of the failure of
the permit holder to display this card.
(ORC 4301.637)
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4301.70, 4301.99(A))
§ 612.07  OPEN CONTAINER PROHIBITED.
   (a)   As used in this section:
      (1)   “Chauffeured limousine” means a vehicle registered under Ohio R.C.
4503.24.
      (2)   “Street,” “highway,” and “motor vehicle” have the same meanings as
in Ohio R.C. 4511.01.
   (b)   No person shall have in the person's possession an opened container of
beer or intoxicating liquor in any of the following circumstances:
      (1)   Except as provided in division (c)(1)E. of this section, in a state
liquor store;
      (2)   Except as provided in division (c) of this section, on the premises
of the holder of any permit issued by the Division of Liquor Control;
      (3)   In any other public place;
      (4)   Except as provided in division (d) or (e) of this section, while
operating or being a passenger in or on a motor vehicle on any street, highway,
or other public or private property open to the public for purposes of
vehicular travel or parking;
      (5)   Except as provided in division (d) or (e) of this section, while
being in or on a stationary motor vehicle on any street, highway, or other
public or private property open to the public for purposes of vehicular travel
or parking.
   (c)   (1)   A person may have in the person’s possession an opened container
of any of the following:
         A.   Beer or intoxicating liquor that has been lawfully purchased for
consumption on the premises where bought from the holder of an A-1-A, A-2, A-
2f, A-3a, D-1, D-2, D-3, D-3a, D-4, D-4a, D-5, D-5a, D-5b, D-5c, D-5d, D-5e, D-
5f, D-5g, D-5h, D-5i, D-5j, D-5k, D-5l, D-5m, D-5n, D-5o, D-7, D-8, E, F, F-2,
F-5, F-7, or F-8 permit;
         B.   Beer, wine, or mixed beverages served for consumption on the
premises by the holder of an F-3 permit, wine served as a tasting sample by an
A-2 permit holder, or S permit holder for consumption on the premises of a
farmers market for which an F-10 permit has been issued, or wine served for
consumption on the premises by the holder of an F-4 or F-6 permit;
         C.   Beer or intoxicating liquor consumed on the premises of a
convention facility as provided in Ohio R.C. 4303.201;
         D.   Beer or intoxicating liquor to be consumed during tastings and
samplings approved by rule of the Liquor Control Commission;
         E.   Spiritous liquor to be consumed for purposes of a tasting sample,
as defined in Ohio R.C. 4301.171.
      (2)   A person may have in the person’s possession on an F liquor permit
premises an opened container of beer or intoxicating liquor that was not
purchased from the holder of the F permit if the premises for which the F
permit is issued is a music festival and the holder of the F permit grants
permission for that possession on the premises during the period for which the
F permit is issued.  As used in this division (c)(2), “music festival” means a
series of outdoor live musical performances extending for a period of at least
three consecutive days and located on an area of land of at least 40 acres.
      (3)   A.   A person may have in the person’s possession on a D-2 liquor
permit premises an opened or unopened container of wine that was not purchased
from the holder of the D-2 permit if the premises for which the D-2 permit is
issued is an outdoor performing arts center, the person is attending an
orchestral performance, and the holder of the D-2 permit grants permission for
the possession and consumption of wine in certain predesignated areas of the
premises during the period for which the D-2 permit is issued.
         B.   As used in division (c)(3)A. of this section:
            1.   “Orchestral performance” means a concert comprised of a group
of not fewer than 40 musicians playing various musical instruments.
            2.   “Outdoor performing arts center” means an outdoor performing
arts center that is located on not less than 150 acres of land and that is open
for performances from the first day of April to the last day of October of each
year.
      (4)   A person may have in the person's possession an opened or unopened
container of beer or intoxicating liquor at an outdoor location at which the
person is attending an orchestral performance as defined in division (c)(3)B.1.
of this section if the person with supervision and control over the performance
grants permission for the possession and consumption of beer or intoxicating
liquor in certain predesignated areas of that outdoor location.
      (5)   A.   A person may have in the person’s possession on an F-9 liquor
permit premises an opened or unopened container of beer or intoxicating liquor
that was not purchased from the holder of the F-9 permit if the person is
attending an orchestral performance and the holder of the F-9 permit grants
permission for the possession and consumption of beer or intoxicating liquor in
certain predesignated areas of the premises during the period for which the F-
9 permit is issued.
         B.   As used in division (c)(5) of this section, “orchestral
performance” has the same meaning as in division (c)(3)B. of this section.
      (6)   A.   A person may have in the person’s possession on the property
of an outdoor motorsports facility an opened or unopened container of beer or
intoxicating liquor that was not purchased from the owner of the facility if
both of the following apply:
            1.   The person is attending a racing event at the facility; and
            2.   The owner of the facility grants permission for the possession
and consumption of beer or intoxicating liquor on the property of the facility.
         B.   As used in division (c)(6)A. of this section:
            1.   “Outdoor motorsports facility.” An outdoor racetrack to which
all of the following apply:
               a.   It is 2.4 miles or more in length.
               b.   It is located on 200 acres or more of land.
               c.   The primary business of the owner of the facility is the
hosting and promoting of racing events.
               d.   The holder of a D-1, D-2, or D-3 permit is located on the
property of the facility.
            2.   “Racing event.” A motor vehicle racing event sanctioned by one
or more motor racing sanctioning organizations.
      (7)   A.   A person may have in the person’s possession an opened
container of beer or intoxicating liquor at an outdoor location within an
outdoor refreshment area created under Ohio R.C. 4301.82 if the opened
container of beer or intoxicating liquor was purchased from an A-1, A-1-A, A-
1c, A-2, A-2f, D class, or F class permit holder to which both of the following
apply:
            1.   The permit holder’s premises is located within the outdoor
refreshment area.
            2.   The permit held by the permit holder has an outdoor
refreshment area designation.
         B.   Division (c)(7) of this section does not authorize a person to do
either of the following:
            1.   Enter the premises of an establishment within an outdoor
refreshment area while possessing an opened container of beer or intoxicating
liquor acquired elsewhere;
            2.   Possess an opened container of beer or intoxicating liquor
while being in or on a motor vehicle within an outdoor refreshment area, unless
the motor vehicle is stationary and is not being operated in a lane of
vehicular travel or unless the possession is otherwise authorized under
division (d) or (e) of this section.
         C.   As used in division (c)(7) of this section, “D class permit
holder” does not include a D-6 or D-8 permit holder.
      (8)   A.   A person may have in the person’s possession on the property
of a market, within a defined F-8 permit premises, an opened container of beer
or intoxicating liquor that was purchased from a D permit premises that is
located immediately adjacent to the market if both of the following apply:
            1.   The market grants permission for the possession and
consumption of beer and intoxicating liquor within the defined F-8 permit
premises;
            2.   The market is hosting an event pursuant to an F-8 permit and
the market has notified the division of liquor control about the event in
accordance with R.C. § 4303.208(A)(3).
         B.   As used in division (c)(8) of this section, “market” means a
market, for which an F-8 permit is held, that has been in operation since 1860.
   (d)   This section does not apply to a person who pays all or a portion of
the fee imposed for use of a chauffeured limousine pursuant to a prearranged
contract or the guest of the person, when all of the following apply:
      (1)   The person or guest is a passenger in the limousine.
      (2)   The person or guest is located in the limousine, but is not
occupying a seat in the front compartment of the limousine where the operator
of the limousine is located.
      (3)   The limousine is located on any street, highway, or other public or
private property open to the public for purposes of vehicular travel or
parking.
   (e)   An opened bottle of wine that was purchased from the holder of a
permit that authorizes the sale of wine for consumption on the premises where
sold is not an opened container for the purposes of this section if both of the
following apply:
      (1)   The opened bottle of wine is securely resealed by the permit holder
or an employee of the permit holder before the bottle is removed from the
premises. The bottle shall be secured in such a manner that it is visibly
apparent if the bottle has been subsequently opened or tampered with.
      (2)   The opened bottle of wine that is resealed in accordance with
division (e)(1) of this section is stored in the trunk of a motor vehicle or,
if the motor vehicle does not have a trunk, behind the last upright seat or in
an area not normally occupied by the driver or passengers and not easily
accessible by the driver.
(ORC 4301.62)
   (f)   (1)   Except if an ordinance or resolution is enacted or adopted under
division (f)(2) of this section, this section does not apply to a person who,
pursuant to a prearranged contract, is a passenger riding on a commercial
quadricycle when all of the following apply:
         A.   The person is not occupying a seat in the front of the commercial
quadricycle where the operator is steering or braking.
         B.   The commercial quadricycle is being operated on a street,
highway, or other public or private property open to the public for purposes of
vehicular travel or parking.
         C.   The person has in their possession on the commercial quadricycle
an opened container of beer or wine.
         D.   The person has in their possession on the commercial quadricycle
not more than either 36 ounces of beer or 18 ounces of wine.
      (2)   The Legislative Authority may enact an ordinance or adopt a
resolution, as applicable, that prohibits a passenger riding on a commercial
quadricycle from possessing an opened container of beer or wine.
      (3)   As used in this section, “commercial quadricycle” means a vehicle
that has fully-operative pedals for propulsion entirely by human power and that
meets all of the following requirements:
         A.   It has four wheels and is operated in a manner similar to a
bicycle.
         B.   It has at least five seats for passengers.
         C.   It is designed to be powered by the pedaling of the operator and
the passengers.
         D.   It is used for commercial purposes.
         E.   It is operated by the vehicle owner or an employee of the owner.
   (g)   (1)   This section does not apply to a person that has in the person’s
possession an opened container of beer or intoxicating liquor on the premises
of a market if the beer or intoxicating liquor has been purchased from a D
liquor permit holder that is located in the market.
      (2)   As used in division (g) of this section, “market” means an
establishment that:
         A.   Leases space in the market to individual vendors, not less than
50% of which are retail food establishments or food service operations licensed
under R.C. Chapter 3717;
         B.   Has an indoor sales floor area of not less than 22,000 square
feet;
         C.   Hosts a farmer’s market on each Saturday from April through
December.
(ORC 4301.62)
   (h)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4301.99(A))
§ 612.08  HOURS OF SALE OR CONSUMPTION.
   (a)   This section shall apply to the retail sale of beer, wine, mixed
beverages, or spirituous liquor.
   (b)   No beer, wine, mixed beverages, or spirituous liquor shall be sold or
delivered by an A-1, A-1C, A-2, B-1, B-2, B-4, B-5, C-1, C-2, C-2X, D-1, D-2,
D-2X, D-3 when issued without a D-3A, D-3X, D-4, D-5H, D-5K, D-8, F, F-1, F-2,
F-3, F-4, F-5, F-6, F-7, F-8, F-9, G, or I permit holder:
      (1)   From Monday to Saturday between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 5:30
a.m.
      (2)   On Sunday between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and Sunday midnight,
unless statutorily authorized otherwise.
      (3)   Consumption of beer, wine, mixed beverages, or spirituous liquor is
also prohibited during the above hours upon the premises of the above permit
holders who are authorized by their permit to sell beer, wine, mixed beverages,
or spirituous liquor for on-premises consumption.
   (c)   No beer, wine, mixed beverages, or spirituous liquor shall be sold or
delivered by an A-1A, D-3 when issued with a D-3A, D-4A, D-5, D-5A, D-5B, D-5C,
D-5D, D-5E, D-5F, D-5G, D-5I, D-5J, D-5L, D-5M, D-5N, D-5O, or D-7 permit
holder:
      (1)   From Monday to Saturday between the hours of 2:30 a.m. and 5:30
a.m.
      (2)   On Sunday between the hours of 2:30 a.m. and Sunday midnight,
unless statutorily authorized otherwise.
      (3)   Consumption of beer, wine, mixed beverages, or spirituous liquor is
also prohibited during the above hours upon the premises of the above permit
holders who are authorized by their permit to sell beer, wine, mixed beverages,
or spirituous liquor for on-premises consumption.
   (d)   Permit holders authorized to sell beer, wine, mixed beverages, or
spirituous liquor at retail who are not specifically identified in divisions
(b) or (c) above shall be subject to the provisions of division (b), unless
statutorily authorized otherwise.
   (e)   The hours on Sunday during which sales, delivery, or consumption of
alcoholic beverages may take place are established by statute, but in no event
shall they begin prior to 5:30 a.m.
(OAC 4301:1-1-49)
   (f)   No association, corporation, local unit of an association or
corporation, or D permit holder who holds an F-2 permit shall sell beer or
intoxicating liquor beyond the hours of sale allowed by the permit. This
division imposes strict liability on the holder of such permit and on any
officer, agent or employee of such permit holder.
(ORC 4303.202(D)(2))
   (g)   No F-8 permit holder shall sell beer or intoxicating liquor beyond the
hours of sale allowed by the permit.  This division imposes strict liability on
the holder of an F-8 permit and on any officer, agent or employee of that
permit holder.
(ORC 4303.208(C))
   (h)   Whoever violates divisions (f) or (g) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(ORC 4303.99(D))
§ 612.09  CONVEYING INTOXICATING LIQUOR OR CASH ONTO GROUNDS OF DETENTION
FACILITIES OR OTHER SPECIFIED GOVERNMENTAL FACILITIES.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly convey, or attempt to convey, onto the
grounds of a detention facility or of an institution, office building or other
place that is under the control of the Department of Mental Health and
Addiction Services, the Department of Developmental Disabilities, the
Department of Youth Services or the Department of Rehabilitation and
Correction, any of the following items:
      (1)   Any deadly weapon or dangerous ordnance, as defined in Ohio R.C.
2923.11, or any part of or ammunition for use in the deadly weapon or dangerous
ordnance.
      (2)   Any drug of abuse, as defined in Ohio R.C. 3719.011.
      (3)   Any intoxicating liquor, as defined in Ohio R.C. 4301.01.
   (b)   Division (a) of this section does not apply to any person who conveys
or attempts to convey an item onto the grounds of a detention facility or of an
institution, office building or other place under the control of the Department
of Mental Health and Addiction Services, the Department of Developmental
Disabilities, the Department of Youth Services or the Department of
Rehabilitation and Correction, with written authorization of the person in
charge of the detention facility or the institution and in accordance with the
written rules of the detention facility or the institution, office building or
other place.
   (c)   No person shall knowingly deliver, or attempt to deliver, to any
person who is confined in a detention facility, to a child confined in a youth
services facility, to a prisoner who is temporarily released from confinement
for a work assignment, or to any patient in an institution under the control of
the Department of Mental Health and Addiction Services, or the Department of
Developmental Disabilities, any item listed in division (a).
   (d)   No person shall knowingly deliver or attempt to deliver cash to any
person who is confined in a detention facility, to a child confined in a youth
services facility, or to a prisoner who is temporarily released from
confinement for a work assignment.
   (e)   No person shall knowingly deliver, or attempt to deliver, to any
person who is confined in a detention facility, to a child confined in a youth
services facility, or to a prisoner who is temporarily released from
confinement for a work assignment a cellular telephone, two-way radio or other
electronic communications device.
   (f)   (1)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (a)(1)
of this section that the weapon or dangerous ordnance in question was being
transported in a motor vehicle for any lawful purpose, that it was not on the
actor’s person, and if the weapon or dangerous ordnance was a firearm, that it
was unloaded and was being carried in a closed package, box or case or in a
compartment that can be reached only by leaving the vehicle.
      (2)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (c) of this
section that the actor was not otherwise prohibited by law from delivering the
item to the confined person, the child, the prisoner or the patient and that
either of the following applies:
         A.   The actor was permitted by the written rules of the detention
facility or the institution, office building or other place to deliver the item
to the confined person or the patient.
         B.   The actor was given written authorization by the person in charge
of the detention facility or the institution, office building or other place to
deliver the item to the confined person or the patient.
   (g)   (1)   Whoever violates division (a)(1) of this section or commits a
violation of division (c) of this section involving any item listed in division
(a)(1) of this section is guilty of illegal conveyance of weapons onto the
grounds of a specified governmental facility, a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (a)(2) of this section or commits a
violation of division (c) of this section involving any drug of abuse is guilty
of illegal conveyance of drugs of abuse onto the grounds of a specified
governmental facility, a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (3)   Whoever violates division (a)(3) of this section or commits a
violation of division (c) of this section involving any intoxicating liquor is
guilty of illegal conveyance of intoxicating liquor onto the grounds of a
specified governmental facility, a misdemeanor of the second degree.
      (4)   Whoever violates division (d) of this section is guilty of illegal
conveyance of cash onto the grounds of a detention facility, a misdemeanor of
the first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of division (d) of this section or a substantially
equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, illegal conveyance of cash onto
the grounds of a detention facility is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
      (5)   Whoever violates division (e) of this section is guilty of illegal
conveyance of a communications device onto the grounds of a specified
governmental facility, a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender
previously has been convicted or pleaded guilty to a violation of division (e)
of this section or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance,
illegal conveyance of a communications device onto the grounds of a detention
facility is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(ORC 2921.36)
§ 612.10  SALES OF LOW-ALCOHOL BEVERAGES TO UNDERAGE PERSONS; PROHIBITIONS AND
MISREPRESENTATIONS.
   (a)   As used in this section, “underage person” means a person under 18
years of age.
   (b)   No underage person shall purchase any low-alcohol beverage.
   (c)   No underage person shall order, pay for, share the cost of, or attempt
to purchase any low-alcohol beverage.
   (d)   No person shall knowingly furnish any false information as to the
name, age, or other identification of any underage person for the purpose of
obtaining or with the intent to obtain any low-alcohol beverage for an underage
person, by purchase or as a gift.
   (e)   No underage person shall knowingly show or give false information
concerning his or her name, age, or other identification for the purpose of
purchasing or otherwise obtaining any low-alcohol beverage in any place in this
municipality.
   (f)   No person shall sell or furnish any low-alcohol beverage to, or buy
any low-alcohol beverage for, an underage person, unless given by a physician
in the regular line of his or her practice or given for established religious
purposes, or unless the underage person is accompanied by a parent, spouse who
is not an underage person, or legal guardian.
   (g)   (1)   No person who is the owner or occupant of any public or private
place shall knowingly allow any underage person to remain in or on the place
while possessing or consuming any low-alcohol beverage, unless the low-alcohol
beverage is given to the person possessing or consuming it by that person’s
parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal guardian, and the
parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal guardian is present when
the person possesses or consumes the low-alcohol beverage.
      (2)   An owner of a public or private place is not liable for acts or
omissions in violation of division (g)(1) that are committed by a lessee of
that place, unless the owner authorizes or acquiesces in the lessee’s acts or
omissions.
   (h)   No permit issued by the Division of Liquor Control shall be suspended,
revoked, or cancelled because of a violation of either division (f) or (g).
   (i)   No underage person shall knowingly possess or consume any low-alcohol
beverage in any public or private place, unless he or she is accompanied by a
parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal guardian, or unless the
low-alcohol beverage is given by a physician in the regular line of his or her
practice or given for established religious purposes.
   (j)   No parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal guardian of
an underage person shall knowingly permit the underage person to violate this
section.
(ORC 4301.631)
   (k)   No low-alcohol beverage shall be sold to any person under 18 years of
age.
(ORC 4301.22(A)(2))
   (l)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section shall be fined not less
than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
The court imposing a fine for a violation of division (b) of this section may
order that the fine be paid by the performance of public work at a reasonable
hour rate established by the court.  The court shall designate the time within
which the public work shall be completed.
(ORC 4301.99(E))
   (m)   Whoever violates divisions (c) through (k) hereof is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(ORC 4301.99(B))
§ 612.11  ALCOHOL VAPORIZING DEVICES PROHIBITED.
   (a)   As used in this section, “alcohol vaporizing device” means a machine
or other device that mixes beer or intoxicating liquor with pure oxygen or any
other gas to produce a vaporized product for the purpose of consumption by
inhalation.
   (b)   No person shall sell or offer for sale an alcohol vaporizing device.
   (c)   No person shall purchase or use an alcohol vaporizing device.
(ORC 4301.65)
   (d)   (1)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of
misdemeanor of the third degree. For a second or subsequent violation occurring
within a period of five consecutive years after the first violation, a person
is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(ORC 4301.99(J))
      (2)   Whoever violates division (c) of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
(ORC 4301.99(A))
CHAPTER 618:  ANIMALS
Section
618.01   Dogs and other animals running at large; dangerous and vicious dogs.
618.02   Abandoning animals.
618.03   Killing or injuring animals.
618.04   Poisoning animals.
618.05   Cruelty to animals; cruelty to companion animals.
618.06   Coloring rabbits and baby poultry; sale or display of poultry.
618.07   Barking or howling dogs.
618.08   Registration of dogs required.
618.09   Hindering capture of unregistered dog.
618.095   Dogs required to wear tags.
618.10   Unlawful tags.
618.11   Rabies quarantine.
618.12   Hunting prohibited.
618.13   Nuisance conditions prohibited.
618.14   Impounding and disposition; records.
618.15   (Reserved)
618.16   Removal of defecation from public or private property.
618.17   Dangerous, wild or undomesticated animals.
618.18   Sexual conduct with an animal.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   See section histories for similar state law
   Power to restrain and impound animals - see Ohio R.C. 715.23
   Possession of dangerous wild animals and restricted snakes, requirements and
licensing - see Ohio R.C. Chapter 935
   Driving animals upon roadway - see TRAF.
404.05,
412.05
   Definitions generally - see GEN. OFF.
606.01
   Assaulting police dog or horse or handicapped assistance dog - see GEN. OFF.
642.12
   Noxious odors; filthy accumulations; polluting and diverting watercourses - 
see GEN. OFF.
660.04
§ 618.01  DOGS AND OTHER ANIMALS RUNNING AT LARGE; DANGEROUS AND VICIOUS DOGS.
   (a)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   “Dangerous dog” is defined as follows:
         A.   “Dangerous dog” means a dog that, without provocation, and
subject to division (a)(1)B. hereof, has chased or approached in either a
menacing fashion or an apparent attitude of attack, or has attempted to bite or
otherwise endanger any person while that dog is off the premises of its owner,
keeper or harborer and not under the reasonable control of its owner, keeper,
harborer or some other responsible person, or not physically restrained or
confined in a locked pen which has a top, locked fenced yard, or other locked
enclosure which has a top.
         B.   “Dangerous dog” does not include a police dog that has chased or
approached in either a menacing fashion or an apparent attitude of attack, or
has attempted to bite or otherwise endanger any person while the police dog is
being used to assist one or more law enforcement officers in the performance of
their official duties.
      (2)   “Menacing fashion.”  A dog that would cause any person being chased
or approached to reasonably believe that the dog will cause physical injury to
that person.
      (3)   “Police dog.”  A dog that has been trained and may be used to
assist one or more law enforcement officers in the performance of their
official duties.
      (4)   “Vicious dog.”
         A.   A dog that, without provocation and subject to division (a)(4)B.
hereof, meets any of the following requirements:
            1.   Has killed or caused serious injury to any person;
            2.   Has caused injury, other than killing or serious injury, to
any person, or has killed another dog; or
            3.   Belongs to a breed that is commonly known as a pit bull dog. 
The ownership, keeping, or harboring of such a breed of dog shall be prima
facie evidence of the ownership, keeping or harboring of a vicious dog.
         B.   “Vicious dog” does not include either of the following:
            1.   A police dog that has killed or caused serious injury to any
person or that has caused injury, other than killing or serious injury, to any
person while the police dog is being used to assist one or more law enforcement
officers in the performance of their official duties.
            2.   A dog that has killed or caused serious injury to any person
while a person was committing or attempting to commit a trespass or other
criminal offense on the property of the owner, keeper or harborer of the dog.
      (5)   “Without provocation” means that a dog was not teased, tormented,
or abused by a person, or that the dog was not coming to the aid or the defense
of a person who was not engaged in illegal or criminal activity and who was not
using the dog as a means of carrying out such activity.
   (b)   No person who is the owner, keeper, or harborer of any animal,
including a dog, shall permit it to run at large upon any public property,
including, without limitation, sidewalks and streets, or upon the premises of
another without the permission of the owner of said premises.
   (c)   No owner, keeper or harborer of any dog shall permit it to go beyond
the premises of the owner, keeper or harborer unless the dog is confined in a
travel cage or is on a leash, cord or tether which is controlled by a person of
such age, size and discretion that he is capable of preventing the dog from
approaching any person or other animal in a menacing fashion.
   (d)   No owner, keeper, or harborer of any dog shall fail at any time to
keep it either physically confined or restrained upon the premises of the
owner, keeper or harborer by a leash, tether, adequate fence, supervision, or
secure enclosure to prevent escape, or under reasonable control of a person of
such age, size and discretion that he is capable of preventing the dog from
approaching any person or other animal in a menacing fashion.
   (e)   No owner, keeper or harborer of a dangerous or vicious dog shall fail
to do either of the following, except when the dog is lawfully engaged in
hunting or training for the purpose of hunting, accompanied by the owner,
keeper, harborer or a handler:
      (1)   While that dog is on the premises of the owner, keeper or harborer,
securely confine it at all times in a locked pen which has a top, locked fenced
yard or other locked enclosure which has a top, except that a dangerous dog
may, in the alternative, be tied with a leash or tether so that the dog is
adequately restrained;
      (2)   While that dog is off the premises of the owner, keeper or
harborer, keep it on a chain-link leash or tether that is not more than six
feet in length and additionally do at least one of the following:
         A.   Keep that dog in a locked pen which has a top, locked fenced yard
or other locked enclosure which has a top;
         B.   Have the leash or tether controlled by a person who is of
suitable age and discretion or securely attach, tie or affix the leash or
tether to the ground or a stationary object or fixture so that the dog is
adequately restrained and station such a person in close enough proximity to
that dog so as to prevent it from causing injury to any person; and/or
         C.   Muzzle that dog.
   (f)   No owner, keeper or harborer of a vicious dog shall fail to obtain
liability insurance with an insurer authorized to write liability insurance in
this state providing coverage in each occurrence, subject to a limit, exclusive
of interest and costs, of not less than one hundred thousand dollars
($100,000.00) because of damage or bodily injury to or death of a person caused
by the vicious dog.
   (g)   The running at large of any such animal in or upon any of the places
mentioned in this section is prima-facie evidence that it is running at large
in violation of this section.
   (h)   Whoever violates division (b) or (c) hereof is guilty of a misdemeanor
of the fourth degree and shall be subject to the penalty provided in §
698.02.
   (i)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of division (d) hereof shall be
fined not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than one hundred
dollars ($100.00) for a first offense. For each subsequent offense, such person
shall be fined not less than seventy-five dollars ($75.00) nor more than two
hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) and may be imprisoned for not more than 30
days.
   (j)   In addition to the penalties prescribed in subsection (i) hereof, if
the offender is guilty of a violation of division (c) or (d) hereof, the court
may order the offender to personally supervise the dog that he or she owns,
keeps or harbors, to cause that dog to complete dog obedience training, or to
do both.
   (k)   If a violation of division (e) hereof involves a dangerous dog,
whoever violates that division is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree
on a first offense and of a misdemeanor of the third degree on each subsequent
offense and shall be subject to the penalty provided in §
698.02. Additionally, the court may order the offender to personally supervise
the dangerous dog that he or she owns, keeps or harbors, to cause that dog to
complete dog obedience training, or to do both, and the court may order the
offender to obtain reasonable and appropriate liability insurance.  The court,
in the alternative, may order the dangerous dog to be humanely destroyed by a
licensed veterinarian, the County Dog Warden or the County Humane Society.
   (l)   If a violation of division (e) hereof involves a vicious dog, whoever
violates that division is guilty of one of the following:
      (1)   A felony of the fourth degree on a first or subsequent offense if
the dog kills or seriously injures a person. Prosecution shall be made under
Ohio R.C. 955.22(D) and the penalty shall be as provided in Ohio R.C. 2929.11.
Additionally, the court shall order that the vicious dog be humanely destroyed
by a licensed veterinarian, the County Dog Warden or the County Humane Society.
      (2)   A misdemeanor of the first degree on a first offense and a felony
of the fourth degree on each subsequent offense. Prosecution for the
misdemeanor shall be under this section and the penalty shall be as provided in
§
698.02. Prosecution for the felony shall be under Ohio R.C. 955.22(D) and the
penalty shall be as provided in Ohio R.C. 2929.11. Additionally, the court may
order the vicious dog to be humanely destroyed by a licensed veterinarian, the
County Dog Warden or the County Humane Society.
      (3)   A misdemeanor of the first degree if the dog causes injury, other
than killing or serious injury, to any person. The penalty shall be as provided
in §
698.02.
   (m)   Whoever violates division (f) hereof is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
first degree and shall be subject to the penalty provided in §
698.02.
(Ord. 08-O-2463, passed 5-6-2008)
Statutory reference:
   Confining restraining debarking dogs, see Ohio R.C. 955.22
   Definitions, see Ohio R.C. 955.11
   Penalties, see Ohio R.C. 951.99, 955.99
§ 618.02  ABANDONING ANIMALS.
   (a)   No owner or keeper of a dog, cat, or other domestic animal shall
abandon the animal.
(ORC 959.01)
   (b)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the second degree on a first offense and a misdemeanor of the
first degree on each subsequent offense.
(ORC 959.99(E)(2))
§ 618.03  KILLING OR INJURING ANIMALS.
   (a)   No person shall maliciously, or willfully and without the consent of
the owner, kill or injure a dog, cat, or any other domestic animal that is the
property of another.  This section does not apply to a licensed veterinarian
acting in an official capacity.
(ORC 959.02)
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (a) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree. 
If the value of the animal killed or the injury done amounts to three hundred
dollars ($300.00) or more, whoever violates division (a) of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(ORC 959.99(B))  (Ord. 83-O-680, passed 6-21-1983)
§ 618.04  POISONING ANIMALS.
   (a)   No person shall maliciously, or willfully and without the consent of
the owner, administer poison, except a licensed veterinarian acting in such
capacity, to a  dog, cat, or any other domestic animal that is the property of
another; and no person shall, willfully and without the consent of the owner,
place any poisoned food where it may be easily found and eaten by any such
animal, either upon his or her own lands or the lands of another.
(ORC 959.03)
   (b)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(ORC 959.99(C))
§ 618.05  CRUELTY TO ANIMALS; CRUELTY TO COMPANION ANIMALS.
   (a)   No person shall:
      (1)   Torture an animal, deprive one of necessary sustenance,
unnecessarily or cruelly beat, needlessly mutilate or kill, or impound or
confine an animal without supplying it during the confinement with a sufficient
quantity of good wholesome food and water;
      (2)   Impound or confine an animal without affording it, during the
confinement, access to shelter from wind, rain, snow, or excessive direct
sunlight, if it can reasonably be expected that the animal would otherwise
become sick or in some other way suffer.  This division does not apply to
animals impounded or confined prior to slaughter.  For the purpose of this
section, “shelter” means an artificial enclosure, windbreak, sunshade, or
natural windbreak or sunshade that is developed from the earth’s contour, tree
development, or vegetation;
      (3)   Carry or convey an animal in a cruel or inhuman manner;
      (4)   Keep animals other than cattle, poultry or fowl, swine, sheep, or
goats in an enclosure without wholesome exercise and change of air, nor feed
cows on food that produces impure or unwholesome milk;
      (5)   Detain livestock in railroad cars or compartments longer than 28
hours after they are so placed without supplying them with necessary food,
water, and attention, nor permit the stock to be so crowded as to overlie,
crush, wound, or kill each other.
   (b)   Upon the written request of the owner or person in custody of any
particular shipment of livestock, which written request shall be separate and
apart from any printed bill of lading or other railroad form, the length of
time in which the livestock may be detained in any cars or compartment without
food, water, and attention may be extended to 36 hours without penalty
therefor.  Division (a) of this section does not prevent the dehorning of
cattle.
   (c)   All fines collected for violations of division (a) of this section
shall be paid to the society or association for the prevention of cruelty to
animals, if there is one in the municipality; otherwise, all fines shall be
paid to the general fund.
(ORC 959.13)
   (d)   Cruelty to companion animals.
      (1)   As used in this section:
         A.   “Boarding kennel” has the same meaning as in R.C. § 956.01.
         B.   “Captive white-tailed deer” has the same meaning as in R.C. §
1531.01.
         C.   “Companion animal” means any animal that is kept inside a
residential dwelling and any dog or cat regardless of where it is kept,
including a pet store as defined in R.C. § 956.01.  “Companion animal” does not
include livestock or any wild animal.
         D.   “Cruelty” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 1717.01.
         E.   “Dog kennel” means an animal rescue for dogs that is registered
under R.C. § 956.06, a boarding kennel, or a training kennel.
         F.   “Federal Animal Welfare Act” means the “Laboratory Animal Act of
1966,” Pub. L. No. 89-544, 80 Stat. 350 (1966), 7 U.S.C. 2131 et seq., as
amended by the “Animal Welfare Act of 1970,” Pub. L. No. 91-579, 84 Stat. 1560
(1970), the “Animal Welfare Act Amendments of 1976,” Pub. L. No. 94-279, 90
Stat. 417 (1976), and the “Food Security Act of 1985,” Pub. L. No. 99-198, 99
Stat. 1354 (1985), and as it may be subsequently amended.
         G.   “Livestock” means horses, mules, and other equidae; cattle,
sheep, goats, and other bovidae; swine and other suidae; poultry; alpacas;
llamas; captive white-tailed deer; and any other animal that is raised or
maintained domestically for food or fiber.
         H.   “Practice of veterinary medicine” has the same meaning as in Ohio
R.C. 4741.01.
         I.   “Residential dwelling” means a structure or shelter or the
portion of a structure or shelter that is used by one or more humans for the
purpose of a habitation.
         J.   “Serious physical harm” means any of the following:
            1.   Physical harm that carries an unnecessary or unjustifiable
substantial risk of death;
            2.   Physical harm that involves either partial or total permanent
incapacity;
            3.   Physical harm that involves acute pain of a duration that
results in substantial suffering or that involves any degree of prolonged or
intractable pain;
            4.   Physical harm that results from a person who confines or who
is the custodian or caretaker of a companion animal depriving the companion
animal of good, wholesome food and water that proximately causes the death of
the companion animal.
         K.   “Torment” has the same meaning as in R.C. § 1717.01.
         L.   “Torture” has the same meaning as in R.C. § 1717.01.
         M.   “Wild animal” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 1531.01.
      (2)   No person shall knowingly torture, torment, needlessly mutilate or
maim, cruelly beat, poison, needlessly kill, or commit an act of cruelty
against a companion animal.
      (3)   No person shall knowingly cause serious physical harm to a
companion animal.
      (4)   No person who confines or who is the custodian or caretaker of a
companion animal shall negligently do any of the following:
         A.   Torture, torment, or commit an act of cruelty against the
companion animal;
         B.   Deprive the companion animal of necessary sustenance or confine
the companion animal without supplying it during the confinement with
sufficient quantities of good, wholesome food and water if it can reasonably be
expected that the companion animal would become sick or suffer in any other way
as a result of or due to the deprivation or confinement;
         C.   Impound or confine the companion animal without affording it,
during the impoundment or confinement, with access to shelter from heat, cold,
wind, rain, snow, or excessive direct sunlight if it can reasonably be expected
that the companion animal would become sick or suffer in any other way as a
result of or due to the lack of adequate shelter.
      (5)   No owner, manager, or employee of a dog kennel who confines or is
the custodian or caretaker of a companion animal shall knowingly do any of the
following:
         A.   Torture, torment, needlessly mutilate or maim, cruelly beat,
poison, needlessly kill, or commit an act of cruelty against the companion
animal;
         B.   Deprive the companion animal of necessary sustenance or confine
the companion animal without supplying it during the confinement with
sufficient quantities of good, wholesome food and water if it is reasonably
expected that the companion animal would die or experience unnecessary or
unjustifiable pain or suffering as a result of the deprivation or confinement;
         C.   Impound or confine the companion animal without affording it,
during the impoundment or confinement, with access to shelter from heat, cold,
wind, rain, snow, or excessive direct sunlight if it is reasonably expected
that the companion animal would die or experience unnecessary or unjustifiable
pain or suffering as a result of or due to the lack of adequate shelter.
      (6)   No owner, manager, or employee of a dog kennel who confines or is
the custodian or caretaker of a companion animal shall negligently do any of
the following:
         A.   Torture, torment, or commit an act of cruelty against the
companion animal;
         B.   Deprive the companion animal of necessary sustenance or confine
the companion animal without supplying it during the confinement with
sufficient quantities of good, wholesome food and water if it can reasonably be
expected that the companion animal would become sick or suffer in any other way
as a result of or due to the deprivation or confinement;
         C.   Impound or confine the companion animal without affording it,
during the impoundment or confinement, with access to shelter from heat, cold,
wind, rain, snow, or excessive direct sunlight if it can reasonably be expected
that the companion animal would become sick or suffer in any other way as a
result of or due to the lack of adequate shelter.
      (7)   Divisions (d)(2), (d)(3), (d)(4), (d)(5), and (d)(6) of this
section do not apply to any of the following:
         A.   A companion animal used in scientific research conducted by an
institution in accordance with the federal animal welfare act and related
regulations;
         B.   The lawful practice of veterinary medicine by a person who has
been issued a license, temporary permit, or registration certificate to do so
under R.C. Chapter 4741;
         C.   Dogs being used or intended for use for hunting or field trial
purposes, provided that the dogs are being treated in accordance with usual and
commonly accepted practices for the care of hunting dogs;
         D.   The use of common training devices, if the companion animal is
being treated in accordance with usual and commonly accepted practices for the
training of animals;
         E.   The administering of medicine to a companion animal that was
properly prescribed by a person who has been issued a license, temporary
permit, or registration certificate under R.C. Chapter 4741.
      (8)   Notwithstanding any section of the Ohio Revised Code that otherwise
provides for the distribution of fine moneys, the Clerk of Court shall forward
all fines the Clerk collects that are so imposed for any violation of this
division (d) to the Treasurer of the municipality, whose county humane society
or law enforcement agency is to be paid the fine money as determined under this
division. The Treasurer shall pay the fine moneys to the county humane society
or the county, township, municipal corporation, or state law enforcement agency
in this state that primarily was responsible for or involved in the
investigation and prosecution of the violation. If a county humane society
receives any fine moneys under this division, the county humane society shall
use the fine moneys either to provide the training that is required for humane
agents under R.C. § 1717.06 or to provide additional training for humane
agents.
(ORC 959.131)
   (e)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the second degree.  In addition, the court may order the
offender to forfeit the animal or livestock and may provide for its disposition
including, but not limited to, the sale of the animal or livestock.  If an
animal or livestock is forfeited and sold pursuant to this division, the
proceeds from the sale first shall be applied to pay the expenses incurred with
regard to the care of the animal from the time it was taken from the custody of
the former owner.  The balance of the proceeds from the sale, if any, shall be
paid to the former owner of the animal.
(ORC 959.99(D))
   (f)   (1)   Whoever violates division (d)(2) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree on a first offense and a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law on each subsequent offense.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (d)(3) of this section is guilty of a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (3)   Whoever violates division (d)(4) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the second degree on a first offense and a misdemeanor of the
first degree on each subsequent offense.
      (4)   Whoever violates division (d)(5) of this section is guilty of a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (5)   Whoever violates division (d)(6) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (6)   A.   A court may order a person who is convicted of or pleads
guilty to a violation of division (d) of this section to forfeit to an
impounding agency, as defined in Ohio R.C. 959.132, any or all of the companion
animals in that person’s ownership or care.  The court also may prohibit or
place limitations on the person’s ability to own or care for any companion
animals for a specified or indefinite period of time.
         B.   A court may order a person who is convicted of or pleads guilty
to a violation of division (d) of this section to reimburse an impounding
agency for the reasonably necessary costs incurred by the agency for the care
of a companion animal that the agency impounded as a result of the
investigation or prosecution of the violation, provided that the costs were not
otherwise paid under Ohio R.C. 959.132.
      (7)   If a court has reason to believe that a person who is convicted of
or pleads guilty to a violation of division (d) of this section suffers from a
mental or emotional disorder that contributed to the violation, the court may
impose as a community control sanction or as a condition of probation a
requirement that the offender undergo psychological evaluation or counseling.
The court shall order the offender to pay the costs of the evaluation or
counseling.
(ORC 959.99(E))
Statutory reference:
   Impoundment of companion animals; notice and hearing, see Ohio R.C. 959.132
§ 618.06  COLORING RABBITS AND BABY POULTRY; SALE OR DISPLAY OF POULTRY.
   (a)   No person shall dye or otherwise color any rabbit or baby poultry,
including, but not limited to, chicks and ducklings.  No person shall sell,
offer for sale, expose for sale, raffle or give away any rabbit or baby poultry
which has been dyed or otherwise colored.  No poultry younger than four weeks
of age may be sold, given away or otherwise distributed to any person in lots
of less than six.  Stores, shops, vendors and others offering young poultry for
sale or other distribution shall provide and operate brooders or other heating
devices that may be necessary to maintain poultry in good health, and shall
keep adequate food and water available to the poultry at all times.
(ORC 925.62)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree on a first offense; each subsequent offense is a misdemeanor of the
third degree.
(ORC 925.99(B))
§ 618.07  BARKING OR HOWLING DOGS.
   (a)   No person shall own, harbor or keep in custody a dog which disturbs
the peace by barking, yelping, howling or making other loud noises to the
annoyance and/or discomfort of any person. Continuous barking, yelping, howling
and/or making other loud noises for 15 consecutive minutes by such dog, whether
confined inside a residence or building or to the outside area, shall be deemed
to have disturbed the peace and to have caused the annoyance and discomfort of
persons; provided, that at the time of the complaint, no person or persons were
trespassing or threatening to trespass upon the private property of the owner,
and provided that the dog was not being teased or provoked in any manner.
   (b)   Any person who shall allow any dog habitually to remain, be lodged or
fed within any dwelling, building, yard or enclosure owned or occupied by such
person shall be considered as harboring or keeping such dog.
   (c)   Upon an initial complaint, an enforcement officer shall warn the
person in writing of the violation. Upon a second such complaint within 30
days, the enforcement officer shall charge the person with a violation of this
section.
   (d)   Division (a) of this section does not apply to owners, operators or
employees of licensed veterinary hospitals, licensed kennels, or licensed
animal boarding establishments, nor does this section apply to blind, deaf or
hearing impaired, or mobility impaired persons when the dog serves as an
assistance dog.
   (e)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
§ 618.08  REGISTRATION OF DOGS REQUIRED.
   (a)   No owner, keeper, or harborer of a dog more than three months of age,
nor owner of a dog kennel, shall fail to file an application for registration
required by Ohio R.C. 955.01, nor shall he or she fail to pay the legal fee
therefor.
(ORC 955.21)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not less than twenty-five
dollars ($25.00) nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) on a first
offense, and on each subsequent offense shall be fined not less than seventy-
five dollars ($75.00) nor more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) and may
be imprisoned for not more than 30 days.
(ORC 955.99(E))
§ 618.09  HINDERING CAPTURE OF UNREGISTERED DOG.
   (a)   No person shall obstruct or interfere with anyone lawfully engaged in
capturing an unlicensed dog or making an examination of a dog wearing a tag.
(ORC 955.24)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 955.99(B))
§ 618.095  DOGS REQUIRED TO WEAR TAGS.
   (a)   No owner of a dog, except a dog constantly confined to a dog kennel
registered under Ohio R.C. Chapter 955 or one licensed under Ohio R.C. Chapter
956, shall fail to require the dog to wear, at all times, a valid tag issued in
connection with a certificate of registration. A dog found not wearing at any
time a valid tag shall be prima-facie evidence of lack of registration and
shall subject any dog found not wearing such a tag to impounding, sale, or
destruction.
(ORC 955.10)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 955.99(B))
§ 618.10  UNLAWFUL TAGS.
   (a)   No person shall own, keep, or harbor a dog wearing a fictitious,
altered, or invalid registration tag or a registration tag not issued by the
County Auditor in connection with the registration of that animal.
(ORC 955.25)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 955.99(B))
§ 618.11  RABIES QUARANTINE.
   (a)   No person having knowledge of the existence of rabies in an animal, or
knowledge that an animal has exhibited symptoms or behavior suggestive of
rabies, or knowledge that an animal has bitten any person, shall fail to
immediately report such information to the Mayor or the Chief of Police.
   (b)   Whenever it is established by the Mayor or Chief of Police that any
animal has bitten any person or exhibits symptoms or behavior suggestive of
rabies, the person who owns, harbors or otherwise cares for such animal shall
confine it in close quarantine and isolation or shall place such animal in the
establishment of a veterinarian until, in either case, it is determined by the
County Board of Health that the animal is not afflicted with rabies. The
isolation and quarantine period hereby required shall be not less than ten days
from the date the person was bitten. If the animal has, or develops, any
symptoms suspicious of rabies during the ten-day period, the County Board of
Health shall be notified immediately. All expenses incurred for the keeping of
such animal, or the necessary tests to determine whether rabies exists, shall
be borne exclusively by the person who owns, harbors or otherwise cares for
such animal.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
§ 618.12  HUNTING PROHIBITED.
   (a)   The hunting of animals or fowl within the municipality is prohibited.
No person shall hunt, kill or attempt to kill any animal or fowl by the use of
firearms or any other means. However, nothing in this section shall be deemed
to prohibit the killing of rats and other undesirable rodents authorized to be
killed by the Chief of Police using means for such killing which are also
authorized by the Chief.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
§ 618.13  NUISANCE CONDITIONS PROHIBITED.
   (a)   No person shall keep or harbor any animal or fowl in the municipality
so as to create noxious or offensive odors or unsanitary conditions which are a
menace to the health, comfort or safety of the public.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
§ 618.14  IMPOUNDING AND DISPOSITION; RECORDS.
   (a)   A police officer or animal warden may impound every dog or other
animal found in violation of §
618.01. If the impounded dog is not wearing a valid registration tag, the dog
shall forthwith be turned over to an officer charged by law with the custody
and disposal of such dogs. If the dog is wearing a valid registration tag or
the identity of the owner or harborer is otherwise established, notice shall
immediately be given to such owner or harborer that the dog has been impounded.
Notice may be by telephone or by ordinary mail to the last known address of
such owner or harborer. The dog shall not be released except upon the payment
of reasonable expenses for its taking and keeping. Any dog not redeemed within
three days of the time it is seized or impounded may be sold or otherwise
disposed of as provided by Ohio R.C. 955.16.
   (b)   A record of all dogs impounded, the disposition of the same, the
owner’s name and address, if known, and a statement of any costs or receipts
involving such dog shall be kept.
§ 618.15  (RESERVED)
§ 618.16  REMOVAL OF DEFECATION FROM PUBLIC OR PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   (a)   No person, being the owner of or having charge of any dog, whether or
not wearing a registration tag, shall permit such dog to defecate upon any
public place or upon the premises of another.
   (b)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (a) hereof
that the person being the owner of or having charge of any dog that has
defecated upon any public place or upon the premises of another has, within a
reasonable time after becoming aware of such defecation, removed such
defecation and deposited the same in an appropriate trash container or other
lawfully suitable place.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor and
shall be subject to the penalty provided in §
698.02.
(Ord. 83-O-668, passed 5-3-1983)
§ 618.17  DANGEROUS, WILD OR UNDOMESTICATED ANIMALS.
   (a)   No person shall harbor, maintain or control a wild, dangerous or
undomesticated animal in the municipality.
   (b)   A wild, dangerous or undomesticated animal shall be an animal which is
not an ordinary household pet, but one which would ordinarily be confined to a
zoo, which would ordinarily be found in the wilderness of this or any other
country, or which otherwise causes a reasonable person to be fearful of bodily
harm or property damage.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree and shall be subject to the penalty provided in §
698.02.  A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on
which a violation occurs or continues.
(Ord. 86-O-913, passed 9-16-1986)
§ 618.18  SEXUAL CONDUCT WITH AN ANIMAL.
   (a)   As used in this section:
      (1)   “Animal” means a nonhuman mammal, bird, reptile, or amphibian,
either dead or alive.
      (2)   “Offense” means a violation of this section or an attempt, in
violation of R.C. § 2923.02, to violate this section.
      (3)   “Officer” has the same meaning as in R.C. § 959.132.
      (4)   “Sexual conduct” means either of the following committed for the
purpose of sexual gratification:
         A.   Any act done between a person and animal that involves contact of
the penis of one and the vulva of the other, the penis of one and the penis of
the other, the penis of one and the anus of the other, the mouth of one and the
penis of the other, the mouth of one and the anus of the other, the vulva of
one and the vulva of the other, the mouth of one and the vulva of the other,
any other contact between a reproductive organ of one and a reproductive organ
of the other, or any other insertion of a reproductive organ of one into an
orifice of the other;
         B.   Without a bona fide veterinary or animal husbandry purpose to do
so, the insertion, however slight, of any part of a person's body or any
instrument, apparatus, or other object into the vaginal, anal, or reproductive
opening of an animal.
   (b)   No person shall knowingly engage in sexual conduct with an animal or
knowingly possess, sell, or purchase an animal with the intent that it be
subjected to sexual conduct.
   (c)   No person shall knowingly organize, promote, aid, or abet in the
conduct of an act involving any sexual conduct with an animal.
   (d)   An officer may seize and cause to be impounded at an impounding agency
an animal that the officer has probable cause to believe is the subject of an
offense. With respect to an animal so seized and impounded, all procedures and
requirements that are established in R.C. § 959.132, and all other provisions
of that section, apply to the seizure, impoundment, and disposition of the
animal. References in R.C. § 959.132 to “section 959.131 of the Revised Code,”
“companion animal,” and “offense” shall be construed, respectively, as being
references to “§ 618.18 of this Code” and to “animal” and “offense” as defined
in this section, for purposes of application under this section only.
(R.C. § 959.21)
   (e)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
second degree. In addition, the court may order the offender to forfeit the
animal or livestock and may provide for its disposition including but not
limited to the sale of the animal or livestock. If an animal or livestock is
forfeited and sold pursuant to this division, the proceeds from the sale first
shall be applied to pay the expenses incurred with regard to the care of the
animal from the time it was taken from the custody of the former owner. The
balance of the proceeds from the sale, if any, shall be paid to the former
owner of the animal.
(R.C. § 959.99(D))
      (2)   If a court has reason to believe that a person who is convicted of
or pleads guilty to a violation of this section suffers from a mental or
emotional disorder that contributed to the violation, the court may impose as a
community control sanction or as a condition of probation a requirement that
the offender undergo psychological evaluation or counseling. The court shall
order the offender to pay the costs of the evaluation or counseling.
(R.C. § 959.99(E)(7))
CHAPTER 624:  DRUGS
Section
624.01   Definitions.
624.02   Trafficking in controlled substances; gift of marihuana.
624.025   Cultivation of marihuana.
624.03   Drug possession offenses.
624.04   Possession of drug abuse instruments.
624.05   Permitting drug abuse.
624.06   Use or possession of paraphernalia.
624.07   Abusing harmful intoxicants.
624.073   Improperly dispensing or distributing nitrous oxide.
624.076   Possessing nitrous oxide in motor vehicles.
624.08   Illegal dispensing of drug samples.
624.09   Counterfeit controlled substances.
624.10   Controlled substance or prescription labels.
624.11   Possession, sale and disposal of hypodermics.
624.12   Evidence.
624.13   Double jeopardy.
624.14   Controlled substance schedules.
624.15   Pseudoephedrine sales.
624.16   Prohibiting medical marijuana cultivation, processors and retail
dispensaries within the city.
624.17   Sale of pure caffeine product.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   See section histories for similar state law
   Treatment of drug dependent persons in lieu of conviction - see Ohio R.C.
2951.041
   Intoxicated pedestrians - see TRAF.
416.10
   Driving or physical control while under the influence - see TRAF.
434.01
   Alcoholic beverages - see GEN. OFF.
Ch. 612
   Placing harmful substance or objects in food or confection - see GEN. OFF.
636.17
   Disorderly conduct while voluntarily intoxicated - see GEN. OFF.
648.04
   Using weapons while intoxicated - see GEN. OFF.
678.03
§ 624.01  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. Words,
terms and phrases and their derivatives used in this chapter which are not
defined in this section shall have the meanings given to them in the Ohio
Revised Code.
   (a)   “Administer.”  Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 3719.01.
   (b)   “Adulterate.”  To cause a drug to be adulterated as described in Ohio
R.C. 3715.63.
   (c)   “Bulk amount.”  Of a controlled substance means any of the following:
      (1)   For any compound, mixture, preparation, or substance included in
Schedule I, Schedule II, or Schedule III, with the exception of any controlled
substance analog, marihuana, cocaine, L.S.D., heroin, any fentanyl-related
compound, and hashish and except as provided in division (2), (5), or (6) of
this definition, whichever of the following is applicable:
      (1)   For any compound, mixture, preparation, or substance included in
Schedule I, Schedule II or Schedule III, with the exception of controlled
substance analogs, marihuana, cocaine, L.S.D., heroin, and hashish and except
as provided in division (2) or (5) of this definition, whichever of the
following is applicable:
         A.   An amount equal to or exceeding 10 grams or 25 unit doses of a
compound, mixture, preparation, or substance that is or contains any amount of
a Schedule I opiate or opium derivative;
         B.   An amount equal to or exceeding 10 grams of a compound, mixture,
preparation, or substance that is or contains any amount of raw or gum opium;
         C.   An amount equal to or exceeding 30 grams or 10 unit doses of a
compound, mixture, preparation, or substance that is or contains any amount of
a Schedule I hallucinogen other than tetrahydrocannabinol or lysergic acid
amide, or a Schedule I stimulant or depressant;
         D.   An amount equal to or exceeding 20 grams or 5 times the maximum
daily dose in the usual dose range specified in a standard pharmaceutical
reference manual of a compound, mixture, preparation, or substance that is or
contains any amount of a Schedule II opiate or opium derivative;
         E.   An amount equal to or exceeding 5 grams or 10 unit doses of a
compound, mixture, preparation, or substance that is or contains any amount of
phencyclidine;
         F.   An amount equal to or exceeding 120 grams or 30 times the maximum
daily dose in the usual dose range specified in a standard pharmaceutical
reference manual of a compound, mixture, preparation, or substance that is or
contains any amount of a Schedule II stimulant that is in a final dosage form
manufactured by a person authorized by the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act
(21 U.S.C. 301 et seq., as amended) and the federal drug abuse control laws, as
defined in this section, that is or contains any amount of a Schedule II
depressant substance or a Schedule II hallucinogenic substance;
         G.   An amount equal to or exceeding 3 grams of a compound, mixture,
preparation, or substance that is or contains any amount of a Schedule II
stimulant, or any of its salts or isomers, that is not in a final dosage form
manufactured by a person authorized by the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act
(21 U.S.C. 301 et seq., as amended) and the federal drug abuse control laws;
      (2)   An amount equal to or exceeding 120 grams or 30 times the maximum
daily dose in the usual dose range specified in a standard pharmaceutical
reference manual of a compound, mixture, preparation, or substance that is or
contains any amount of a Schedule III or IV substance other than an anabolic
steroid or a Schedule III opiate or opium derivative;
      (3)   An amount equal to or exceeding 20 grams or 5 times the maximum
daily dose in the usual dose range specified in a standard pharmaceutical
reference manual of a compound, mixture, preparation, or substance that is or
contains any amount of a Schedule III opiate or opium derivative;
      (4)   An amount equal to or exceeding 250 milliliters or 250 grams of a
compound, mixture, preparation, or substance that is or contains any amount of
a Schedule V substance;
      (5)   An amount equal to or exceeding 200 solid dosage units, 16 grams,
or 16 milliliters of a compound, mixture, preparation, or substance that is or
contains any amount of a Schedule III anabolic steroid;
      (6)   For any compound, mixture, preparation, or substance that is a
combination of a fentanyl-related compound and any other compound, mixture,
preparation, or substance included in Schedule III, Schedule IV, or Schedule V,
if the defendant is charged with a violation of Ohio R.C. 2925.11 and the
sentencing provisions set forth in Ohio R.C. 2925.11(C)(10)(b) and (C)(11) will
not apply regarding the defendant and the violation, the bulk amount of the
controlled substance for purposes of the violation is the amount specified in
division (1), (2), (3), (4), or (5) of this definition for the other Schedule
III, Schedule IV, or Schedule V controlled substance that is combined with the
fentanyl-related compound.
   (d)   “Certified grievance committee.”  A duly constituted and organized
committee of the Ohio State Bar Association or of one or more local bar
associations of the state that complies with the criteria set forth in Rule V,
Section 6 of the Rules for the Government of the Bar of Ohio.
   (e)   “Cocaine.”  Any of the following:
      (1)   A cocaine salt, isomer, or derivative, a salt of a cocaine isomer
or derivative, or the base form of cocaine.
      (2)   Coca leaves or a salt, compound, derivative, or preparation of coca
leaves, including ecgonine, a salt, isomer, or derivative of ecgonine, or a
salt of an isomer or derivative of ecgonine.
      (3)   A salt, compound, derivative, or preparation of a substance
identified in division (1) or (2) of this definition that is chemically
equivalent to or identical with any of those substances, except that the
substances shall not include decocainized coca leaves or extraction of coca
leaves if the extractions do not contain cocaine or ecgonine.
   (f)   “Committed in the vicinity of a juvenile.”  An offense is “committed
in the vicinity of a juvenile” if the offender commits the offense within 100
feet of a juvenile or within the view of a juvenile, regardless of whether the
offender knows the age of the juvenile, whether the offender knows the offense
is being committed within 100 feet of or within view of the juvenile, or
whether the juvenile actually views the commission of the offense.
   (g)   “Committed in the vicinity of a school.”  An offense is “committed in
the vicinity of a school” if the offender commits the offense on school
premises, in a school building, or within 1,000 feet of the boundaries of any
school premises, regardless of whether the offender knows the offense is being
committed on school premises, in a school building, or within 1,000 feet of the
boundaries of any school premises.
   (h)   “Controlled substance.” Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 3719.01.
   (i)   “Controlled substance analog.”Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C.
3719.01.
   (j)   “Counterfeit controlled substance.”  Any of the following:
      (1)   Any drug that bears, or whose container or label bears, a
trademark, trade name, or other identifying mark used without authorization of
the owner of rights to the trademark, trade name, or identifying mark.
      (2)   Any unmarked or unlabeled substance that is represented to be a
controlled substance manufactured, processed, packed, or distributed by a
person other than the person that manufactured, processed, packed, or
distributed it.
      (3)   Any substance that is represented to be a controlled substance but
is not a controlled substance or is a different controlled substance.
      (4)   Any substance other than a controlled substance that a reasonable
person would believe to be a controlled substance because of its similarity in
shape, size, and color, or its markings, labeling, packaging, distribution, or
the price for which it is sold or offered for sale.
   (k)   “Cultivate.”  Includes planting, watering, fertilizing or tilling.
   (l)   “Dangerous drug.”  Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 4729.01.
   (m)   “Deception.”  Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2913.01.
   (n)   “Disciplinary counsel.” The disciplinary counsel appointed by the
Board of Commissioners on Grievances and Discipline of the Ohio Supreme Court
under the Rules for the Government of the Bar of Ohio.
   (o)   “Dispense.”  Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 3719.01.
   (p)   “Distribute.”  Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 3719.01.
   (q)   “Drug.”  Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 4729.01.
   (r)   “Drug abuse offense.”  Any of the following:
      (1)   A violation of Ohio R.C. 2913.02(A) that constitutes theft of
drugs, or any violation of Ohio R.C. 2925.02, 2925.03, 2925.04, 2925.041,
2925.05, 2925.06, 2925.11, 2925.12, 2925.13, 2925.22, 2925.23, 2925.24,
2925.31, 2925.32, 2925.36, or 2925.37.
      (2)   A violation of an existing or former law of any municipality,
state, or of the United States, that is substantially equivalent to any section
listed in division (1) of this definition.
      (3)   An offense under an existing or former law of any municipality,
state, or of the United States, of which planting, cultivating, harvesting,
processing, making, manufacturing, producing, shipping, transporting,
delivering, acquiring, possessing, storing, distributing, dispensing, selling,
inducing another to use, administering to another, using, or otherwise dealing
with a controlled substance is an element.
      (4)   A conspiracy to commit, attempt to commit, or complicity in
committing or attempting to commit, any offense under division (1), (2), or (3)
of this definition.
   (s)   “Drug dependent person.”  Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C.
3719.011.
   (t)   “Drug of abuse.”  Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 3719.011.
   (u)   “Felony drug abuse offense.”  Any drug abuse offense that would
constitute a felony under the laws of this state, any other state, or the
United States.
   (v)   “Fentanyl-related compound.” Any of the following:
      (1)   Fentanyl;
      (2)   Alpha-methylfentanyl (N-[1-(alpha-methyl-beta-phenyl)ethyl-4-
piperidyl] propionanilide; 1-(1-methyl-2-phenylethyl)-4-(N-propanilido)
piperidine);
      (3)   Alpha-methylthiofentanyl (N-[1-methyl-2-(2-thienyl)ethyl-4-
piperidinyl]-N- phenylpropanamide);
      (4)   Beta-hydroxyfentanyl (N-[1-(2-hydroxy-2-phenethyl-4-piperidinyl]-N-
phenylpropanamide);
      (5)   Beta-hydroxy-3-methylfentanyl (other name: N-[1-(2-hydroxy-2-
phenethyl)-3- methyl-4-piperidinyl]-N-phenylpropanamide);
      (6)   3-methylfentanyl (N-[3-methyl-1-(2-phenylethyl)-4-piperidyl]-N-
phenylpropanamide);
      (7)   3-methylthiofentanyl (N-[3-methyl-1-[2-(thienyl)ethyl]-4-
piperidinyl]-N- phenylpropanamide);
      (8)   Para-fluorofentanyl (N-(4-fluorophenyl)-N-[1-(2-phenethyl)-4-
piperidinyl]propanamide;
      (9)   Thiofentanyl (N-phenyl-N-[1-(2-thienyl)ethyl-4-piperidinyl]-
propanamide;
      (10)   Alfentanil;
      (11)   Carfentanil;
      (12)   Remifentanil;
      (13)   Sufentanil;
      (14)   Acetyl-alpha-methylfentanyl (N-[1-(1-methyl-2-phenethyl)-4-
piperidinyl]-N- phenylacetamide); and
      (15)   Any compound that meets all of the following fentanyl
pharmacophore requirements to bind at the mu receptor, as identified by a
report from an established forensic laboratory, including acetylfentanyl,
furanylfentanyl, valerylfentanyl, butyrylfentanyl, isobutyrylfentanyl, 4-
methoxybutyrylfentanyl, para-fluorobutyrylfentanyl, acrylfentanyl, and ortho-
fluorofentanyl:
         A.   A chemical scaffold consisting of both of the following:
            1.   A five, six, or seven member ring structure containing a
nitrogen, whether or not further substituted;
            2.   An attached nitrogen to the ring, whether or not that nitrogen
is enclosed in a ring structure, including an attached aromatic ring or other
lipophilic group to that nitrogen.
         B.   A polar functional group attached to the chemical scaffold,
including but not limited to a hydroxyl, ketone, amide, or ester;
         C.   An alkyl or aryl substitution off the ring nitrogen of the
chemical scaffold; and
         D.   The compound has not been approved for medical use by the United
States food and drug administration.
   (w)   “Harmful intoxicant.”  Does not include beer or intoxicating liquor,
but means any of the following:
      (1)   Any compound, mixture, preparation, or substance the gas, fumes, or
vapor of which when inhaled can induce intoxication, excitement, giddiness,
irrational behavior, depression, stupefaction, paralysis, unconsciousness,
asphyxiation, or other harmful physiological effects, and includes but is not
limited to any of the following:
         A.   Any volatile organic solvent, plastic cement, model cement,
fingernail polish remover, lacquer thinner, cleaning fluid, gasoline, or other
preparation containing a volatile organic solvent.
         B.   Any aerosol propellant.
         C.   Any fluorocarbon refrigerant.
         D.   Any anesthetic gas.
      (2)   Gamma Butyrolactone;
      (3)   1,4 Butanediol.
   (x)   “Hashish.”  The resin or a preparation of the resin contained in
marihuana, whether in solid form or in a liquid concentrate, liquid extract, or
liquid distillate form.
   (y)   “Hypodermic.”  Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 3719.01.
   (z)   “Juvenile.”  A person under 18 years of age.
   (aa)   “Licensed health professional authorized to prescribe drugs.”  Has
the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 4729.01.
   (bb)   “L.S.D.”  Lysergic acid diethylamide.
   (cc)   “Major drug offender.”  Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2929.01.
   (dd)   “Mandatory prison term.”  Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C.
2929.01.
   (ee)   “Manufacture.”  To plant, cultivate, harvest, process, make, prepare,
or otherwise engage in any part of the production of a drug, by propagation,
extraction, chemical synthesis, or compounding, or any combination of the same,
and includes packaging, repackaging, labeling, and other activities incident to
production.
   (ff)   “Manufacturer.”  Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 3719.01.
   (gg)   “Marihuana.”  Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 3719.01, except
that it does not include hashish.
   (hh)   “Methamphetamine.” Methamphetamine, any salt, isomer, or salt of an
isomer of methamphetamine, or any compound, mixture, preparation, or substance
containing methamphetamine or any salt, isomer, or salt of an isomer of
methamphetamine.
   (ii)   “Minor drug possession offense.”  Either of the following:
      (1)   A violation of Ohio R.C. 2925.11 as it existed prior to July 1,
1996, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
      (2)   A violation of Ohio R.C. 2925.11 as it exists on and after July 1,
1996, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, that is a misdemeanor
or a felony of the fifth degree.
   (jj)   “Official written order.”  Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C.
3719.01.
   (kk)   “Person.”  Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 3719.01.
   (ll)   “Pharmacist.”  Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 3719.01.
   (mm)   “Pharmacy.”  Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 3719.01.
   (nn)   “Possess” or “possession.”  Having control over a thing or substance
but may not be inferred solely from mere access to the thing or substance
through ownership or occupation of the premises upon which the thing or
substance is found.
   (oo)   “Prescription.”  Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 4729.01.
   (pp)   “Presumption for a prison term” or “presumption that a prison term
shall be imposed.”  A presumption as described in Ohio R.C. 2929.13(D) that a
prison term is a necessary sanction for a felony in order to comply with the
purposes and principles of sentencing under Ohio R.C. 2929.11.
   (qq)   “Professional license.”  Any license, permit, certificate,
registration, qualification, admission, temporary license, temporary permit,
temporary certificate, or temporary registration that is described in Ohio R.C.
2925.01(W)(1) to (36) and that qualifies a person as a professionally licensed
person.
   (rr)   “Professionally licensed person.”  Any of the following:
      (1)   A person who has received a certificate or temporary certificate as
a certified public accountant or who has registered as a public accountant
under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4701 and who holds an Ohio permit issued under that
chapter;
      (2)   A person who holds a certificate of qualification to practice
architecture issued or renewed and registered under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4703;
      (3)   A person who is registered as a landscape architect under Ohio R.C.
Chapter 4703 or who holds a permit as a landscape architect issued under that
chapter;
      (4)   A person licensed under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4707;
      (5)   A person who has been issued a certificate of registration as a
registered barber under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4709;
      (6)   A person licensed and regulated to engage in the business of a debt
pooling company by a legislative authority, under authority of Ohio R.C.
Chapter 4710;
      (7)   A person who has been issued a cosmetologist’s license, hair
designer’s license, manicurist’s license, esthetician’s license, natural hair
stylist’s license, advanced cosmetologist’s license, advanced hair designer’s
license, advanced manicurist’s license, advanced esthetician’s license,
advanced natural hair stylist’s license, cosmetology instructor’s license, hair
design instructor’s license, manicurist instructor’s license, esthetics
instructor’s license, natural hair style instructor’s license, independent
contractor’s license, or tanning facility permit under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4713;
      (8)   A person who has been issued a license to practice dentistry, a
general anesthesia permit, a conscious sedation permit, a limited resident’s
license, a limited teaching license, a dental hygienist’s license or a dental
hygienist’s teacher’s certificate under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4715;
      (9)   A person who has been issued an embalmer’s license, a funeral
director’s license, a funeral home license, or a crematory license, or who has
been registered for an embalmer’s or funeral director’s apprenticeship under
Ohio R.C. Chapter 4717;
      (10)   A person who has been licensed as a registered nurse or practical
nurse, or who has been issued a certificate for the practice of nurse-midwifery
under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4723;
      (11)   A person who has been licensed to practice optometry or to engage
in optical dispensing under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4725;
      (12)   A person licensed to act as a pawnbroker under Ohio R.C. Chapter
4727;
      (13)   A person licensed to act as a precious metals dealer under Ohio
R.C. Chapter 4728;
      (14)   A person licensed under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4729 as a pharmacist or
pharmacy intern or registered under that chapter as a registered pharmacy
technician, certified pharmacy technician, or pharmacy technician trainee;
      (15)   A person licensed under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4729 as a manufacturer
of dangerous drugs, outsourcing facility, third-party logistics provider,
repackager of dangerous drugs, wholesale distributor of dangerous drugs, or
terminal distributor of dangerous drugs;
      (16)   A person who is authorized to practice as a physician assistant
under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4730;
      (17)   A person who has been issued a certificate to practice medicine
and surgery, osteopathic medicine and surgery, a limited branch of medicine, or
podiatry under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4731;
      (18)   A person licensed as a psychologist or school psychologist under
Ohio R.C. Chapter 4732;
      (19)   A person registered to practice the profession of engineering or
surveying under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4733;
      (20)   A person who has been issued a license to practice chiropractic
under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4734;
      (21)   A person licensed to act as a real estate broker or real estate
salesperson under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4735;
      (22)   A person registered as a registered sanitarian under Ohio R.C.
Chapter 4736;
      (23)   A person licensed to operate or maintain a junkyard under Ohio
R.C. Chapter 4737;
      (24)   A person who has been issued a motor vehicle salvage dealer’s
license under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4738;
      (25)   A person who has been licensed to act as a steam engineer under
Ohio R.C. Chapter 4739;
      (26)   A person who has been issued a license or temporary permit to
practice veterinary medicine or any of its branches, or who is registered as a
graduate animal technician under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4741;
      (27)   A person who has been issued a hearing aid dealer’s or fitter’s
license or trainee permit under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4747;
      (28)   A person who has been issued a class A, class B, or class C
license or who has been registered as an investigator or security guard
employee under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4749;
      (29)   A person licensed and registered to practice as a nursing home
administrator under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4751;
      (30)   A person licensed to practice as a speech-language pathologist or
audiologist under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4753;
      (31)   A person issued a license as an occupational therapist or physical
therapist under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4755;
      (32)   A person who is licensed as a licensed professional clinical
counselor, licensed professional counselor, social worker, independent social
worker, independent marriage and family therapist, or marriage and family
therapist, or registered as a social work assistant under R.C. Chapter 4757;
      (33)   A person issued a license to practice dietetics under Ohio R.C.
Chapter 4759;
      (34)   A person who has been issued a license or limited permit to
practice respiratory therapy under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4761;
      (35)   A person who has been issued a real estate appraiser certificate
under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4763;
      (36)   A person who has been issued a home inspector license under Ohio
R.C. Chapter 4764;
      (37)   A person who has been admitted to the bar by order of the Ohio
Supreme Court in compliance with its prescribed and published rules.
   (ss)   “Public premises.” Any hotel, restaurant, tavern, store, arena, hall,
or other place of public accommodation, business, amusement, or resort.
   (tt)   “Sale.” Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 3719.01.
   (uu)   “Sample drug.”  A drug or pharmaceutical preparation that would be
hazardous to health or safety if used without the supervision of a licensed
health professional authorized to prescribe drugs, or a drug of abuse, and
that, at one time, had been placed in a container plainly marked as a sample by
a manufacturer.
   (vv)   “Schedule I”, “Schedule II”, “Schedule III”, “Schedule IV” or
“Schedule V.” Have the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. § 3719.01.
   (ww)   “School.”  Any school operated by a board of education, any community
school established under Ohio R.C. Chapter 3314, or any nonpublic school for
which the State Board of Education prescribes minimum standards under Ohio R.C.
3301.07, whether or not any instruction, extracurricular activities, or
training provided by the school is being conducted at the time a criminal
offense is committed.
   (xx)   “School building.”  Any building in which any of the instruction,
extracurricular activities, or training provided by a school is conducted,
whether or not any instruction, extracurricular activities, or training
provided by the school is being conducted in the school building at the time a
criminal offense is committed.
   (yy)   “School premises.”  Either of the following:
      (1)   The parcel of real property on which any school is situated,
whether or not any instruction, extracurricular activities, or training
provided by the school is being conducted on the premises at the time a
criminal offense is committed.
      (2)   Any other parcel of real property that is owned or leased by a
board of education of a school, the governing authority of a community school
established under Ohio R.C. Chapter 3314, or the governing body of a nonpublic
school for which the State Board of Education prescribes minimum standards
under Ohio R.C. 3301.07 and on which some of the instruction, extracurricular
activities, or training of the school is conducted, whether or not any
instruction, extracurricular activities, or training provided by the school is
being conducted on the parcel of real property at the time a criminal offense
is committed.
   (zz)   “Standard Pharmaceutical Reference Manual.”  The current edition,
with cumulative changes if any, of references that are approved by the State
Board of Pharmacy.
   (aaa)   “Unit dose.”  An amount or unit or a compound, mixture, or
preparation containing a controlled substance that is separately identifiable
and in a form that indicates that it is the amount or unit by which the
controlled substance is separately administered to or taken by an individual.
   (bbb)   “Wholesaler.”  Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 3719.01.
(ORC 2925.01)
§ 624.02  TRAFFICKING IN CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES; GIFT OF MARIHUANA.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly do any of the following:
      (1)   Sell or offer to sell a controlled substance or a controlled
substance analog;
      (2)   Prepare for shipment, ship, transport, deliver, prepare for
distribution, or distribute a controlled substance or a controlled substance
analog, when the offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe that the
controlled substance or a controlled substance analog is intended for sale or
resale by the offender or another person.
   (b)   This section does not apply to any of the following:
      (1)   Manufacturers, licensed health professionals authorized to
prescribe drugs, pharmacists, owners of pharmacies, and other persons whose
conduct is in accordance with Ohio R.C. Chapters 3719, 4715, 4723, 4729, 4730,
4731, and 4741.
      (2)   If the offense involves an anabolic steroid, any person who is
conducting or participating in a research project involving the use of an
anabolic steroid if the project has been approved by the United States Food and
Drug Administration.
      (3)   Any person who sells, offers for sale, prescribes, dispenses, or
administers for livestock or other nonhuman species an anabolic steroid that is
expressly intended for administration through implants to livestock or other
nonhuman species and approved for that purpose under the “Federal Food, Drug
and Cosmetic Act” (21 U.S.C. 301 et seq., as amended), and is sold, offered for
sale, prescribed, dispensed, or administered for that purpose in accordance
with that Act.
   (c)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of the
following:
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (c)(2) and (c)(3) of this
section, trafficking in controlled substances is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, if the offense
involves a gift of 20 grams or less of marihuana, trafficking in marihuana is a
minor misdemeanor upon a first offense and a misdemeanor of the third degree
upon a subsequent offense.  If the offense involves a gift of 20 grams or less
of marihuana and if the offense was committed in the vicinity of a school or in
the vicinity of a juvenile, trafficking in marihuana is a misdemeanor of the
third degree.
      (3)   If the drug involved in the violation is a compound, mixture,
preparation, or substance that is a combination of a fentanyl-related compound
and marihuana, one of the following applies:
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in division (c)(3)B. of this
section, the offender is guilty of trafficking in marihuana and shall be
punished under division (c)(2) of this section. The offender is not guilty of
trafficking in a fentanyl-related compound and shall not be charged with,
convicted of, or punished under Ohio R.C. 2925.03(C)(9) for trafficking in a
fentanyl- related compound.
         B.   If the offender knows or has reason to know that the compound,
mixture, preparation, or substance that is the drug involved contains a
fentanyl-related compound, the offender is guilty of trafficking in a fentanyl-
related compound and shall be punished under Ohio R.C. 2925.03(C)(9).
   (d)   As used in this section, “drug” includes any substance that is
represented to be a drug.
(ORC 2925.03(A) - (C), (I))
Statutory reference:
   Felony drug trafficking offenses, see Ohio R.C. 2925.03(C)
§ 624.025  CULTIVATION OF MARIHUANA.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly cultivate marihuana.
   (b)   This section does not apply to any person listed in Ohio R.C. 2925.03
(B)(1), (2) or (3), or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, to the
extent and under the circumstances described in that division.
   (c)   Whoever commits a violation of division (a) of this section is guilty
of illegal cultivation of marihuana.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in the following divisions, illegal
cultivation of marihuana is a minor misdemeanor or, if the offense was
committed in the vicinity of a school or in the vicinity of a juvenile, a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
      (2)   If the amount of marihuana involved equals or exceeds 100 grams but
is less than 200 grams, illegal cultivation of marihuana is a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree or, if the offense was committed in the vicinity of a school
or in the vicinity of a juvenile, a misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (3)   If the amount of marihuana involved equals or exceeds 200 grams,
illegal cultivation of marihuana is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
   (d)   Arrest or conviction for a minor misdemeanor violation of this section
does not constitute a criminal record and need not be reported by the person so
arrested or convicted in response to any inquiries about the person’s criminal
record, including any inquiries contained in any application for employment,
license, or other right or privilege, or made in connection with the person’s
appearance as a witness.
(ORC 2925.04(A), (B), (C)(5), (G))
§ 624.03  DRUG POSSESSION OFFENSES.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly obtain, possess, or use a controlled
substance or a controlled substance analog.
   (b)   (1)   This section does not apply to any of the following:
         A.   Manufacturers, licensed health professionals authorized to
prescribe drugs, pharmacists, owners of pharmacies, and other persons whose
conduct is in accordance with R.C. Chapters 3719, 4715, 4723, 4729, 4730, 4731
and 4741.
         B.   If the offense involves an anabolic steroid, any person who is
conducting or participating in a research project involving the use of an
anabolic steroid if the project has been approved by the United States Food and
Drug Administration.
         C.   Any person who sells, offers for sale, prescribes, dispenses or
administers for livestock or other nonhuman species an anabolic steroid that is
expressly intended for administration through implants to livestock or other
nonhuman species and approved for that purpose under the Federal Food, Drug and
Cosmetic Act, and is sold, offered for sale, prescribed, dispensed or
administered for that purpose in accordance with that Act.
         D.   Any person who obtained the controlled substance pursuant to a
prescription issued by a licensed health professional authorized to prescribe
drugs if the prescription was issued for a legitimate medical purpose and not
altered, forged, or obtained through deception or commission of a theft
offense. As used in this division (b)(1)D., “deception” and “theft offense”
have the same meanings as in Ohio R.C. 2913.01.
      (2)   A.   As used in division (b)(2) of this section:
            1.   “Community addiction services provider” has the same meaning
as in R.C. § 5119.01.
            2.   “Community control sanction” has the same meanings as in R.C.
§ 2929.01.
            3.   “Drug treatment program” has the same meanings as in R.C. §
2929.01.
            4.   “Health care facility” has the same meaning as in R.C. §
2919.16.
            5.   “Minor drug possession offense” means a violation of this
section or R.C. § 2925.11 that is a misdemeanor or a felony of the fifth
degree.
            6.   “Peace officer” has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2935.01.
            7.   “Post-release control sanction” has the same meaning as in
R.C. § 2967.28.
            8.   “Public agency” has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2930.01.
            9.   “Qualified individual” means a person who is not on community
control or post-release control and is a person acting in good faith who seeks
or obtains medical assistance for another person who is experiencing a drug
overdose, a person who experiences a drug overdose and who seeks medical
assistance for that overdose, or a person who is the subject of another person
seeking or obtaining medical assistance for that overdose as described in
division (b)(2)B. of this section.
            10.   “Seek or obtain medical assistance” includes, but is not
limited to making a 9-1-1 call, contacting in person or by telephone call an
on-duty peace officer, or transporting or presenting a person to a health care
facility.
         B.   Subject to division (b)(2)F. of this section, a qualified
individual shall not be arrested, charged, prosecuted, convicted, or penalized
pursuant to this chapter for a minor drug possession offense if all of the
following apply:
            1.   The evidence of the obtaining, possession, or use of the
controlled substance or controlled substance analog that would be the basis of
the offense was obtained as a result of the qualified individual seeking the
medical assistance or experiencing an overdose and needing medical assistance.
            2.   Subject to division (b)(2)G. of this section, within 30 days
after seeking or obtaining the medical assistance, the qualified individual
seeks and obtains a screening and receives a referral for treatment from a
community addiction services provider or a properly credentialed addiction
treatment professional.
            3.   Subject to division (b)(2)G. of this section, the qualified
individual who obtains a screening and receives a referral for treatment under
division (b)(2)B.2. of this section, upon the request of any prosecuting
attorney, submits documentation to the prosecuting attorney that verifies that
the qualified individual satisfied the requirements of that division. The
documentation shall be limited to the date and time of the screening obtained
and referral received.
         C.   If a person is found to be in violation of any community control
sanction and if the violation is a result of either of the following, the court
shall first consider ordering the person’s participation or continued
participation in a drug treatment program or mitigating the penalty specified
in R.C. § 2929.13, 2929.15, or 2929.25, or any substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, whichever is applicable, after which the court has the
discretion either to order the person’s participation or continued
participation in a drug treatment program or to impose the penalty with the
mitigating factor specified in any of those applicable sections:
            1.   Seeking or obtaining medical assistance in good faith for
another person who is experiencing a drug overdose;
            2.   Experiencing a drug overdose and seeking medical assistance
for that overdose or being the subject of another person seeking or obtaining
medical assistance for that overdose as described in division (b)(2)B. of this
section.
         D.   If a person is found to be in violation of any post-release
control sanction and if the violation is a result of either of the following,
the court or the parole board shall first consider ordering the person’s
participation or continued participation in a drug treatment program or
mitigating the penalty specified in R.C. § 2929.141 or 2967.28, whichever is
applicable, after which the court or the parole board has the discretion either
to order the person’s participation or continued participation in a drug
treatment program or to impose the penalty with the mitigating factor specified
in either of those applicable sections:
            1.   Seeking or obtaining medical assistance in good faith for
another person who is experiencing a drug overdose;
            2.   Experiencing a drug overdose and seeking medical assistance
for that emergency or being the subject of another person seeking or obtaining
medical assistance for that overdose as described in division (b)(2)B. of this
section.
         E.   Nothing in division (b)(2)B. of this section shall be construed
to do any of the following:
            1.   Limit the admissibility of any evidence in connection with the
investigation or prosecution of a crime with regards to a defendant who does
not qualify for the protections of division (b)(2)B. of this section or with
regards to any crime other than a minor drug possession offense committed by a
person who qualifies for protection pursuant to division (b)(2)B. of this
section for a minor drug possession offense;
            2.   Limit any seizure of evidence or contraband otherwise
permitted by law;
            3.   Limit or abridge the authority of a peace officer to detain or
take into custody a person in the course of an investigation or to effectuate
an arrest for any offense except as provided in that division;
            4.   Limit, modify, or remove any immunity from liability available
pursuant to law in effect prior to September 13, 2016 to any public agency or
to an employee of any public agency.
         F.   Division (b)(2)B. of this section does not apply to any person
who twice previously has been granted an immunity under division (b)(2)B. of
this section. No person shall be granted an immunity under division (b)(2)B. of
this section more than two times.
         G.   Nothing in this section shall compel any qualified individual to
disclose protected health information in a way that conflicts with the
requirements of the “Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of
1996,” 104 Pub. L. No. 191, 110 Stat. 2021, 42 U.S.C. §§ 1320d et seq., as
amended, and regulations promulgated by the United States Department of Health
and Human Services to implement the act or the requirements of 42 C.F.R. Part
2.
   (c)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of one of the
following:
      (1)   If the drug involved in the violation is a compound, mixture,
preparation, or substance included in Schedule I or Schedule II, with the
exception of marihuana or hashish, whoever violates division (a) of this
section is guilty of a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   If the drug involved in the violation is a compound, mixture,
preparation, or substance included in Schedule III, Schedule IV, or Schedule V,
whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of possession of drugs.
The penalty for the offense shall be determined as follows:
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in division (c)(2)B. of this
section, possession of drugs is a misdemeanor of the first degree or, if the
offender previously has been convicted of a drug abuse offense, a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
         B.   If the amount of the drug involved equals or exceeds the bulk
amount, possession of drugs is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
      (3)   If the drug involved in the violation is marihuana or a compound,
mixture, preparation, or substance containing marihuana other than hashish,
whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of possession of
marihuana. The penalty for the offense shall be determined as follows:
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in division (c)(3)B. or (c)(3)C. of
this section, possession of marihuana is a minor misdemeanor.
         B.   If the amount of the drug involved equals or exceeds 100 grams
but is less than 200 grams, possession of marihuana is a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree.
         C.   If the amount of the drug involved equals or exceeds 200 grams,
possession of marihuana is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state
law.
      (4)   If the drug involved in the violation is hashish or a compound,
mixture, preparation, or substance containing hashish, whoever violates
division (a) of this section is guilty of possession of hashish. The penalty
for the offense shall be determined as follows:
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in division (c)(4)B. or (c)(4)C. of
this section, possession of hashish is a minor misdemeanor.
         B.   If the amount of the drug involved equals or exceeds five grams
but is less than ten grams of hashish in a solid form or equals or exceeds one
gram but is less than two grams of hashish in a liquid concentrate, liquid
extract, or liquid distillate form, possession of hashish is a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree.
         C.   If the amount of the drug involved equals or exceeds ten grams of
hashish in a solid form or equals or exceeds two grams of hashish in a liquid
concentrate, liquid extract, or liquid distillate form, possession of hashish
is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (5)   If the drug involved in the violation is a compound, mixture,
preparation, or substance that is a combination of a fentanyl-related compound
and marihuana, one of the following applies:
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in division (c)(5)B. of this
section, the offender is guilty of possession of marihuana and shall be
punished as provided in division (c)(3) of this section. Except as otherwise
provided in division (c)(5)B. of this section, the offender is not guilty of
possession of a fentanyl-related compound under Ohio R.C. 2925.11(C)(11) and
shall not be charged with, convicted of, or punished under Ohio R.C. 2925.11(C)
(11) for possession of a fentanyl-related compound.
         B.   If the offender knows or has reason to know that the compound,
mixture, preparation, or substance that is the drug involved contains a
fentanyl-related compound, the offender is guilty of possession of a fentanyl-
related compound and shall be punished under Ohio R.C. 2925.11(C)(11).
      (6)   If the drug involved in the violation is a compound, mixture,
preparation, or substance that is a combination of a fentanyl-related compound
and any Schedule III, Schedule IV, or Schedule V controlled substance that is
not a fentanyl-related compound, one of the following applies:
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in division (c)(6)B. of this
section, the offender is guilty of possession of drugs and shall be punished as
provided in division (c)(2) of this section. Except as otherwise provided in
division (c)(6)B. of this section, the offender is not guilty of possession of
a fentanyl-related compound under Ohio R.C. 2925.11(C)(11) and shall not be
charged with, convicted of, or punished under Ohio R.C. 2925.11(C)(11) for
possession of a fentanyl-related compound.
         B.   If the offender knows or has reason to know that the compound,
mixture, preparation, or substance that is the drug involved contains a
fentanyl-related compound, the offender is guilty of possession of a fentanyl-
related compound and shall be punished under Ohio R.C. 2925.11(C)(11).
   (d)   Arrest or conviction for a minor misdemeanor violation of this section
does not constitute a criminal record and need not be reported by the person so
arrested or convicted in response to any inquiries about the person’s criminal
record, including any inquiries contained in any application for employment,
license, or other right or privilege, or made in connection with the person’s
appearance as a witness.
   (e)   (1)   In addition to any prison term or jail term authorized or
required by division (c) of this section and Ohio R.C. 2929.13, 2929.14,
2929.22, 2929.24, and 2929.25, or any substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, and in addition to any other sanction that is imposed for the
offense under this section or Ohio R.C. 2929.11 through 2929.18, or Ohio R.C.
2929.21 to 2929.28, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the
court that sentences an offender who is convicted of or pleads guilty to a
violation of division (a) of this section may suspend the offender’s driver’s
or commercial driver’s license or permit for not more than five years. However,
if the offender pleaded guilty to or was convicted of a violation of R.C. §
4511.19 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance or the law of another
state or the United States arising out of the same set of circumstances as the
violation, the court shall suspend the offender’s driver’s or commercial
driver’s license or permit for not more than five years.
      (2)   If the offender is a professionally licensed person, in addition to
any other sanction imposed for a violation of this section, the court
immediately shall comply with Ohio R.C. 2925.38.
   (f)   (1)   Any offender who received a mandatory suspension of the
offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit under this section
prior to September 13, 2016 may file a motion with the sentencing court
requesting the termination of the suspension. However, an offender who pleaded
guilty to or was convicted of a violation of R.C. § 4511.19 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance or law of another state or the United States
that arose out of the same set of circumstances as the violation for which the
offender’s license or permit was suspended under this section shall not file
such a motion.
      (2)   Upon the filing of a motion under division (f) of this section, the
sentencing court, in its discretion, may terminate the suspension.
(ORC 2925.11)
Statutory reference:
   Felony drug possession offenses, see Ohio R.C. 2925.11(C)
§ 624.04  POSSESSION OF DRUG ABUSE INSTRUMENTS.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly make, obtain, possess, or use any
instrument, article, or thing the customary and primary purpose of which is for
the administration or use of a dangerous drug, other than marihuana, when the
instrument involved is a hypodermic or syringe, whether or not of crude or
extemporized manufacture or assembly, and the instrument, article, or thing
involved has been used by the offender to unlawfully administer or use a
dangerous drug, other than marihuana, or to prepare a dangerous drug, other
than marihuana, for unlawful administration or use.
   (b)   This section does not apply to manufacturers, licensed health
professionals authorized to prescribe drugs, pharmacists, owners of pharmacies,
and other persons whose conduct was in accordance with Ohio R.C. Chapters 3719,
4715, 4723, 4729, 4730, 4731, and 4741.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of possessing drug abuse
instruments, a misdemeanor of the second degree.  If the offender previously
has been convicted of a drug abuse offense, violation of this section is a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
   (d)   (1)   In addition to any other sanction imposed upon an offender for a
violation of this section, the court may suspend for not more than five years
the offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit. However, if
the offender pleaded guilty to or was convicted of a violation of R.C. §
4511.19 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance or the law of another
state or the United States arising out of the same set of circumstances as the
violation, the court shall suspend the offender’s driver’s or commercial
driver’s license or permit for not more than five years. If the offender is a
professionally licensed person, in addition to any other sanction imposed for a
violation of this section, the court immediately shall comply with R.C. §
2925.38.
      (2)   A.   Any offender who received a mandatory suspension of the
offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit under this section
prior to September 13, 2016 may file a motion with the sentencing court
requesting the termination of the suspension. However, an offender who pleaded
guilty to or was convicted of a violation of R.C. § 4511.19 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance or law of another state or the United States
that arose out of the same set of circumstances as the violation for which the
offender’s license or permit was suspended under this section shall not file
such a motion.
         B.   Upon the filing of a motion under division (d)(2) of this
section, the sentencing court, in its discretion, may terminate the suspension.
(ORC 2925.12)
§ 624.05  PERMITTING DRUG ABUSE.
   (a)   No person who is the owner, operator, or person in charge of a
locomotive, watercraft, aircraft, or other vehicle, as defined in Ohio R.C.
4501.01, shall knowingly permit the vehicle to be used for the commission of a
felony drug abuse offense.
   (b)   No person, who is the owner, lessee, or occupant, or who has custody,
control, or supervision of premises, or real estate, including vacant land,
shall knowingly permit his or her premises, or real estate, including vacant
land, to be used for the commission of a felony drug abuse offense by another
person.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of permitting drug abuse.
      (1)   Except as provided in division (c)(2) of this section, permitting
drug abuse is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (2)   Permitting drug abuse is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law if the felony drug abuse offense in question is a
violation of Ohio R.C. 2925.02, 2925.03, or 2925.04, or if the felony drug
abuse offense in question is a violation of Ohio R.C. 2925.041 and the offender
had actual knowledge, at the time the offender permitted the vehicle, premises,
or real estate to be used as described in division (a) or (b) of this section,
that the person who assembled or possessed the chemicals in question in
violation of Ohio R.C. 2925.041 had assembled or possessed them with the intent
to manufacture a controlled substance in Schedule I or Schedule II in violation
of Ohio R.C. 2925.04.
   (d)   Any premises or real estate that is permitted to be used in violation
of division (b) of this section constitutes a nuisance subject to abatement
pursuant to Ohio R.C. Chapter 3767.
(ORC 2925.13(A) - (C), (F))
§ 624.06  USE OR POSSESSION OF PARAPHERNALIA.
   (a)   As used in this section, “drug paraphernalia” means any equipment,
product, or material of any kind that is used by the offender, intended by the
offender for use, or designed for use, in propagating, cultivating, growing,
harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing,
preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing,
concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing into the
human body, a controlled substance in violation of this chapter.  “Drug
paraphernalia” includes, but is not limited to, any of the following equipment,
products, or materials that are used by the offender, intended by the offender
for use, or designed by the offender for use, in any of the following manners:
      (1)   A kit for propagating, cultivating, growing, or harvesting any
species of a plant that is a controlled substance or from which a controlled
substance can be derived.
      (2)   A kit for manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing,
processing, or preparing a controlled substance.
      (3)   Any object, instrument, or device for manufacturing, compounding,
converting, producing, processing, or preparing methamphetamine.
      (4)   An isomerization device for increasing the potency of any species
of a plant that is a controlled substance.
      (5)   Testing equipment for identifying, or analyzing the strength,
effectiveness, or purity of, a controlled substance.
      (6)   A scale or balance for weighing or measuring a controlled
substance.
      (7)   A diluent or adulterant, such as quinine hydrochloride, mannitol,
mannite, dextrose, or lactose, for cutting a controlled substance.
      (8)   A separation gin or sifter for removing twigs and seeds from, or
otherwise cleaning or refining, marihuana.
      (9)   A blender, bowl, container, spoon, or mixing device for compounding
a controlled substance.
      (10)   A capsule, balloon, envelope, or container for packaging small
quantities of a controlled substance.
      (11)   A container or device for storing or concealing a controlled
substance.
      (12)   A hypodermic syringe, needle, or instrument for parenterally
injecting a controlled substance into the human body.
      (13)   An object, instrument, or device for ingesting, inhaling, or
otherwise introducing into the human body, marihuana, cocaine, hashish, or
hashish oil, such as a metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic, or
ceramic pipe, with or without a screen, permanent screen, hashish head, or
punctured metal bowl; water pipe; carburetion tube or device; smoking or
carburetion mask; roach clip or similar object used to hold burning material,
such as a marihuana cigarette, that has become too small or too short to be
held in the hand; miniature cocaine spoon, or cocaine vial; chamber pipe;
carburetor pipe; electric pipe; air driver pipe; chillum; bong; or ice pipe or
chiller.
   (b)   In determining if any equipment, product, or material is drug
paraphernalia, a court or law enforcement officer shall consider, in addition
to other relevant factors, the following:
      (1)   Any statement by the owner or by anyone in control of the
equipment, product, or material, concerning its use.
      (2)   The proximity in time or space of the equipment, product, or
material, or of the act relating to the equipment, product, or material, to a
violation of any provision of this chapter or Ohio R.C. Chapter 2925.
      (3)   The proximity of the equipment, product, or material to any
controlled substance.
      (4)   The existence of any residue of a controlled substance on the
equipment, product, or material.
      (5)   Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of the owner, or of
anyone in control, of the equipment, product, or material, to deliver it to any
person whom he or she knows intends to use the equipment, product, or material
to facilitate a violation of any provision of this chapter or Ohio R.C. Chapter
2925.  A finding that the owner or anyone in control of the equipment, product,
or material is not guilty of a violation of any other provision of this chapter
or Ohio R.C. Chapter 2925 does not prevent a finding that the equipment,
product, or material was intended or designed by the offender for use as drug
paraphernalia.
      (6)   Any oral or written instruction provided with the equipment,
product, or material concerning its use.
      (7)   Any descriptive material accompanying the equipment, product, or
material and explaining or depicting its use.
      (8)   National or local advertising concerning the use of the equipment,
product, or material.
      (9)   The manner and circumstances in which the equipment, product, or
material is displayed for sale.
      (10)   Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of the sales of the
equipment, product, or material to the total sales of the business enterprise.
      (11)   The existence and scope of legitimate uses of the equipment,
product, or material in the community.
      (12)   Expert testimony concerning the use of the equipment, product, or
material.
   (c)   (1)   Subject to division (d)(2) of this section, no person shall
knowingly use, or possess with purpose to use, drug paraphernalia.
      (2)   No person shall knowingly sell, or possess or manufacture with
purpose to sell, drug paraphernalia, if he or she knows or reasonably should
know that the equipment, product, or material will be used as drug
paraphernalia.
      (3)   No person shall place an advertisement in any newspaper, magazine,
handbill, or other publication that is published and printed and circulates
primarily within this state, if he or she knows that the purpose of the
advertisement is to promote the illegal sale in this municipality or in this
state of the equipment, product, or material that the offender intended or
designed for use as drug paraphernalia.
   (d)   (1)   This section does not apply to manufacturers, licensed health
professionals authorized to prescribe drugs, pharmacists, owners of pharmacies,
and other persons whose conduct is in accordance with Ohio R.C. Chapters 3719,
4715, 4723, 4729, 4730, 4731, and 4741.  This section shall not be construed to
prohibit the possession or use of a hypodermic as authorized by Ohio R.C.
3719.172.
      (2)   Division (c)(1) of this section does not apply to a person’s use,
or possession with purpose to use, any drug paraphernalia that is equipment, a
product, or material of any kind that is used by the person, intended by the
person for use, or designed for use in storing, containing, concealing,
injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing into the human body
marihuana.
   (e)   Notwithstanding Ohio R.C. Chapter 2981, any drug paraphernalia that
was used, possessed, sold, or manufactured in violation of this section shall
be seized, after a conviction for that violation, shall be forfeited, and upon
forfeiture shall be disposed of pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2981.12(B).
   (f)   (1)   Whoever violates division (c)(1) of this section is guilty of
illegal use or possession of drug paraphernalia, a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.
      (2)   Except as provided in division (f)(3) of this section, whoever
violates division (c)(2) of this section is guilty of dealing in drug
paraphernalia, a misdemeanor of the second degree.
      (3)   Whoever violates division (c)(2) of this section by selling drug
paraphernalia to a juvenile is guilty of selling drug paraphernalia to
juveniles, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (4)   Whoever violates division (c)(3) of this section is guilty of
illegal advertising of drug paraphernalia, a misdemeanor of the second degree.
   (g)   (1)   In addition to any other sanction imposed upon an offender for a
violation of this section, the court may suspend for not more than five years
the offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit. However, if
the offender pleaded guilty to or was convicted of a violation of R.C. §
4511.19 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance or the law of another
state or the United States arising out of the same set of circumstances as the
violation, the court shall suspend the offender’s driver’s or commercial
driver’s license or permit for not more than five years. If the offender is a
professionally licensed person, in addition to any other sanction imposed for a
violation of this section, the court immediately shall comply with R.C. §
2925.38.
      (2)   A.   Any offender who received a mandatory suspension of the
offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit under this section
prior to September 13, 2016 may file a motion with the sentencing court
requesting the termination of the suspension. However, an offender who pleaded
guilty to or was convicted of a violation of R.C. § 4511.19 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance or law of another state or the United States
that arose out of the same set of circumstances as the violation for which the
offender’s license or permit was suspended under this section shall not file
such a motion.
         B.   Upon the filing of a motion under division (g)(2) of this
section, the sentencing court, in its discretion, may terminate the suspension.
(ORC 2925.14)
   (h)   Illegal use or possession of marihuana drug paraphernalia.
      (1)   As used in this division (h), “drug paraphernalia” has the same
meaning as in section division (a) of this section.
      (2)   In determining if any equipment, product, or material is drug
paraphernalia, a court or law enforcement officer shall consider, in addition
to other relevant factors, all factors identified in division (b) of this
section.
      (3)   No person shall knowingly use, or possess with purpose to use, any
drug paraphernalia that is equipment, a product, or material of any kind that
is used by the person, intended by the person for use, or designed for use in
storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise
introducing into the human body marihuana.
      (4)   This division (h) does not apply to any person identified in
division (d)(1) of this section, and it shall not be construed to prohibit the
possession or use of a hypodermic as authorized by Ohio R.C. 3719.172.
      (5)   Division (e) of this section applies with respect to any drug
paraphernalia that was used or possessed in violation of this section.
      (6)   Whoever violates division (h)(3) of this section is guilty of
illegal use or possession of marihuana drug paraphernalia, a minor misdemeanor.
      (7)   A.   In addition to any other sanction imposed upon an offender for
a violation division (h) of this section, the court may suspend for not more
than five years the offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or
permit. However, if the offender pleaded guilty to or was convicted of a
violation of R.C. § 4511.19 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance
or the law of another state or the United States arising out of the same set of
circumstances as the violation, the court shall suspend the offender’s driver’s
or commercial driver’s license or permit for not more than five years. If the
offender is a professionally licensed person, in addition to any other sanction
imposed for a violation of division (h) of this section, the court immediately
shall comply with R.C. § 2925.38.
         B.   1.   Any offender who received a mandatory suspension of the
offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit under division (h)
of this section prior to September 13, 2016 may file a motion with the
sentencing court requesting the termination of the suspension. However, an
offender who pleaded guilty to or was convicted of a violation of R.C. §
4511.19 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance or law of another
state or the United States that arose out of the same set of circumstances as
the violation for which the offender’s license or permit was suspended under
division (h) of this section shall not file such a motion.
            2.   Upon the filing of a motion under division (h)(7)B. of this
section, the sentencing court, in its discretion, may terminate the suspension.
(R.C. 2925.141)
§ 624.07  ABUSING HARMFUL INTOXICANTS.
   (a)   Except for lawful research, clinical, medical, dental, or veterinary
purposes, no person, with purpose to induce intoxication or similar
physiological effects, shall obtain, possess, or use a harmful intoxicant.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of abusing harmful
intoxicants, a misdemeanor of the first degree.  If the offender previously has
been convicted of a drug abuse offense, abusing harmful intoxicants is a felony
to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (c)   (1)   In addition to any other sanction imposed upon an offender for a
violation of this section, the court may suspend for not more than five years
the offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit. However, if
the offender pleaded guilty to or was convicted of a violation of R.C. §
4511.19 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance or the law of another
state or the United States arising out of the same set of circumstances as the
violation, the court shall suspend the offender’s driver’s or commercial
driver’s license or permit for not more than five years. If the offender is a
professionally licensed person, in addition to any other sanction imposed for a
violation of this section, the court immediately shall comply with R.C. §
2925.38.
      (2)   A.   Any offender who received a mandatory suspension of the
offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit under this section
prior to the September 13, 2016 may file a motion with the sentencing court
requesting the termination of the suspension. However, an offender who pleaded
guilty to or was convicted of a violation of R.C. § 4511.19 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance or law of another state or the United States
that arose out of the same set of circumstances as the violation for which the
offender’s license or permit was suspended under this section shall not file
such a motion.
         B.   Upon the filing of a motion under division (c)(2) of this
section, the sentencing court, in its discretion, may terminate the suspension.
(ORC 2925.31)
§ 624.073  IMPROPERLY DISPENSING OR DISTRIBUTING NITROUS OXIDE.
   (a)   No person who dispenses or distributes nitrous oxide in cartridges
shall fail to comply with either of the following:
      (1)   The record-keeping requirements established under division (c) of
this section.
      (2)   The labeling and transaction identification requirements
established under division (d) of this section.
   (b)   Whoever violates division (a)(1) or (a)(2) of this section is guilty
of improperly dispensing or distributing nitrous oxide, a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree.
   (c)   Beginning July 1, 2001, a person who dispenses or distributes nitrous
oxide shall record each transaction involving the dispensing or distribution of
the nitrous oxide on a separate card.  The person shall require the purchaser
to sign the card and provide a complete residence address.  The person
dispensing or distributing the nitrous oxide shall sign and date the card.  The
person shall retain the card recording a transaction for one year from the date
of the transaction.  The person shall maintain the cards at the person’s
business address and make them available during normal business hours for
inspection and copying by officers or employees of the State Board of Pharmacy
or of other law enforcement agencies that are authorized to investigate
violations of this code, Ohio R.C. Chapters 2925, 3719, or 4729, or federal
drug abuse control laws.  The cards used to record each transaction shall
inform the purchaser of the following:
      (1)   That nitrous oxide cartridges are to be used only for purposes of
preparing food;
      (2)   That inhalation of nitrous oxide can have dangerous health effects;
and
      (3)   That it is a violation of state law to distribute or dispense
cartridges of nitrous oxide to any person under age 21, punishable as a felony
of the fifth degree.
   (d)   (1)   Each cartridge of nitrous oxide dispensed or distributed in this
municipality shall bear the following printed warning:  “Nitrous oxide
cartridges are to be used only for purposes of preparing food.  Nitrous oxide
cartridges may not be sold to persons under age 21.  Do not inhale contents. 
Misuse can be dangerous to your health.”
      (2)   Each time a person dispenses or distributes one or more cartridges
of nitrous oxide, the person shall mark the packaging containing the cartridges
with a label or other device that identifies the person who dispensed or
distributed the nitrous oxide and the person’s business address.
(ORC 2925.32(B)(4), (D)(2), (F), (G))
Statutory reference:
   Trafficking in harmful intoxicants, felony offenses, see Ohio R.C. 2925.32
§ 624.076  POSSESSING NITROUS OXIDE IN MOTOR VEHICLES.
   (a)   As used in this section, “motor vehicle,” “street,” and “highway” have
the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 4511.01.
   (b)   Unless authorized by these Codified Ordinances or by state law, no
person shall possess an open cartridge of nitrous oxide in either of the
following circumstances:
      (1)   While operating or being a passenger in or on a motor vehicle on a
street, highway, or other public or private property open to the public for
purposes of vehicular traffic or parking.
      (2)   While being in or on a stationary motor vehicle on a street,
highway, or other public or private property open to the public for purposes of
vehicular traffic or parking.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of possessing nitrous oxide in
a motor vehicle, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
   (d)   In addition to any other sanction imposed upon an offender for
possessing nitrous oxide in a motor vehicle, the court may suspend for not more
than five years the offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or
permit.
(ORC 2925.33)
§ 624.08  ILLEGAL DISPENSING OF DRUG SAMPLES.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly furnish a sample drug to another person.
   (b)   Division (a) of this section does not apply to manufacturers,
wholesalers, pharmacists, owners of pharmacies, licensed health professionals
authorized to prescribe drugs, and other persons whose conduct is in accordance
with Ohio R.C. Chapters 3719, 4715, 4723, 4725, 4729, 4730, 4731, and 4741.
   (c)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of illegal dispensing of
drug samples.
      (2)   If the drug involved in the offense is a compound, mixture,
preparation, or substance included in Schedule I or Schedule II, with the
exception of marihuana, illegal dispensing of drug samples is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (3)   If the drug involved in the offense is a dangerous drug or a
compound, mixture, preparation, or substance included in Schedule III, Schedule
IV or Schedule V, or is marihuana, the penalty for the offense shall be
determined as follows:
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in the following division, illegal
dispensing of drug samples is a misdemeanor of the second degree.
         B.   If the offense was committed in the vicinity of a school or in
the vicinity of a juvenile, illegal dispensing of drug samples is a misdemeanor
of the first degree.
(ORC 2925.36(A) - (C))
Statutory reference:
   Felony offenses, see Ohio R.C. 2925.36(C)(2)
§ 624.09  COUNTERFEIT CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly possess any counterfeit controlled
substance.
   (b)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section shall be guilty of
possession of counterfeit controlled substances, a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(ORC 2925.37(A), (G))
Statutory reference:
   Trafficking, other felony counterfeit controlled substance offenses, see
Ohio R.C. 2925.37(H) - (K)
§ 624.10  CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE OR PRESCRIPTION LABELS.
   (a)   Whenever a manufacturer sells a controlled substance, and whenever a
wholesaler sells a controlled substance in a package the wholesaler has
prepared, the manufacturer or wholesaler shall securely affix to each package
in which the controlled substance is contained a label showing in legible
English the name and address of the vendor and the quantity, kind and form of
controlled substance contained therein.  No person, except a pharmacist for the
purpose of dispensing a controlled substance upon a prescription, shall alter,
deface or remove any label so affixed.
   (b)   No person shall alter, deface or remove any label affixed pursuant to
Ohio R.C. 3719.08 as long as any of the original contents remain.
(ORC 3719.08(A), (E))
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.  If the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of this
section, or Ohio R.C. 3719.07 or 3719.08, or a drug abuse offense, a violation
of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.  If
the violation involves the sale, offer to sell, or possession of a Schedule I
or II controlled substance, with the exception of marihuana, and if the
offender, as a result of the violation, is a major drug offender, then Ohio
R.C. 3719.99(D) applies.
(ORC 3719.99(C))
§ 624.11  POSSESSION, SALE AND DISPOSAL OF HYPODERMICS.
   (a)   Possession of a hypodermic is authorized for the following:
      (1)   A manufacturer or distributor of, or dealer in hypodermics, or
medication packaged in hypodermics, and any authorized agent of employee of
that manufacturer, distributor or dealer, in the regular course of business;
      (2)   A terminal distributor of dangerous drugs, in the regular course of
business;
      (3)   A person authorized to administer injections, in the regular course
of the person’s profession or employment;
      (4)   A person, when the hypodermic in his or her possession was lawfully
obtained and is kept and used for the purpose of self-administration of insulin
or other drug prescribed for the treatment of disease by a licensed health
professional authorized to prescribe drugs;
      (5)   A person whose use of a hypodermic is for legal research, clinical,
educational or medicinal purposes;
      (6)   A farmer, for the lawful administration of a drug to an animal;
      (7)   A person whose use of a hypodermic is for lawful professional,
mechanical, trade or craft purposes.
   (b)   No manufacturer or distributor of, or dealer in, hypodermics or
medication packaged in hypodermics, or their authorized agents or employees,
and no terminal distributor of dangerous drugs, shall display any hypodermic
for sale.  No person authorized to possess a hypodermic pursuant to division
(a) of this section shall negligently fail to take reasonable precautions to
prevent any hypodermic in the person’s possession from theft or acquisition by
any unauthorized person.
(ORC 3719.172(A), (B))
   (c)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.  If the offender previously has been convicted
of a violation of division (b) of this section, Ohio R.C. 3719.05, 3719.06,
3719.13, 3719.172(B), or 3719.31, or a drug abuse offense, a violation of
division (b) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(ORC 3719.99(E))
Statutory reference:
   Felony offenses, see Ohio R.C. 3719.172(C), (D)
§ 624.12  EVIDENCE.
   (a)   (1)   In any criminal prosecution for a violation of this chapter or
Ohio R.C. Chapters 2925 or 3719, a laboratory report from the Bureau of
Criminal Identification and Investigation or a laboratory operated by another
law enforcement agency, or a laboratory established by or under the authority
of an institution of higher education that has its main campus in this state
and that is accredited by the Association of American Universities or the North
Central Association of Colleges and Secondary Schools, primarily for the
purpose of providing scientific service to law enforcement agencies, and signed
by the person performing the analysis, stating that the substance that is the
basis of the alleged offense has been weighed and analyzed and stating the
findings as to the content, weight, and identity of the substance and that it
contains any amount of a controlled substance and the number and description of
unit dosages, is prima facie evidence of the content, identity, and weight or
the existence and number of unit dosages of the substance. In any criminal
prosecution for a violation of Ohio R.C. 2925.041 or a violation of this
chapter, Ohio R.C. Chapter 2925 or Ohio R.C. Chapter 3719 that is based on the
possession of chemicals sufficient to produce a compound, mixture, preparation,
or substance included in Schedule I, II, III, IV, or V, a laboratory report
from the Bureau or from any laboratory that is operated or established as
described in this division that is signed by the person performing the
analysis, stating that the substances that are the basis of the alleged offense
have been weighed and analyzed and stating the findings as to the content,
weight, and identity of each of the substances, is prima facie evidence of the
content, identity, and weight of the substances.
      (2)   Attached to that report shall be a copy of a notarized statement by
the signer of the report giving the name of the signer and stating that the
signer is an employee of the laboratory issuing the report and that performing
the analysis is a part of the signer’s regular duties, and giving an outline of
the signer’s education, training, and experience for performing an analysis of
materials included under this section.  The signer shall attest that
scientifically accepted tests were performed with due caution, and that the
evidence was handled in accordance with established and accepted procedures
while in the custody of the laboratory.
   (b)   The prosecuting attorney shall serve a copy of the report on the
attorney of record for the accused, or on the accused if the accused has no
attorney, prior to any proceeding in which the report is to be used against the
accused other than at a preliminary hearing or grand jury proceeding where the
report may be used without having been previously served upon the accused.
   (c)   The report shall not be prima facie evidence of the contents,
identity, and weight or the existence and number of unit dosages of the
substance if the accused or the accused’s attorney demands the testimony of the
person signing the report, by serving the demand upon the prosecuting attorney,
within seven days from the accused or the accused’s attorney’s receipt of the
report.  The time may be extended by a trial judge in the interests of justice.
   (d)   Any report issued for use under this section shall contain notice of
the right of the accused to demand, and the manner in which the accused shall
demand, the testimony of the person signing the report.
   (e)   Any person who is accused of a violation of this chapter or Ohio R.C.
Chapters 2925 or 3719 is entitled, upon written request made to the prosecuting
attorney, to have a portion of the substance that is, or of each of the
substances that are, the basis of the alleged violation preserved for the
benefit of independent analysis performed by a laboratory analyst employed by
the accused person, or, if the accused is indigent, by a qualified laboratory
analyst appointed by the court.  Such portion shall be a representative sample
of the entire substance that is, or of each of the substances that are, the
basis of the alleged violation and shall be of sufficient size, in the opinion
of the court, to permit the accused’s analyst to make a thorough scientific
analysis concerning the identity of the substance or substances.  The
prosecuting attorney shall provide the accused’s analyst with the sample
portion at least 14 days prior to trial, unless the trial is to be held in a
court not of record or unless the accused person is charged with a minor
misdemeanor, in which case the prosecuting attorney shall provide the accused’s
analyst with the sample portion at least three days prior to trial.  If the
prosecuting attorney determines that such a sample portion cannot be preserved
and given to the accused’s analyst, the prosecuting attorney shall so inform
the accused person, or the accused’s attorney.  In such a circumstance, the
accused person is entitled, upon written request made to the prosecuting
attorney, to have the accused’s privately employed or court appointed analyst
present at an analysis of the substance that is, or the substances that are,
the basis of the alleged violation, and, upon further written request, to
receive copies of all recorded scientific data that result from the analysis
and that can be used by an analyst in arriving at conclusions, findings, or
opinions concerning the identity of the substance or substances subject to the
analysis.
   (f)   In addition to the rights provided under division (e) of this section,
any person who is accused of a violation of this chapter or Ohio R.C. Chapters
2925 or 3719 that involves a bulk amount of a controlled substance, or any
multiple thereof, or who is accused of a violation of Ohio R.C. 2925.11 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, other than a minor misdemeanor
violation, that involves marihuana, is entitled, upon written request made to
the prosecuting attorney, to have a laboratory analyst of the accused’s choice,
or, if the accused is indigent, a qualified laboratory analyst appointed by the
court, present at a measurement or weighing of the substance that is the basis
of the alleged violation.  Also, the accused person is entitled, upon further
written request, to receive copies of all recorded scientific data that result
from the measurement or weighing and that can be used by an analyst in arriving
at conclusions, findings, or opinions concerning the weight, volume, or number
of unit doses of the substance subject to the measurement or weighing.
(ORC 2925.51)
   (g)   In addition to the financial sanctions authorized or required under
Ohio R.C. 2929.18 and 2929.28 and to any costs otherwise authorized or required
under any provision of law, the court imposing sentence upon an offender who is
convicted of or pleads guilty to a drug abuse offense may order the offender to
pay to the state, municipal, or county law enforcement agencies that handled
the investigation and prosecution all of the costs that the state, municipal
corporation, or county reasonably incurred in having tests performed under this
section or Ohio R.C. 2925.51 or in any other manner on any substance that was
the basis of, or involved in, the offense to determine whether the substance
contained any amount of a controlled substance if the results of the tests
indicate that the substance tested contained any controlled substance. No court
shall order an offender under this section to pay the costs of tests performed
on a substance if the results of the tests do not indicate that the substance
tested contained any controlled substance. The court shall hold a hearing to
determine the amount of costs to be imposed under this section. The court may
hold the hearing as part of the sentencing hearing for the offender.
(ORC 2925.511)
§ 624.13  DOUBLE JEOPARDY.
   No person shall be prosecuted for a violation of this chapter if the person
has been acquitted or convicted under the federal drug abuse control laws of
the same act or omission which, it is alleged, constitutes a violation of this
chapter.
(ORC 2925.50, 3719.19)
§ 624.14  CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE SCHEDULES.
   Controlled Substance Schedules I, II, III, IV, and V, as established in Ohio
R.C. 3719.41 and amended by Ohio R.C. 3719.43 and 3719.44, are hereby adopted
by reference, and shall be treated as if set forth in full herein.
§ 624.15  PSEUDOEPHEDRINE SALES.
   (a)   Unlawful purchases.
      (1)   As used in divisions (a), (b), (c) and (d) of this section:
         A.   “Consumer product.” Any food or drink that is consumed or used by
humans and any drug, including a drug that may be provided legally only
pursuant to a prescription, that is intended to be consumed or used by humans.
         B.   “Ephedrine.” Any material, compound, mixture, or preparation that
contains any quantity of ephedrine, any of its salts, optical isomers, or salts
of optical isomers.
         C.   “Ephedrine product.” A consumer product that contains ephedrine.
         D.   “Pseudoephedrine.” Any material, compound, mixture, or
preparation that contains any quantity of pseudoephedrine, any of its salts,
optical isomers, or salts of optical isomers.
         E.   “Pseudoephedrine product.” A consumer product consisting that
contains pseudoephedrine.
         F.   “Retailer.” A place of business that offers consumer products for
sale to the general public.
         G.   “Single-ingredient preparation.” A compound, mixture,
preparation, or substance that contains a single active ingredient.
         H.   “Terminal distributor of dangerous drugs.” Has the same meaning
as in Ohio R.C. 4729.01.
      (2)   A.   1.   No individual shall knowingly purchase, receive, or
otherwise acquire an amount of pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product
that is greater than either of the following unless the pseudoephedrine product
or ephedrine product is dispensed by a pharmacist pursuant to a valid
prescription issued by a licensed health professional authorized to prescribe
drugs and the conduct of the pharmacist and the licensed health professional
authorized to prescribe drugs is in accordance with Ohio R.C. Chapter 3719,
4715, 4723, 4729, 4730, 4731, or 4741:
               a.   Three and six tenths grams within a period of a single day;
               b.   Nine grams within a period of 30 consecutive days.
            2.   The limits specified in divisions (a)(2)A.1.a. and (a)
(2)A.1.b. of this section apply to the total amount of base pseudoephedrine or
base ephedrine in the pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product,
respectively. The limits do not apply to the product’s overall weight.
         B.   It is not a violation of division (b)(1) of this section for an
individual to receive or accept more than an amount of pseudoephedrine product
or ephedrine product specified in division (a)(2)A.1.a. or (a)(2)A.1.b. of this
section if the individual is an employee of a retailer or terminal distributor
of dangerous drugs, and the employee receives or accepts from the retailer or
terminal distributor of dangerous drugs the pseudoephedrine product or
ephedrine product in a sealed container in connection with manufacturing,
warehousing, placement, stocking, bagging, loading, or unloading of the
product.
      (3)   A.   No individual under 18 years of age shall knowingly purchase,
receive, or otherwise acquire a pseudoephedrine product, or ephedrine product
unless the pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product is dispensed by a
pharmacist pursuant to a valid prescription issued by a licensed health
professional authorized to prescribe drugs and the conduct of the pharmacist
and the licensed health professional authorized to prescribe drugs is in
accordance with Ohio R.C. Chapter 3719, 4715, 4723, 4729, 4730, 4731, or 4741.
         B.   Division (a)(3)A. of this section does not apply to an individual
under 18 years of age who purchases, receives, or otherwise acquires a
pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product from any of the following:
            1.   A licensed health professional authorized to prescribe drugs
or pharmacist who dispenses, sells, or otherwise provides the pseudoephedrine
product or ephedrine product to that individual and whose conduct is in
accordance with Ohio R.C. Chapter 3719, 4715, 4723, 4729, 4730, 4731, or 4741;
            2.   A parent or guardian of that individual who provides the
pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product to the individual;
            3.   A person, as authorized by that individual’s parent or
guardian, who dispenses, sells, or otherwise provides the pseudoephedrine
product or ephedrine product to the individual;
            4.   A retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs who
provides the pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product to that individual if
the individual is an employee of the retailer or terminal distributor of
dangerous drugs and the individual receives or accepts from the retailer or
terminal distributor of dangerous drugs the pseudoephedrine product or
ephedrine product in a sealed container in connection with manufacturing,
warehousing, placement, stocking, bagging, loading, or unloading of the
product.
      (4)   No individual under 18 years of age shall knowingly show or give
false information concerning the individual’s name, age, or other
identification for the purpose of purchasing, receiving, or otherwise acquiring
a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product.
      (5)   No individual shall knowingly fail to comply with the requirements
of Ohio R.C. 3715.051(B).
      (6)   Whoever violates division (a)(2)A. of this section is guilty of
unlawful purchase of a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product, a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (7)   Whoever violates division (a)(3)A. of this section is guilty of
underage purchase of a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product, a
delinquent act that would be a misdemeanor of the fourth degree if it could be
committed by an adult.
      (8)   Whoever violates division (a)(4) of this section is guilty of using
false information to purchase a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product, a
delinquent act that would be a misdemeanor of the first degree if it could be
committed by an adult.
      (9)   Whoever violates division (a)(5) of this section is guilty of
improper purchase of a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product, a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(ORC 2925.55)
   (b)   Unlawful retail sales.
      (1)   A.   1.   Except as provided in division (b)(1)B. of this section,
no retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs or an employee of a
retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs shall knowingly sell, offer
to sell, hold for sale, deliver, or otherwise provide to any individual an
amount of pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product that is greater than
either of the following:
               a.   Three and six tenths grams within a period of a single day;
               b.   Nine grams within a period of 30 consecutive days.
            2.   The maximum amounts specified in divisions (b)(1)A.1.a. and
(b)(1)A.1.b. of this section apply to the total amount of base pseudoephedrine
or base ephedrine in the pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product,
respectively. The maximum amounts do not apply to the product’s overall weight.
         B.   1.   Division (b)(1)A. of this section does not apply to any
quantity of pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product dispensed by a
pharmacist pursuant to a valid prescription issued by a licensed health
professional authorized to prescribe drugs if the conduct of the pharmacist and
the licensed health professional authorized to prescribe drugs is in accordance
with Ohio R.C. Chapter 3719, 4715, 4723, 4729, 4730, 4731, or 4741.
            2.   It is not a violation of division (b)(1)A. of this section for
a retailer, terminal distributor of dangerous drugs, or employee of either to
provide to an individual more than an amount of pseudoephedrine product or
ephedrine product specified in division (b)(1)A.1.a. or (b)(1)A.1.b. of this
section under either of the following circumstances:
               a.   The individual is an employee of the retailer or terminal
distributor of dangerous drugs, and the employee receives or accepts from the
retailer, terminal distributor of dangerous drugs, or employee the
pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product in a sealed container in
connection with manufacturing, warehousing, placement, stocking, bagging,
loading, or unloading of the product;
               b.   A stop-sale alert is generated after the submission of
information to the national precursor log exchange under the conditions
described in Ohio R.C. 3715.052(A)(2).
      (2)   A.   Except as provided in division (b)(2)B. of this section, no
retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs or an employee of a
retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs shall sell, offer to sell,
hold for sale, deliver, or otherwise provide a pseudoephedrine product or
ephedrine product to an individual who is under 18 years of age.
         B.   Division (b)(2)A. of this section does not apply to any of the
following:
            1.   A licensed health professional authorized to prescribe drugs
or pharmacist who dispenses, sells, or otherwise provides a pseudoephedrine
product or ephedrine product to an individual under 18 years of age and whose
conduct is in accordance with Ohio R.C. Chapter 3719, 4715, 4723, 4729, 4730,
4731, or 4741;
            2.   A parent or guardian of an individual under 18 years of age
who provides a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product to the individual;
            3.   A person who, as authorized by the individual’s parent or
guardian, dispenses, sells, or otherwise provides a pseudoephedrine product or
ephedrine product to an individual under 18 years of age;
            4.   The provision by a retailer, terminal distributor of dangerous
drugs, or employee of either of a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product
in a sealed container to an employee of the retailer or terminal distributor of
dangerous drugs who is under 18 years of age in connection with manufacturing,
warehousing, placement, stocking, bagging, loading, or unloading of the
product.
      (3)   No retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs shall fail
to comply with the requirements of Ohio R.C. 3715.051(A) or Ohio R.C. 3715.052
(A)(2).
      (4)   No retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs shall fail
to comply with the requirements of Ohio R.C. 3715.052(A)(1).
      (5)   Whoever violates division (b)(1)A. of this section is guilty of
unlawfully selling a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product, a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (6)   Whoever violates division (b)(2)A. of this section is guilty of
unlawfully selling a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product to a minor, a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
      (7)   Whoever violates division (b)(3) of this section is guilty of
improper sale of a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product, a misdemeanor
of the second degree.
      (8)   Whoever violates division (b)(4) of this section is guilty of
failing to submit information to the national precursor log exchange, a
misdemeanor for which the offender shall be fined not more than one thousand
dollars ($1,000) per violation.
(ORC 2925.56)
   (c)   Transaction scans.
      (1)   As used in this division and division (d) of this section:
         A.   “Card holder” means any person who presents a driver’s or
commercial driver’s license or an identification card to a seller, or an agent
or employee of a seller, to purchase or receive any pseudoephedrine product or
ephedrine product from the seller, agent, or employee.
         B.   Identification card” and “transaction scan device” have the same
meanings as in Ohio R.C. 2927.021.
         C.   “Seller” means a retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous
drugs.
         D.   “Transaction scan” means the process by which a seller or an
agent or employee of a seller checks by means of a transaction scan device the
validity of a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or an identification card
that is presented as a condition for purchasing or receiving any
pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product.
      (2)   A.   A seller or an agent or employee of a seller may perform a
transaction scan by means of a transaction scan device to check the validity of
a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or identification card presented by a
card holder as a condition for selling, giving away, or otherwise distributing
to the card holder a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product.
         B.   If the information deciphered by the transaction scan performed
under division (c)(2)A. of this section fails to match the information printed
on the driver’s or commercial driver’s license or identification card presented
by the card holder, or if the transaction scan indicates that the information
so printed is false or fraudulent, neither the seller nor any agent or employee
of the seller shall sell, give away, or otherwise distribute any
pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product to the card holder.
         C.   Division (c)(2)A. of this section does not preclude a seller or
an agent or employee of a seller as a condition for selling, giving away, or
otherwise distributing a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product to the
person presenting the document from using a transaction scan device to check
the validity of a document other than a driver’s or commercial driver’s license
or an identification card if the document includes a bar code or magnetic strip
that may be scanned by the device.
      (3)   Rules adopted by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles under Ohio R.C.
4301.61(C) apply to the use of transaction scan devices for purposes of this
division (c)  and division (d) of this section.
      (4)   A.   No seller or agent or employee of a seller shall
electronically or mechanically record or maintain any information derived from
a transaction scan, except the following:
            1.   The name, address, and date of birth of the person listed on
the driver’s or commercial driver’s license or identification card presented by
a card holder;
            2.   The expiration date, identification number, and issuing agency
of the driver’s or commercial driver’s license or identification card presented
by a card holder.
         B.   No seller or agent or employee of a seller shall use the
information that is derived from a transaction scan or that is permitted to be
recorded and maintained under division (c)(4)A. of this section except for
purposes of division (d) of this section, Ohio R.C. 2925.58, or Ohio R.C.
3715.052(A)(1).
         C.   No seller or agent or employee of a seller shall use a
transaction scan device for a purpose other than the purpose specified in
division (c)(2)A. of this section.
         D.   No seller or agent or employee of a seller shall sell or
otherwise disseminate the information derived from a transaction scan to any
third party, including, but not limited to, selling or otherwise disseminating
that information for any marketing, advertising, or promotional activities, but
a seller or agent or employee of a seller may release that information pursuant
to a court order or as specifically authorized by division (d) of this section
or any other section of the Ohio Revised Code.
      (5)   Nothing in this division (c) or division (d) of this section
relieves a seller or an agent or employee of a seller of any responsibility to
comply with any other applicable state or federal laws or rules governing the
sale, giving away, or other distribution of pseudoephedrine products or
ephedrine products.
      (6)   Whoever violates division (c)(2)B. or (c)(4) of this section is
guilty of engaging in an illegal pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product
transaction scan, and the court may impose upon the offender a civil penalty of
up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each violation. The Clerk of the
Court shall pay each collected civil penalty to the County Treasurer for
deposit into the County Treasury.
(ORC 2925.57)
   (d)   Affirmative defenses.
      (1)   A seller or an agent or employee of a seller may not be found
guilty of a charge of a violation of division (b) of this section in which the
age of the purchaser or other recipient of a pseudoephedrine product is an
element of the alleged violation if the seller, agent, or employee raises and
proves as an affirmative defense that all of the following occurred:
         A.   A card holder attempting to purchase or receive a pseudoephedrine
product presented a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or an
identification card.
         B.   A transaction scan of the driver’s or commercial driver’s license
or identification card that the card holder presented indicated that the
license or card was valid.
         C.   The pseudoephedrine product was sold, given away, or otherwise
distributed to the card holder in reasonable reliance upon the identification
presented and the completed transaction scan.
      (2)   In determining whether a seller or an agent or employee of a seller
has proven the affirmative defense provided by division (d)(1) of this section,
the trier of fact in the action for the alleged violation of division (b) of
this section shall consider any written policy that the seller has adopted and
implemented and that is intended to prevent violations of division (b) of this
section. For purposes of division (d)(1)C. of this section, the trier of fact
shall consider that reasonable reliance upon the identification presented and
the completed transaction scan may require a seller or an agent or employee of
a seller to exercise reasonable diligence to determine, and that the use of a
transaction scan device does not excuse a seller or an agent or employee of a
seller from exercising reasonable diligence to determine, the following:
         A.   Whether a person to whom the seller or agent or employee of a
seller sells, gives away, or otherwise distributes a pseudoephedrine product is
18 years of age or older;
         B.   Whether the description and picture appearing on the driver’s or
commercial driver’s license or identification card presented by a card holder
is that of the card holder.
      (3)   In any criminal action in which the affirmative defense provided by
division (d)(1) of this section is raised, the Registrar of Motor Vehicles or a
deputy registrar who issued an identification card under Ohio R.C. 4507.50
through 4507.52 shall be permitted to submit certified copies of the records of
that issuance in lieu of the testimony of the personnel of or contractors with
the Bureau of Motor Vehicles in the action.
(ORC 2925.58)
   (e)   Retailer’s duties.
      (1)   As used in divisions (e) and (f) of this section:
         A.   “Consumer product.” Any food or drink that is consumed or used by
humans and any drug, including a drug that may be provided legally only
pursuant to a prescription, that is intended to be consumed or used by humans.
         B.   “Drug.” Has the same meanings as in Ohio R.C. 4729.01.
         C.   “Ephedrine.” Any material, compound, mixture, or preparation that
contains any quantity of ephedrine, any of its salts, optical isomers, or salts
of optical isomers.
         D.   “Ephedrine product.” A consumer product that contains ephedrine.
         E.   “Law enforcement official.” An officer or employee of any agency
or authority of the United States, a state, a territory, a political
subdivision of a state or territory, or an Indian tribe, who is empowered by
the law to investigate or conduct an official inquiry into a potential
violation of law or prosecute or otherwise conduct a criminal, civil, or
administrative proceeding arising from an alleged violation of law.
         F.   “Licensed health professional authorized to prescribe drugs.” Has
the same meanings as in Ohio R.C. 4729.01.
         G.   “National Precursor Log Exchange” or “Exchange.” The electronic
system for tracking sales of pseudoephedrine products and ephedrine products on
a national basis that is administered by the National Association of Drug
Diversion Investigators or a successor organization.
         H.   “Pharmacist.” A person licensed under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4729 to
engage in the practice of pharmacy.
         I.   “Pharmacy.” Has the same meanings as in Ohio R.C. 4729.01.
         J.   “Prescriber.” Has the same meanings as in Ohio R.C. 4729.01.
         K.   “Prescription.” Has the same meanings as in Ohio R.C. 4729.01.
         L.   “Proof of age.” A driver’s license, a commercial driver’s
license, a military identification card, a passport, or an identification card
issued under Ohio R.C. 4507.50 to 4507.52 that shows a person is 18 years of
age or older.
         M.   “Pseudoephedrine.” Any material, compound, mixture, or
preparation that contains any quantity of pseudoephedrine, any of its salts,
optical isomers, or salts of optical isomers.
         N.   “Pseudoephedrine product.” A consumer product that contains
pseudoephedrine.
         O.   “Retailer.” A place of business that offers consumer products for
sale to the general public.
         P.   “Single-ingredient preparation.” A compound, mixture,
preparation, or substance that contains a single active ingredient.
         Q.   “Stop-sale alert.” A notification sent from the national
precursor log exchange to a retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs
indicating that the completion of a sale of a pseudoephedrine product or
ephedrine product would result in a violation of Ohio R.C. 2925.56(A)(1) or
federal law.
         R.   “Terminal distributor of dangerous drugs.” Has the same meanings
as in Ohio R.C. 4729.01.
         S.   “Wholesaler.” Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 3719.01.
      (2)   A retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs that sells,
offers to sell, holds for sale, delivers, or otherwise provides a
pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product to the public shall do all of the
following:
         A.   Segregate pseudoephedrine products or ephedrine products from
other merchandise so that no member of the public may procure or purchase such
products without the direct assistance of a pharmacist or other authorized
employee of the retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs;
         B.   With regard to each time a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine
product is sold or otherwise provided without a valid prescription:
            1.   Determine, by examination of a valid proof of age, that the
purchaser or recipient is at least 18 years of age;
            2.   a.   Using any information available, including information
from the national precursor log exchange if the information is accessible, make
a reasonable attempt to ensure that no individual purchases or receives an
amount of pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product that is greater than
either of the following:
                  i.   Three and six tenths grams within a period of a single
day;
                  ii.   Nine grams within a period of 30 consecutive days.
               b.   The maximum amounts specified in divisions (e)(2)B.2.a.i.
and (e)(2)B.2.a.ii. of this section apply to the total amount of base
pseudoephedrine or base ephedrine in the pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine
product, respectively. The maximum amounts do not apply to the product’s
overall weight.
         C.   Maintain a log book of pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine
product purchases, in accordance with Ohio R.C. 3715.051;
         D.   If required to comply with section Ohio R.C. 3715.052, submit the
information specified in divisions (A)(1)(a) to (A)(1)(d) of that section to
the national precursor log exchange.
      (3)   Prescriptions, orders, and records maintained pursuant to this
section and stocks of pseudoephedrine products and ephedrine products shall be
open for inspection to federal, state, county, and municipal officers, and
employees of the State Board of Pharmacy whose duty it is to enforce the laws
of this state or of the United States relating to controlled substances. Such
prescriptions, orders, records, and stocks shall be open for inspection by the
State Medical Board and its employees for purposes of enforcing Ohio R.C.
Chapter 4731.
(ORC 3715.05)
   (f)   Theft or loss; reporting requirements.
      (1)   Each retailer, terminal distributor of dangerous drugs, pharmacy,
prescriber, or wholesaler that sells, offers to sell, holds for sale, delivers,
or otherwise provides any pseudoephedrine product and that discovers the theft
or loss of any pseudoephedrine product in an amount of more than nine grams per
incident of theft or loss shall notify all of the following upon discovery of
the theft or loss:
         A.   The State Board of Pharmacy, by telephone immediately upon
discovery of the theft or loss;
         B.   Law enforcement authorities. If the incident is a theft and the
theft constitutes a felony, the retailer, terminal distributor of dangerous
drugs, pharmacy, prescriber, or wholesaler shall report the theft to the law
enforcement authorities in accordance with Ohio R.C. 2921.22.
      (2)   Within 30 days after making a report by telephone to the State
Board of Pharmacy pursuant to division (f)(1)A. of this section, a retailer,
terminal distributor of dangerous drugs, pharmacy, prescriber, or wholesaler
shall send a written report to the State Board of Pharmacy.
      (3)   The reports required under this section shall identify the product
that was stolen or lost, the amount of the product stolen or lost, and the date
and time of discovery of the theft or loss.
(ORC 3715.06)
§ 624.16  PROHIBITING MEDICAL MARIJUANA CULTIVATION, PROCESSORS AND RETAIL
DISPENSARIES WITHIN THE CITY.
   (a)   The cultivation, processing and/or retail dispensing of medical
marijuana, as the same is defined in Ohio R.C. 3796.01(A)(2), effective
September 8, 2016, is hereby prohibited within the city.
   (b)   Whoever violates any provision of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.  Each day that any person continues to violate
any provision of this section shall constitute a separate and complete offense.
(Ord. 17-O-2898, passed 1-17-2017)
§ 624.17  SALE OF PURE CAFFEINE PRODUCT.
   (a)   As used in this section, “pure caffeine product” means:
      (1)   Subject to division (a)(2) of this section, a product that consists
solely or primarily of caffeine and is manufactured into a crystalline, liquid,
or powdered form.
      (2)   The phrase does not include any of the following that contains
caffeine and is formulated, manufactured, and labeled in accordance with the
laws and regulations enforced by the United States Food and Drug
Administration:
         A.   Coffee, tea, any soft drink, any energy drink, or any other
caffeine-containing beverage;
         B.   Any energy product.
   (b)   Except as provided in division (c) of this section, no person shall
knowingly sell or offer for sale a pure caffeine product.
   (c)   Division (b) of this section does not prohibit a person from selling
or offering for sale any product manufactured in a unit-dose form such as a
pill, tablet, or caplet, but only if each unit dose of the product contains not
more than 250 milligrams of caffeine.
   (d)   Nothing in this section prohibits either of the following:
      (1)   Possession of a product described in division (c) of this section;
      (2)   Possession of a pure caffeine product by any of the following:
         A.   A food processing establishment, as defined in Ohio R.C.
3715.021;
         B.   A manufacturer of a drug that is available without a
prescription;
         C.   A laboratory that holds a current, valid category III terminal
distributor of dangerous drugs license issued by the state board of pharmacy
under Ohio R.C. 4729.54;
         D.   A laboratory of any agency or department of this state that
performs testing, analysis, and other laboratory services on behalf of the
state;
         E.   A postal or delivery service that transports or delivers a pure
caffeine product to an entity specified in divisions (d)(2)A. to (d)(2)D. of
this section.
   (e)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of illegal
sale of pure caffeine, a minor misdemeanor on a first offense and a misdemeanor
of the third degree on each subsequent offense.
(ORC 2925.34)
CHAPTER 630:  GAMBLING
Section
630.01   Definitions.
630.02   Gambling in general.
630.03   Operating a gambling house.
630.04   Public gaming.
630.05   Cheating.
630.06   Responsibility of charitable organization conducting bingo game.
630.07   Maintenance of records by charitable organizations.
630.08   Qualifications of bingo game operator.
630.09   Exemption for bingo games conducted for amusement.
630.10   Prohibitions where instant bingo game is conducted.
630.11   Raffle drawings.
630.12   Instant bingo other than at bingo sessions.
630.13   Restrictions on owner or lessor of location at instant bingo.
630.14   Skill-based amusement machines; prohibited conduct.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   See section histories for similar state law
   Power to prohibit gambling - see Ohio R.C. 715.49
   Power to destroy devices - see Ohio R.C. 715.51
   Definitions generally - see GEN. OFF.
606.01
   Disposition of unclaimed or forfeited property held by Police Department -
see GEN. OFF.
608.16
§ 630.01  DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this chapter:
   (a)   “Bet” means the hazarding of anything of value upon the result of an
event, undertaking, or contingency, but does not include a bona fide business
risk.
   (b)   “Bingo” means either of the following:
      (1)   A game with all of the following characteristics:
         A.   The participants use bingo cards or sheets, including paper
formats and electronic representation or image formats, that are divided into
25 spaces arranged in 5 horizontal and 5 vertical rows of spaces, with each
space, except the central space, being designated by a combination of a letter
and a number and with the central space being designated as a free space;
         B.   The participants cover the spaces on the bingo cards or sheets
that correspond to combinations of letters and numbers that are announced by a
bingo game operator;
         C.   A bingo game operator announces combinations of letters and
numbers that appear on objects that a bingo game operator selects by chance,
either manually or mechanically, from a receptacle that contains 75 objects at
the beginning of each game, each object marked by a different combination of a
letter and a number that corresponds to one of the 75 possible combinations of
a letter and a number that can appear on the bingo cards or sheets;
         D.   The winner of the bingo game includes any participant who
properly announces during the interval between the announcements of letters and
numbers, as described in division (1)C. of this definition, that a
predetermined and pre-announced pattern of spaces has been covered on a bingo
card or sheet being used by the participant.
      (2)   Instant bingo, punch boards, and raffles.
   (c)   “Bingo game operator” means any person, except security personnel, who
performs work or labor at the site of bingo including but not limited to
collecting money from participants, handing out bingo cards or sheets or
objects to cover spaces on bingo cards or sheets, selecting from a receptacle
the objects that contain the combination of letters and numbers that appear on
bingo cards or sheets, calling out the combinations of letters and numbers,
distributing prizes, selling or redeeming instant bingo tickets or cards,
supervising the operation of a punch board, selling raffle tickets, selecting
raffle tickets from a receptacle and announcing the winning numbers in a
raffle, and preparing, selling, and serving food or beverages.
   (d)   “Bingo session” means a period that includes both of the following:
      (1)   Not to exceed five continuous hours for the conduct of one or more
games described in division (1) of the definition of “bingo” in this section,
instant bingo, and seal cards;
      (2)   A period for the conduct of instant bingo and seal cards for not
more than two hours before and not more than two hours after the period
described in division (1) of this definition.
   (e)   “Bingo supplies” means bingo cards or sheets; instant bingo tickets or
cards; electronic bingo aids; raffle tickets; punch boards; seal cards; instant
bingo ticket dispensers; and devices for selecting or displaying the
combination of bingo letters and numbers or raffle tickets. Items that are
“bingo supplies” are not gambling devices if sold or otherwise provided, and
used, in accordance with this chapter or Ohio R.C. Chapter 2915. For purposes
of this chapter, “bingo supplies” are not to be considered equipment used to
conduct a bingo game.
   (f)   “Bookmaking” means the business of receiving or paying off bets.
   (g)   “Chamber of commerce” means any organization of individuals,
professionals, and businesses that has the purpose to advance the commercial,
financial, industrial, and civic interests of the community and that is, and
has received from the Internal Revenue Service a determination letter that
currently is in effect stating that the organization is, exempt from federal
income taxation under IRC 501(a) and described in IRC 501(c)(6).
   (h)   “Charitable bingo game” means any bingo game described in divisions
(1) or (2) of the definition of “bingo” in this section that is conducted by a
charitable organization that has obtained a license pursuant to Ohio R.C.
2915.08 and the proceeds of which are used for a charitable purpose.
   (i)   “Charitable instant bingo organization.” means an organization that is
exempt from federal income taxation under IRC 501(a) and described in IRC 501
(c)(3) and is a charitable organization as defined in this section. A
“charitable instant bingo organization” does not include a charitable
organization that is exempt from federal income taxation under IRC 501(a) and
described in IRC 501(c)(3) and that is created by a veteran’s organization, a
fraternal organization, or a sporting organization in regards to bingo
conducted or assisted by a veteran’s organization, a fraternal organization, or
a sporting organization pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2915.13, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (j)   “Charitable organization.”
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, “charitable
organization” means either of the following:
         A.   An organization that is and has received from the Internal
Revenue Service a determination letter that is currently in effect, stating
that the organization is exempt from federal income taxation under IRC § 501(a)
and described in IRC § 501(c)(3);
         B.   A volunteer rescue service organization, volunteer firefighter’s
organization, veteran’s organization, fraternal organization, or sporting
organization that is exempt from federal income taxation under IRC §§ 501(c)
(4), 501(c)(7), 501(c)(8), 501(c)(10) or 501(c)(19).
      (2)   To qualify as a charitable organization, an organization shall have
been in continuous existence as such in this state for a period of two years
immediately preceding either the making of an application for a bingo license
under Ohio R.C. 2915.08 or the conducting of any game of chance as provided in
Ohio R.C. 2915.02(D), or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (k)   “Charitable purpose” means that the net profit of bingo, other than
instant bingo, is used by, or is given, donated, or otherwise transferred to,
any of the following:
      (1)   Any organization that is described in IRC 509(a)(1), 509(a)(2), or
509(a)(3) and is either a governmental unit or an organization that is tax
exempt under IRC 501(a) and described in IRC 501(c)(3);
      (2)   A veteran’s organization that is a post, chapter, or organization
of veterans, or an auxiliary unit or society of, or a trust or foundation for,
any such post, chapter, or organization organized in the United States or any
of its possessions, at least 75% of the members of which are veterans and
substantially all of the other members of which are individuals who are
spouses, widows, or widowers of veterans, or such individuals, provided that no
part of the net earnings of such post, chapter, or organization inures to the
benefit of any private shareholder or individual, and further provided that the
net profit is used by the post, chapter, or organization for the charitable
purposes set forth in Ohio R.C. 5739.02(B)(12), is used for awarding
scholarships to or for attendance at an institution mentioned in that division
of the Revised Code, is donated to a governmental agency, or is used for
nonprofit youth activities, the purchase of United States or Ohio flags that
are donated to schools, youth groups, or other bona fide nonprofit
organizations, promotion of patriotism, or disaster relief;
      (3)   A fraternal organization that has been in continuous existence in
this state for 15 years and that uses the net profit exclusively for religious,
charitable, scientific, literary, or educational purposes, or for the
prevention of cruelty to children or animals, if contributions for such use
would qualify as a deductible charitable contribution under IRC 170;
      (4)   A volunteer firefighter’s organization that uses the net profit for
the purposes set forth in the definition of “volunteer firefighter’s
organization” in this section.
   (l)   “Community action agency” has the same  meaning as in Ohio R.C.
122.66.
   (m)   “Conduct” means to back, promote, organize, manage, carry on, sponsor,
or prepare for the operation of bingo or a game of chance, a scheme of chance,
or a sweepstakes.
   (n)   “Deal of instant bingo tickets” means a single game of instant bingo
tickets all with the same serial number.
   (o)   “Distributor” means any person who purchases or obtains bingo supplies
and who does either of the following:
      (1)   Sells, offers for sale, or otherwise provides or offers to provide
the bingo supplies to another person for use in this state;
      (2)   Modifies, converts, adds to, or removes parts from the bingo
supplies to further their promotion or sale for use in this state.
   (p)   “Electronic bingo aid.”
      (1)   “Electronic bingo aid” means an electronic device used by a
participant to monitor bingo cards or sheets purchased at the time and place of
a bingo session and that does all of the following:
         A.   It provides a means for a participant to input numbers and
letters announced by a bingo caller.
         B.   It compares the numbers and letters entered by the participant to
the bingo faces previously stored in the memory of the device.
         C.   It identifies a winning bingo pattern.
      (2)   “Electronic bingo aid” does not include any device into which a
coin, currency, token, or an equivalent is inserted to activate play.
   (q)   “Expenses” means the reasonable amount of gross profit actually
expended for all of the following:
      (1)   The purchase or lease of bingo supplies;
      (2)   The annual license fee required under Ohio R.C. 2915.08;
      (3)   Bank fees and service charges for a bingo session or game account
described in Ohio R.C.  2915.10;
      (4)   Audits and accounting services;
      (5)   Safes;
      (6)   Cash registers;
      (7)   Hiring security personnel;
      (8)   Advertising bingo;
      (9)   Renting premises in which to conduct a bingo session;
      (10)   Tables and chairs;
      (11)   Expenses for maintaining and operating a charitable organization’s
facilities, including, but not limited to, a post home, club house, lounge,
tavern, or canteen and any grounds attached to the post home, club house,
lounge, tavern, or canteen;
      (12)   Payment of real property taxes and assessments that are levied on
a premises on which bingo is conducted;
      (13)   Any other product or service directly related to the conduct of
bingo that is authorized in rules adopted by the Attorney General under Ohio
R.C. 2915.08(B)(1).
   (r)   “Fraternal organization” means any society, order, state headquarters,
or association within this state, except a college or high school fraternity,
that is not organized for profit, that is a branch, lodge, or chapter of a
national or state organization, that exists exclusively for the common business
or sodality of its members.
   (s)   “Gambling device” means any of the following:
      (1)   A book, totalizer, or other equipment used for recording bets;
      (2)   A ticket, token, or other device representing a chance, share, or
interest in a scheme of chance or evidencing a bet;
      (3)   A deck of cards, dice, gaming table, roulette wheel, slot machine,
or other apparatus designed for use in connection with a game of chance;
      (4)   Any equipment, device, apparatus, or paraphernalia specially
designed for gambling purposes;
      (5)   Bingo supplies sold or otherwise provided, or used, in violation of
this chapter or Ohio R.C. Chapter 2915.
   (t)   “Gambling offense” means any of the following:
      (1)   A violation of Ohio R.C. 2915.02, 2915.03, 2915.04, 2915.05,
2915.06, 2915.07, 2915.08, 2915.081, 2915.082, 2915.09, 2915.091, 2915.092,
2915.10, or 2915.11;
      (2)   A violation of an existing or former municipal ordinance or law of
this or any other state or of the United States substantially equivalent to any
section listed in division (1) of this definition or a violation of Ohio R.C.
2915.06 as it existed prior to July 1, 1996;
      (3)   An offense under an existing or former municipal ordinance or law
of this or any other state or of the United States, of which gambling is an
element;
      (4)   A conspiracy or attempt to commit, or complicity in committing, any
offense under division (1), (2), or (3) of this definition.
   (u)   “Game flare” means the board or placard that accompanies each deal of
instant bingo tickets and that has printed on or affixed to it the following
information for the game:
      (1)   The name of the game;
      (2)   The manufacturer’s name or distinctive logo;
      (3)   The form number;
      (4)   The ticket count;
      (5)   The prize structure, including the number of winning instant bingo
tickers by denomination and the respective winning symbol or number
combinations for the winning instant bingo tickets;
      (6)   The cost per play;
      (7)   The serial number of the game.
   (v)   “Game of chance” means poker, craps, roulette, or other game in which
a player gives anything of value in the hope of gain, the outcome of which is
determined largely by chance, but does not include bingo.
   (w)   “Game of chance conducted for profit” means any game of chance
designed to produce income for the person who conducts or operates the game of
chance, but does not include bingo.
   (x)   “Gross annual revenues” means the annual gross receipts derived from
the conduct of bingo described in division (1) of the definition of “bingo” in
this section plus the annual net profit derived from the conduct of bingo
described in division (2) of the definition of “bingo” in this section.
   (y)   “Gross profit” means gross receipts minus the amount actually expended
for the payment of prize awards.
   (z)   “Gross receipts” means all money or assets, including admission fees,
that a person receives from bingo without the deduction of any amounts for
prizes paid out or for the expenses of conducting bingo.  “Gross receipts” does
not include any money directly taken in from the sale of food or beverages by a
charitable organization conducting bingo, or by a bona fide auxiliary unit or
society of a charitable organization conducting bingo, provided all of the
following apply:
      (1)   The auxiliary unit or society has been in existence as a bona fide
auxiliary unit or society of the charitable organization for at least two years
prior to conducting bingo.
      (2)   The person who purchases the food or beverage receives nothing of
value except the food or beverage and items customarily received with the
purchase of that food or beverage.
      (3)   The food and beverages are sold at customary and reasonable prices.
   (aa)   “Historic railroad” means all or a portion of the tracks and right-
of-way of a railroad that was owned and operated by a for profit common carrier
in this state at any time prior to January 1, 1950.
   (bb)   “Instant bingo” A form of bingo that shall use folded or banded
tickets or paper cards with perforated break-open tabs, a face of which is
covered or otherwise hidden from view to conceal a number, letter, or symbol,
or set of numbers, letters, or symbols, some of which have been designated in
advance as prize winners, and may also include games in which some winners are
determined by the random selection of one or more bingo numbers by the use of a
seal card or bingo blower. In all “instant bingo” the prize amount and
structure shall be predetermined. The term does not include any device that is
activated by the insertion of a coin, currency, token, or an equivalent, and
that contains as one of its components a video display monitor that is capable
of displaying numbers, letters, symbols, or characters in winning or losing
combinations.
   (cc)   “Instant bingo ticket dispenser” means a mechanical device that
dispenses an instant bingo ticket or card as the sole item of value dispensed
and that has the following characteristics:
      (1)   It is activated upon the insertion of United States currency.
      (2)   It performs no gaming functions.
      (3)   It does not contain a video display monitor or generate noise.
      (4)   It is not capable of displaying any numbers, letters, symbols, or
characters in winning or losing combinations.
      (5)   It does not simulate or display rolling or spinning reels.
      (6)   It is incapable of determining whether a dispensed bingo ticket or
card is a winning or non-winning ticket or card and requires a winning ticket
or card to be paid by a bingo game operator.
      (7)   It may provide accounting and security features to aid in
accounting for the instant bingo tickets or cards it dispenses.
      (8)   It is not part of an electronic network and is not interactive.
   (dd)   “IRC” or “Internal Revenue Code” means the Internal Revenue Code of
1986, 100 Stat. 2085, 26 U.S.C. 1 et seq., as now or hereafter amended.
   (ee)   “Manufacturer” means any person who assembles completed bingo
supplies from raw materials, other items, or subparts or who modifies,
converts, adds to, or removes parts from bingo supplies to further their
promotion or sale.
   (ff)   “Merchandise prize” means any item of value, but shall not include
any of the following:
      (1)   Cash, gift cards, or any equivalent thereof;
      (2)   Plays on games of chance, state lottery tickets, bingo, or instant
bingo;
      (3)   Firearms, tobacco, or alcoholic beverages; or
      (4)   A redeemable voucher that is redeemable for any of the items listed
in division (1), (2), or (3) of this definition.
   (gg)   “Net profit” means gross profit minus expenses.
   (hh)   “Net profit from the proceeds of the sale of instant bingo” means
gross profit minus the ordinary, necessary, and reasonable expense expended for
the purchase of instant bingo supplies, and, in the case of instant bingo
conducted by a veteran’s, fraternal, or sporting organization, minus the
payment by that organization of real property taxes and assessments levied on a
premises on which instant bingo is conducted.
   (ii)   “Participant” means any person who plays bingo.
   (jj)   “Person” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 1.59 and includes any
firm or any other legal entity, however organized.
   (kk)   “Pool not conducted for profit” means a scheme in which a participant
gives a valuable consideration for a chance to win a prize and the total amount
of consideration wagered is distributed to a participant or participants.
   (ll)   “Punch board” means a board containing a number of holes or
receptacles of uniform size in which are placed, mechanically and randomly,
serially numbered slips of paper that may be punched or drawn from the hole or
receptacle when used in conjunction with instant bingo. A player may punch or
draw the numbered slips of paper from the holes or receptacles and obtain the
prize established for the game if the number drawn corresponds to a winning
number or, if the punch board includes the use of a seal card, a potential
winning number.
   (mm)   “Raffle” means a form of bingo in which the one or more prizes are
won by one or more persons who have purchased a raffle ticket. The one or more
winners of the raffle are determined by drawing a ticket stub or other
detachable section from a receptacle containing ticket stubs or detachable
sections corresponding to all tickets sold for the raffle. The term does not
include the drawing of a ticket stub or other detachable section of a ticket
purchased to attend a professional sporting event if both of the following
apply:
      (1)   The ticket stub or other detachable section is used to select the
winner of a free prize given away at the professional sporting event; and
      (2)   The cost of the ticket is the same as the cost of a ticket to the
professional sporting event on days when no free prize is given away.
   (nn)   “Redeemable voucher” means any ticket, token, coupon, receipt, or
other noncash representation of value.
   (oo)   “Religious organization” means any church, body of communicants, or
group that is not organized or operated for profit and that gathers in common
membership for regular worship and religious observances.
   (pp)   “Revoke” means to void permanently all rights and privileges of the
holder of a license issued under Ohio R.C. 2915.08, 2915.081, or 2915.082 or a
charitable gaming license issued by another jurisdiction.
   (qq)   “Scheme of chance.”
      (1)   A slot machine unless authorized under Ohio R.C. Chapter 3772,
lottery unless authorized under Ohio R.C. Chapter 3770, numbers game, pool
conducted for profit, or other scheme in which a participant gives a valuable
consideration for a chance to win a prize, but does not include bingo, a skill-
based amusement machine, or a pool not conducted for profit. “Scheme of chance”
includes the use of an electronic device to reveal the results of a game entry
if valuable consideration is paid, directly or indirectly, for a chance to win
a prize. Valuable consideration is deemed to be paid for a chance to win a
prize in the following instances:
         A.   Less than 50% of the goods or services sold by a scheme of chance
operator in exchange for game entries are used or redeemed by participants at
any one location;
         B.   Less than 50% of participants who purchase goods or services at
any one location do not accept, use, or redeem the goods or services sold or
purportedly sold;
         C.   More than 50% of prizes at any one location are revealed to
participants through an electronic device simulating a game of chance or a
“casino game” as defined in Ohio R.C. 3772.01;
         D.   The good or service sold by a scheme of chance operator in
exchange for a game entry cannot be used or redeemed in the manner advertised;
         E.   A participant pays more than fair market value for goods or
services offered by a scheme of chance operator in order to receive one or more
game entries;
         F.   A participant may use the electronic device to purchase
additional game entries;
         G.   A participant may purchase additional game entries by using
points or credits won as prizes while using the electronic device;
         H.   A scheme of chance operator pays out in prize money more than 20%
of the gross revenue received at one location; or
         I.   A participant makes a purchase or exchange in order to obtain any
good or service that may be used to facilitate play on the electronic device.
      (2)   As used in this division, “electronic device” means a mechanical,
video, digital, or electronic machine or device that is capable of displaying
information on a screen or other mechanism and that is owned, leased, or
otherwise possessed by any person conducting a scheme of chance, or by that
person’s partners, affiliates, subsidiaries, or contractors.
   (rr)   “Seal card” means a form of instant bingo that uses instant bingo
tickets in conjunction with a board or placard that contains one or more seals
that, when removed or opened, reveal predesignated winning numbers, letters, or
symbols.
   (ss)   “Security personnel” includes any person who either is a sheriff,
deputy sheriff, marshal, deputy marshal, township constable, or member of an
organized police department of a municipal corporation or has successfully
completed a peace officer’s training course pursuant to Ohio R.C. 109.71 to
109.79 and who is hired to provide security for the premises on which bingo is
conducted.
   (tt)   “Skill-based amusement machine.”
      (1)   A.   A mechanical, video, digital, or electronic device that
rewards the player or players, if at all, only with merchandise prizes or with
redeemable vouchers redeemable only for merchandise prizes, provided that with
respect to rewards for playing the game all of the following apply:
            1.   The wholesale value of a merchandise prize awarded as a result
of the single play of a machine does not exceed ten dollars ($10.00);
            2.   Redeemable vouchers awarded for any single play of a machine
are not redeemable for a merchandise prize with a wholesale value of more than
ten dollars ($10.00);
            3.   Redeemable vouchers are not redeemable for a merchandise prize
that has a wholesale value of more than ten dollars ($10.00) times the fewest
number of single plays necessary to accrue the redeemable vouchers required to
obtain that prize; and
            4.   Any redeemable vouchers or merchandise prizes are distributed
at the site of the skill-based amusement machine at the time of play.
         B.   A card for the purchase of gasoline is a redeemable voucher for
purposes of division (1) of this definition even if the skill-based amusement
machine for the play of which the card is awarded is located at a place where
gasoline may not be legally distributed to the public or the card is not
redeemable at the location of, or at the time of playing, the skill-based
amusement machine.
      (2)   A device shall not be considered a skill-based amusement machine
and shall be considered a slot machine if it pays cash or one or more of the
following apply:
         A.   The ability of a player to succeed at the game is impacted by the
number or ratio of prior wins to prior losses of players playing the game;
         B.   Any reward of redeemable vouchers is not based solely on the
player achieving the object of the game or the players score;
         C.   The outcome of the game, or the value of the redeemable voucher
or merchandise prize awarded for winning the game, can be controlled by a
source other than any player playing the game;
         D.   The success of any player is or may be determined by a chance
event that cannot be altered by player actions;
         E.   The ability of any player to succeed at the game is determined by
game features not visible or known to the player;
         F.   The ability of the player to succeed at the game is impacted by
the exercise of a skill that no reasonable player could exercise.
      (3)   All of the following apply to any machine that is operated as
described in division (1) of this definition:
         A.   As used in this definition of “skill-based amusement machine”,
“game” and “play” mean one event from the initial activation of the machine
until the results of play are determined without payment of additional
consideration. An individual utilizing a machine that involves a single game,
play, contest, competition, or tournament may be awarded redeemable vouchers or
merchandise prizes based on the results of play.
         B.   Advance play for a single game, play, contest, competition, or
tournament participation may be purchased. The cost of the contest,
competition, or tournament participation may be greater than a single non-
contest, competition, or tournament play.
         C.   To the extent that the machine is used in a contest, competition,
or tournament, that contest, competition, or tournament has a defined starting
and ending date and is open to participants in competition for scoring and
ranking results toward the awarding of redeemable vouchers or merchandise
prizes that are stated prior to the start of the contest, competition, or
tournament.
      (4)   For purposes of division (1) of this definition, the mere presence
of a device, such as a pin-setting, ball-releasing, or scoring mechanism, that
does not contribute to or affect the outcome of the play of the game does not
make the device a skill-based amusement machine.
   (uu)   “Slot machine.”
      (1)   Means either of the following:
         A.   Any mechanical, electronic, video, or digital device that is
capable of accepting anything of value, directly or indirectly, from or on
behalf of a player who gives the thing of value in the hope of gain;
         B.   Any mechanical, electronic, video, or digital device that is
capable of accepting anything of value, directly or indirectly, from or on
behalf of a player to conduct bingo or a scheme or game of chance.
      (2)   “Slot machine” does not include a skill-based amusement machine or
an instant bingo ticket dispenser.
   (vv)   “Sporting organization” means a hunting, fishing, or trapping
organization, other than a college or high school fraternity or sorority, that
is not organized for profit, that is affiliated with a state or national
sporting organization, including but not limited to, the League of Ohio
Sportsmen, and that has been in continuous existence in this state for a period
of three years.
   (ww)   “Suspend” means to interrupt temporarily all rights and privileges of
the holder of a license issued under Ohio R.C. 2915.08, 2915.081, or 2915.082
or a charitable gaming license issued by another jurisdiction.
   (xx)   “Sweepstakes.” Any game, contest, advertising scheme or plan, or
other promotion where consideration is not required for a person to enter to
win or become eligible to receive any prize, the determination of which is
based upon chance. “Sweepstakes” does not include bingo as authorized under
Ohio R.C. Chapter 2915, pari-mutuel wagering as authorized by Ohio R.C. Chapter
3769, lotteries conducted by the State Lottery Commission as authorized by Ohio
R.C. Chapter 3770, and casino gaming as authorized by Ohio R.C. Chapter 3772.
   (yy)   “Sweepstakes terminal device.”
      (1)   A mechanical, video, digital, or electronic machine or device that
is owned, leased, or otherwise possessed by any person conducting a
sweepstakes, or by that person’s partners, affiliates, subsidiaries, or
contractors, that is intended to be used by a sweepstakes participant, and that
is capable of displaying information on a screen or other mechanism. A device
is a sweepstakes terminal device if any of the following apply:
         A.   The device uses a simulated game terminal as a representation of
the prizes associated with the results of the sweepstakes entries.
         B.   The device utilizes software such that the simulated game
influences or determines the winning of or value of the prize.
         C.   The device selects prizes from a predetermined finite pool of
entries.
         D.   The device utilizes a mechanism that reveals the content of a
predetermined sweepstakes entry.
         E.   The device predetermines the prize results and stores those
results for delivery at the time the sweepstakes entry results are revealed.
         F.   The device utilizes software to create a game result.
         G.   The device reveals the prize incrementally, even though the
device does not influence the awarding of the prize or the value of any prize
awarded.
         H.   The device determines and associates the prize with an entry or
entries at the time the sweepstakes is entered.
      (2)   As used in this definition and in §
630.02:
         A.   “Enter.” The act by which a person becomes eligible to receive
any prize offered in a sweepstakes.
         B.   “Entry.” One event from the initial activation of the sweepstakes
terminal device until all the sweepstakes prize results from that activation
are revealed.
         C.   “Prize.” Any gift, award, gratuity, good, service, credit,
reward, or any other thing of value that may be transferred to a person,
whether possession of the prize is actually transferred, or placed on an
account or other record as evidence of the intent to transfer the prize.
         D.   “Sweepstakes terminal device facility.” Any location in this
state where a sweepstakes terminal device is provided to a sweepstakes
participant, except as provided in Section
630.02(g) and Ohio R.C. 2915.02(G).
   (zz)   “Veteran’s organization” means any individual post or state
headquarters of a national veteran’s association or an auxiliary unit of any
individual post of a national veteran’s association, which post, state
headquarters, or auxiliary unit is incorporated as a nonprofit corporation and
either has received a letter from the state headquarters of the national
veteran’s association indicating that the individual post or auxiliary unit is
in good standing with the national veteran’s association or has received a
letter from the national veteran’s association indicating that the state
headquarters is in good standing with the national veteran’s association.  As
used in this division, “national veteran’s association” means any veteran’s
association that has been in continuous existence as such for a period of at
least five years and either is incorporated by an act of the United States
Congress or has a national dues-paying membership of at least 5,000 persons.
   (aaa)   “Volunteer firefighter’s organization” means any organization of
volunteer firefighters, as defined in Ohio R.C. 146.01, that is organized and
operated exclusively to provide financial support for a volunteer fire
department or a volunteer fire company and that is recognized or ratified by a
county, municipal corporation, or township.
   (bbb)   “Volunteer rescue service organization” means any organization of
volunteers organized to function as an emergency medical service organization,
as defined in Ohio R.C. 4765.01.
   (ccc)   “Youth athletic organization” means any organization, not organized
for profit, that is organized and operated exclusively to provide financial
support to, or to operate, athletic activities for persons who are 21 years of
age or younger by means of sponsoring, organizing, operating, or contributing
to the support of an athletic team, club, league, or association.
   (ddd)   “Youth athletic park organization” means any organization, not
organized for profit, that satisfies both of the following:
      (1)   It owns, operates, and maintains playing fields that satisfy both
of the following:
         A.   The playing fields are used at least 100 days per year for
athletic activities by one or more organizations, not organized for profit,
each of which is organized and operated exclusively to provide financial
support to, or to operate, athletic activities for persons who are 18 years of
age or younger by means of sponsoring, organizing, operating, or contributing
to the support of an athletic team, club, league, or association.
         B.   The playing fields are not used for any profit-making activity at
any time during the year.
      (2)   It uses the proceeds of bingo it conducts exclusively for the
operation, maintenance, and improvement of its playing fields of the type
described in division (1) of this definition.
(ORC 2915.01)
§ 630.02  GAMBLING IN GENERAL.
   (a)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Engage in bookmaking, or knowingly engage in conduct that
facilitates bookmaking.
      (2)   Establish, promote, or operate or knowingly engage in conduct that
facilitates any game of chance conducted for profit or any scheme of chance.
      (3)   Knowingly procure, transmit, exchange, or engage in conduct that
facilitates the procurement, transmission, or exchange of information for use
in establishing odds or determining winners in connection with bookmaking or
with any game of chance conducted for profit or any scheme of chance.
      (4)   Engage in betting or in playing any scheme or game of chance as a
substantial source of income or livelihood.
      (5)   Conduct, or participate in the conduct of, a sweepstakes with the
use of a sweepstakes terminal device at a sweepstakes terminal device facility
and either:
         A.   Give to another person any item described in Ohio R.C. 2915.01
(VV)(1), (VV)(2), (VV)(3), or (VV)(4) as a prize for playing or participating
in a sweepstakes; or
         B.   Give to another person any merchandise prize, or a redeemable
voucher for a merchandise prize, the wholesale value of which is in excess of
ten dollars ($10.00) and which is awarded as a single entry for playing or
participating in a sweepstakes. Redeemable vouchers shall not be redeemable for
a merchandise prize that has a wholesale value of more than ten dollars
($10.00).
      (6)   Conduct, or participate in the conduct of, a sweepstakes with the
use of a sweepstakes terminal device at a sweepstakes terminal device facility
without first obtaining a current annual “certificate of registration” from the
Attorney General as required by Ohio R.C. 2915.02(F).
      (7)   With purpose to violate division (a)(1), (2), (3), (4), (5), or (6)
of this section, acquire, possess, control, or operate any gambling device.
   (b)   For purposes of division (a)(1) of this section, a person facilitates
bookmaking if the person in any way knowingly aids an illegal bookmaking
operation, including, without limitation, placing a bet with a person engaged
in or facilitating illegal bookmaking.  For purposes of division (a)(2) of this
section, a person facilitates a game of chance conducted for profit or a scheme
of chance if the person in any way knowingly aids in the conduct or operation
of any such game or scheme, including, without limitation, playing any such
game or scheme.
   (c)   This section does not prohibit conduct in connection with gambling
expressly permitted by law.
   (d)   This section does not apply to any of the following:
      (1)   Games of chance, if all of the following apply:
         A.   The games of chance are not craps for money or roulette for
money.
         B.   The games of chance are conducted by a charitable organization
that is and has received from the Internal Revenue Service a determination
letter that is currently in effect, stating that the organization is exempt
from federal income taxation under IRC 501(a) and described in IRC 501(c)(3).
         C.   The games of chance are conducted at festivals of the charitable
organization that are conducted not more than a total of five days a calendar
year, and are conducted on premises owned by the charitable organization for a
period of no less than one year immediately preceding the conducting of the
games of chance, on premises leased from a governmental unit, or on premises
that are leased from a veteran’s or fraternal organization and that have been
owned by the lessor veteran’s or fraternal organization for a period of no less
than one year immediately preceding the conducting of the games of chance. A
charitable organization shall not lease premises from a veteran’s or fraternal
organization to conduct a festival described in this division, if the veteran’s
or fraternal organization already has leased the premises 12 times during the
preceding year to charitable organizations for that purpose.  If a charitable
organization leases premises from a veteran’s or fraternal organization to
conduct a festival described in this division, the charitable organization
shall not pay a rental rate for the premises per day of the festival that
exceeds the rental rate per bingo session that a charitable organization may
pay under Ohio R.C. 2915.09(B)(1) or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance when it leases premises from another charitable organization to
conduct bingo games.
         D.   All of the money or assets received from the games of chance
after deduction only of prizes paid out during the conduct of the games of
chance are used by, given, donated or otherwise transferred to any organization
that is described in IRC 509(a)(1), (a)(2), or (a)(3) and is either a
governmental unit or an organization that is tax exempt under IRC 501(a) and
described in IRC 501(c)(3).
         E.   The games of chance are not conducted during or within ten hours
of a bingo game conducted for amusement purposes only pursuant to Ohio R.C.
2915.12 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.  No person shall
receive any commission, wage, salary, reward, tip, donation, gratuity, or other
form of compensation, directly or indirectly, for operating or assisting in the
operation of any game of chance.
      (2)   Any tag fishing tournament, as defined in Ohio R.C. 1531.01,
operated under a permit issued under Ohio R.C. 1533.92.
      (3)   Bingo conducted by a charitable organization that holds a license
issued under Ohio R.C. 2915.08.
   (e)   Division (d) of this section shall not be construed to authorize the
sale, lease, or other temporary or permanent transfer of the right to conduct
games of chance, as granted by that division, by any charitable organization
that is granted that right.
   (f)   Any person desiring to conduct, or participate in the conduct of, a
sweepstakes with the use of a sweepstakes terminal device at a sweepstakes
terminal device facility shall first register with the Office of the Attorney
General and obtain an annual certificate of registration by providing a filing
fee of two hundred dollars ($200.00) and all information as required by rule
adopted under Ohio R.C. 2915.02(H). Not later than the tenth day of each month,
each sweepstakes terminal device operator shall file a sweepstakes terminal
device monthly report with the Attorney General and provide a filing fee of
fifty dollars ($50.00) and all information required by rule adopted under Ohio
R.C. 2915.02(H). All information provided to the Attorney General under this
division shall be available to law enforcement upon request.
   (g)   (1)   A person may apply to the Attorney General, on a form prescribed
by the Attorney General, for a certificate of compliance that the person is not
operating a sweepstakes terminal device facility. The form shall require the
person to include the address of the business location where sweepstakes
terminal devices will be used and to make the following certifications:
         A.   That the person will not use more than two sweepstakes terminal
devices at the business location;
         B.   That the retail value of sweepstakes prizes to be awarded at the
business location using sweepstakes terminal devices during a reporting period
will be less than 3% of the gross revenue received at the business location
during the reporting period;
         C.   That no other form of gaming except lottery ticket sales as
authorized under Ohio R.C. Chapter 3770 will be conducted at the business
location or in an adjoining area of the business location;
         D.   That any sweepstakes terminal device at the business location
will not allow any deposit of any money, coin, or token, or the use of any
credit card, debit card, prepaid card, or any other method of similar payment
to be used, directly or indirectly, to participate in a sweepstakes;
         E.   That notification of any prize will not take place on the same
day as a participant’s sweepstakes entry; and
         F.   That the person consents to provide any other information to the
Attorney General as required by rule adopted under Ohio R.C. 2915.02(H).
      (2)   The filing fee for a certificate of compliance is two hundred and
fifty dollars ($250.00). The Attorney General may charge up to an additional
two hundred and fifty dollars ($250.00) for reasonable expenses resulting from
any investigation related to an application for a certificate of compliance.
      (3)   A certificate of compliance is effective for one year. The
certificate holder may reapply for a certificate of compliance. A person issued
a certificate of compliance shall file semiannual reports with the Attorney
General stating the number of sweepstakes terminal devices at the business
location and that the retail value of prizes awarded at the business location
using sweepstakes terminal devices is less than 3% of the gross revenue
received at the business location.
   (h)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of gambling, a misdemeanor of
the first degree.  If the offender previously has been convicted of any
gambling offense, gambling is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state
law.  Notwithstanding this division, failing to file a sweepstakes terminal
device monthly report as required by division (f) of this section or the
semiannual report required by division (g) of this section is a misdemeanor of
the first degree.
(ORC 2915.02)
§ 630.03  OPERATING A GAMBLING HOUSE.
   (a)   No person, being the owner or lessee, or having custody, control, or
supervision of premises, shall:
      (1)   Use or occupy the premises for gambling in violation of Ohio R.C.
2915.02 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
      (2)   Recklessly permit the premises to be used or occupied for gambling
in violation of Ohio R.C. 2915.02 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance.
   (b)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of operating a
gambling house, a misdemeanor of the first degree.  If the offender previously
has been convicted of a gambling offense, operating a gambling house is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (c)   Premises used or occupied in violation of this section constitute a
nuisance subject to abatement under Ohio R.C. Chapter 3767.
(ORC 2915.03)
§ 630.04  PUBLIC GAMING.
   (a)   No person, while at a hotel, restaurant, tavern, store, arena, hall,
or other place of public accommodation, business, amusement, or resort shall
make a bet or play any game of chance or scheme of chance.
   (b)   No person, being the owner or lessee, or having custody, control, or
supervision of a hotel, restaurant, tavern, store, arena, hall, or other place
of public accommodation, business, amusement, or resort shall recklessly permit
those premises to be used or occupied in violation of division (a) of this
section.
   (c)   Divisions (a) and (b) of this section do not prohibit conduct in
connection with gambling expressly permitted by law.
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of public gaming.  Except as
otherwise provided in this division, public gaming is a minor misdemeanor.  If
the offender previously has been convicted of any gambling offense, public
gaming is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
   (e)   Premises used or occupied in violation of division (b) of this section
constitute a nuisance subject to abatement under R.C. Chapter 3767.
(ORC 2915.04)
§ 630.05  CHEATING.
   (a)   No person, with purpose to defraud or knowing that the person is
facilitating a fraud, shall engage in conduct designed to corrupt the outcome
of any of the following:
      (1)   The subject of a bet.
      (2)   A contest of knowledge, skill, or endurance that is not an athletic
or sporting event.
      (3)   A scheme or game of chance.
      (4)   Bingo.
   (b)   No person shall knowingly do any of the following:
      (1)   Offer, give, solicit, or accept anything of value to corrupt the
outcome of an athletic or sporting event.
      (2)   Engage in conduct designed to corrupt the outcome of an athletic or
sporting event.
   (c)   (1)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of
cheating.  Except as otherwise provided in this division, cheating is a
misdemeanor of the first degree.  If the potential gain from the cheating is
one thousand dollars ($1,000) or more or if the offender previously has been
convicted of any gambling offense or of any theft offense as defined in Ohio
R.C. 2913.01, cheating is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state
law.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of
corrupting sports.  Corrupting sports is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
(ORC 2915.05)
§ 630.06  RESPONSIBILITY OF CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION CONDUCTING BINGO GAME.
   (a)   No charitable organization that conducts bingo shall fail to do any of
the following:
      (1)   Own all of the equipment used to conduct bingo or lease that
equipment from a charitable organization that is licensed to conduct bingo, or
from the landlord of a premises where bingo is conducted, for a rental rate
that is not more than is customary and reasonable for that equipment;
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in division (a)(3) of this section,
use all of the gross receipts from bingo for paying prizes, for reimbursement
of expenses for or for renting premises in which to conduct bingo, for
reimbursement of expenses for or for purchasing or leasing bingo supplies used
in conducting bingo, for reimbursement of expenses for or for hiring security
personnel, for reimbursement of expenses for or for advertising bingo, or for
reimbursement of other expenses or for other expenses listed in the definition
for “expenses” in Ohio R.C. 2915.01, provided that the amount of the receipts
so spent is not more than is customary and reasonable for a similar purchase,
lease, hiring, advertising, or expense. If the building in which bingo is
conducted is owned by the charitable organization conducting bingo and the
bingo conducted includes a form of bingo described in division (1) of the
definition of “bingo” in Ohio R.C. 2915.01, the charitable organization may
deduct from the total amount of the gross receipts from each session a sum
equal to the lesser of six hundred dollars ($600.00) or 45% of the gross
receipts from the bingo described in that division as consideration for the use
of the premises;
      (3)   Use, or give, donate, or otherwise transfer, all of the net profit
derived from bingo, other than instant bingo, for a charitable purpose listed
in its license application and described in the definition for “charitable
purpose” in Ohio R.C. 2915.01, or distribute all of the net profit from the
proceeds of the sale of instant bingo as stated in its license application and
in accordance with Ohio R.C. 2915.101.
   (b)   No charitable organization that conducts a bingo game described in
division (1) of the definition of “bingo” in Ohio R.C. 2915.01 shall fail to do
any of the following:
      (1)   Conduct the bingo game on premises that are owned by the charitable
organization, on premises that are owned by another charitable organization and
leased from that charitable organization for a rental rate not in excess of the
lesser of six hundred fifty dollars ($650.00) per bingo session or 45% of the
gross receipts of the bingo session, on premises that are leased from a person
other than a charitable organization for a rental rate that is not more than is
customary and reasonable for premises that are similar in location, size, and
quality but not in excess of four hundred fifty dollars ($450.00) per bingo
session, or on premises that are owned by a person other than a charitable
organization, that are leased from that person by another charitable
organization, and that are subleased from that other charitable organization by
the charitable organization for a rental rate not in excess of four hundred
fifty dollars ($450.00) per bingo session.  No charitable organization is
required to pay property taxes or assessments on premises that the charitable
organization leases from another person to conduct bingo sessions. If the
charitable organization leases from a person other than a charitable
organization the premises on which it conducts bingo sessions, the lessor of
the premises shall provide only the premises to the organization and shall not
provide the organization with bingo game operators, security personnel,
concessions or concession operators, bingo supplies, or any other type of
service. A charitable organization shall not lease or sublease premises that it
owns or leases to more than three other charitable organizations per calendar
week for conducting bingo sessions on the premises. A person that is not a
charitable organization shall not lease premises that it owns, leases, or
otherwise is empowered to lease to more than three charitable organizations per
calendar week for conducting bingo sessions on the premises. In no case shall
more than nine bingo sessions be conducted on any premises in any calendar
week;
      (2)   Display its license conspicuously at the premises where the bingo
session is conducted;
      (3)   Conduct the bingo session in accordance with division (1) of the
definition of “bingo” in Ohio R.C. 2915.01.
   (c)   No charitable organization that conducts a bingo game described in
division (1) of the definition of “bingo” in Ohio R.C. 2915.01 shall do any of
the following:
      (1)   Pay any compensation to a bingo game operator for operating a bingo
session that is conducted by the charitable organization or for preparing,
selling, or serving food or beverages at the site of the bingo session, permit
any auxiliary unit or society of the charitable organization to pay
compensation to any bingo game operator who prepares, sells, or serves food or
beverages at a bingo session conducted by the charitable organization, or
permit any auxiliary unit or society of the charitable organization to prepare,
sell, or serve food or beverages at a bingo session conducted by the charitable
organization, if the auxiliary unit or society pays any compensation to the
bingo game operators who prepare, sell, or serve the food or beverages;
      (2)   Pay consulting fees to any person for any services performed in
relation to the bingo session;
      (3)   Pay concession fees to any person who provides refreshments to the
participants in the bingo session;
      (4)   Except as otherwise provided in division (c)(4) of this section,
conduct more than three bingo sessions in any seven-day period. A volunteer
firefighter’s organization or a volunteer rescue service organization that
conducts not more than five bingo sessions in a calendar year may conduct more
than three bingo sessions in a seven-day period after notifying the Attorney
General when it will conduct the sessions;
      (5)   Pay out more than six thousand dollars ($6,000.00) in prizes for
bingo games described in Ohio R.C. 2915.01(S)(1) during any bingo session that
is conducted by the charitable organization.  “Prizes” does not include awards
from the conduct of instant bingo;
      (6)   Conduct a bingo session at any time during the eight-hour period
between 2:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m., at any time during, or within ten hours of, a
bingo game conducted for amusement only pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2915.12 or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, at any premises not specified on
its license, or on any day of the week or during any time period not specified
on its license.  This division does not prohibit the sale of instant bingo
tickets beginning at 9:00 a.m. for a bingo session that begins at 10:00 a.m. If
circumstances make it impractical for the charitable organization to conduct a
bingo session at the premises, or on the day of the week or at the time
specified on its license or if a charitable organization wants to conduct bingo
sessions on a day of the week or at a time other than the day or time specified
on its license, the charitable organization may apply in writing to the
Attorney General for an amended license pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2915.08(F).  A
charitable organization may apply twice in each calendar year for an amended
license to conduct bingo sessions on a day of the week or at a time other than
the day or time specified on its license. If the amended license is granted,
the organization may conduct bingo sessions at the premises, on the day of the
week, and at the time specified on its amended license;
      (7)   Permit any person whom the charitable organization knows, or should
have known, is under the age of 18 to work as a bingo game operator;
      (8)   Permit any person whom the charitable organization knows, or should
have known, has been convicted of a felony or gambling offense in any
jurisdiction to be a bingo game operator;
      (9)   Permit the lessor of the premises on which the bingo session is
conducted, if the lessor is not a charitable organization, to provide the
charitable organization with bingo game operators, security personnel,
concessions, bingo  supplies, or any other type of service;
      (10)   Purchase or lease bingo supplies from any person except a
distributor issued a license under Ohio R.C. 2915.081;
      (11)   A.   Use or permit the use of electronic bingo aids except under
the following circumstances:
            1.   For any single participant, not more than 90 bingo faces can
be played using an electronic bingo aid or aids.
            2.   The charitable organization shall provide a participant using
an electronic bingo aid with corresponding paper bingo cards or sheets.
            3.   The total price of bingo faces played with an electronic bingo
aid shall be equal to the total price of the same number of bingo faces played
with a paper bingo card or sheet sold at the same bingo session but without an
electronic bingo aid.
            4.   An electronic bingo aid cannot be part of an electronic
network other than a network that includes only bingo aids and devices that are
located on the premises at which the bingo is being conducted or be interactive
with any device not located on the premises at which the bingo is being
conducted.
            5.   An electronic bingo aid cannot be used to participate in bingo
that is conducted at a location other than the location at which the bingo
session is conducted and at which the electronic bingo aid is used.
            6.   An electronic bingo aid cannot be used to provide for the
input of numbers and letters announced by a bingo caller other than the bingo
caller who physically calls the numbers and letters at the location at which
the bingo session is conducted and at which the electronic bingo aid is used.
         B.   The Attorney General may adopt rules in accordance with Ohio R.C.
Chapter 119 that govern the use of electronic bingo aids. The rules may include
a requirement that an electronic bingo aid be capable of being audited by the
Attorney General to verify the number of bingo cards or sheets played during
each bingo session.
      (12)   Permit any person the charitable organization knows, or should
have known, to be under 18 years of age to play bingo described in division (1)
of the definition of “bingo” in Ohio R.C. 2915.01.
   (d)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (d)(3) of this section,
no charitable organization shall provide to a bingo game operator, and no bingo
game operator shall receive or accept, any commission, wage, salary, reward,
tip, donation, gratuity, or other form of compensation, directly or indirectly,
regardless of the source, for conducting bingo or providing other work or labor
at the site of bingo during a bingo session.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in division (d)(3) of this section, no
charitable organization shall provide to a bingo game operator any commission,
wage, salary, reward, tip, donation, gratuity, or other form of compensation,
directly or indirectly regardless of the source, for conducting instant bingo
other than at a bingo session at the site of instant bingo other than at a
bingo session.
      (3)   Nothing in this division (d) of this section prohibits an employee
of a fraternal organization, veteran’s organization, or sporting organization
from selling instant bingo tickets or cards to the organization’s members or
invited guests, as long as no portion of the employee’s compensation is paid
from any receipts of bingo.
   (e)   Notwithstanding division (b)(1) of this section, a charitable
organization that, prior to December 6, 1977, has entered into written
agreements for the lease of premises it owns to another charitable organization
or other charitable organizations for the conducting of bingo sessions so that
more than two bingo sessions are conducted per calendar week on the premises,
and a person that is not a charitable organization and that, prior to December
6, 1977, has entered into written agreements for the lease of premises it owns
to charitable organizations for the conducting of more than two bingo sessions
per calendar week on the premises, may continue to lease the premises to those
charitable organizations, provided that no more than four sessions are
conducted per calendar week, that the lessor organization or person has
notified the Attorney General in writing of the organizations that will conduct
the sessions and the days of the week and the times of the day on which the
sessions will be conducted, that the initial lease entered into with each
organization that will conduct the sessions was filed with the Attorney General
prior to December 6, 1977, and that each organization that will conduct the
sessions was issued a license to conduct bingo games by the Attorney General
prior to December 6, 1977.
   (f)   This section does not prohibit a bingo licensed charitable
organization or a game operator from giving any person an instant bingo ticket
as a prize.
   (g)   Whoever violates division (a)(2) of this section is guilty of
illegally conducting a bingo game, a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law. Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (a)(1), (a)(3), (b)(1), (b)(2), (b)(3), (c)(1) to (c)(11), or (d) of
this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If the offender previously has
been convicted of a violation of division (a)(1), (a)(3), (b)(1), (b)(2), (b)
(3), (c)(1) to (c)(11), or (d) of this section, a violation of division (a)(1),
(a)(3), (b)(1), (b)(2), (b)(3), (c)(1) to (c)(11), or (d) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the first degree. Whoever violates division (c)(12) of this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender
previously has been convicted of a violation of division (c)(12) of this
section, a violation of division (c)(12) of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(ORC 2915.09)
§ 630.07  MAINTENANCE OF RECORDS BY CHARITABLE ORGANIZATIONS.
   (a)   No charitable organization that conducts bingo or a game of chance
pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2915.02(D), or any substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, shall fail to maintain the following records for at least three
years from the date on which the bingo or game of chance is conducted:
      (1)   An itemized list of the gross receipts of each bingo session, each
game of instant bingo by serial number, each raffle, each punch board game, and
each game of chance, and an itemized list of the gross profits of each game of
instant bingo by serial number;
      (2)   An itemized list of all expenses, other than prizes, that are
incurred in conducting bingo or instant bingo, the name of each person to whom
the expenses are paid, and a receipt for all of the expenses;
      (3)   A list of all prizes awarded during each bingo session, each
raffle, each punch board game, and each game of chance conducted by the
charitable organization, the total prizes awarded from each game of instant
bingo by serial number, and the name, address, and social security number of
all persons who are winners of prizes of six hundred dollars ($600.00) or more
in value;
      (4)   An itemized list of the recipients of the net profit of bingo or
game of chance, including the name and address of each recipient to whom the
money is distributed, and if the organization uses the net profit of bingo, or
the money or assets received from a game of chance, for any charitable or other
purpose set forth in Ohio R.C. 2915.01(Z), Ohio R.C. 2915.02(D), or Ohio R.C.
2915.101, a list of each purpose and an itemized list of each expenditure for
each purpose;
      (5)   The number of persons who participate in any bingo session or game
of chance that is conducted by the charitable organization;
      (6)   A list of receipts from the sale of food and beverages by the
charitable organization or one of its auxiliary units or societies, if the
receipts were excluded from “gross receipts” under Ohio R.C. 2915.01(T);
      (7)   An itemized list of all expenses incurred at each bingo session,
each raffle, each punch board game, or each game of instant bingo conducted by
the charitable organization in the sale of food and beverages by the charitable
organization or by an auxiliary unit or society of the charitable organization,
the name of each person to whom the expenses are paid, and a receipt for all of
the expenses.
   (b)   A charitable organization shall keep the records that it is required
to maintain pursuant to division (a) of this section at its principal place of
business in this state or at its headquarters in this state and shall notify
the Attorney General of the location at which those records are kept.
   (c)   The gross profit from each bingo session or game described in division
(1) or (2) of the definition of “bingo” in Ohio R.C. 2915.01 shall be deposited
into a checking account devoted exclusively to the bingo session or game. 
Payments for allowable expenses incurred in conducting the bingo session or
game and payments to recipients of some or all of the net profit of the bingo
session or game shall be made only by checks or electronic fund transfers drawn
on the bingo session or game account.
   (d)   Each charitable organization shall conduct and record an inventory of
all of its bingo supplies as of the first day of November of each year.
   (e)   The Attorney General may adopt rules in accordance with Ohio R.C.
Chapter 119 that establish standards of accounting, record keeping, and
reporting to ensure that gross receipts from bingo or games of chance are
properly accounted for.
   (f)   A distributor shall maintain, for a period of three years after the
date of its sale or other provision, a record of each instance of its selling
or otherwise providing to another person bingo supplies for use in this state.
The record shall include all of the following for each instance:
      (1)   The name of the manufacturer from which the distributor purchased
the bingo supplies and the date of the purchase;
      (2)   The name and address of the charitable organization or other
distributor to which the bingo supplies were sold or otherwise provided;
      (3)   A description that clearly identifies the bingo supplies;
      (4)   Invoices that include the nonrepeating serial numbers of all paper
bingo cards and sheets and all instant bingo deals sold or otherwise provided
to each charitable organization.
   (g)   A manufacturer shall maintain, for a period of three years after the
date of its sale or other provision, a record of each instance of its selling
or otherwise providing bingo supplies for use in this state. The record shall
include all of the following for each instance:
      (1)   The name and address of the distributor to whom the bingo supplies
were sold or otherwise provided;
      (2)   A description that clearly identifies the bingo supplies, including
serial numbers;
      (3)   Invoices that include the nonrepeating serial numbers of all paper
bingo cards and sheets and all instant bingo deals sold or otherwise provided
to each distributor.
   (h)   (1)   The Attorney General or any law enforcement agency may do all of
the following:
         A.   Investigate any charitable organization or any officer, agent,
trustee, member, or employee of the organization;
         B.   Examine the accounts and records of the organization;
         C.   Conduct inspections, audits, and observations of bingo or games
of chance;
         D.   Conduct inspections of the premises where bingo or games of
chance are conducted;
         E.   Take any other necessary and reasonable action to determine if a
violation of any provision of this chapter or Ohio R.C. Chapter 2915 has
occurred and to determine whether Ohio R.C. 2915.11, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, has been complied with.
      (2)   If any law enforcement agency has reasonable grounds to believe
that a charitable organization or an officer, agent, trustee, member, or
employee of the organization has violated any provision of this chapter or Ohio
R.C. Chapter 2915, the law enforcement agency may proceed by action in the
proper court to enforce this chapter or Ohio R.C. Chapter 2915, provided that
the law enforcement agency shall give written notice to the Attorney General
when commencing an action as described in this division.
   (i)   No person shall destroy, alter, conceal, withhold, or deny access to
any accounts or records of a charitable organization that have been requested
for examination, or obstruct, impede, or interfere with any inspection, audit,
or observation of bingo or a game of chance or premises where bingo or a game
of chance is conducted, or refuse to comply with any reasonable request of, or
obstruct, impede, or interfere with any other reasonable action undertaken by,
the Attorney General or a law enforcement agency pursuant to division (h) of
this section.
   (j)   Whoever violates division (a) or (i) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(ORC 2915.10)
§ 630.08  QUALIFICATIONS OF BINGO GAME OPERATOR.
   (a)   No person shall be a bingo game operator unless the person is 18 years
of age or older.
   (b)   No person who has been convicted of a felony or a gambling offense in
any jurisdiction shall be a bingo game operator.
   (c)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.  Whoever violates division (b) of this section
is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(ORC 2915.11)
§ 630.09  EXEMPTION FOR BINGO GAMES CONDUCTED FOR AMUSEMENT.
   (a)   Sections
630.06 to
630.13 do not apply to bingo games that are conducted for the purpose of
amusement only.  A bingo game is conducted for the purpose of amusement only if
it complies with all of the requirements specified in either division (a)(1) or
(a)(2) of this section.
      (1)   A.   The participants do not pay any money or any other thing of
value, including an admission fee or any fee, for bingo cards or sheets,
objects to cover the spaces, or other devices used in playing bingo, for the
privilege of participating in the bingo game, or to defray any costs of the
game, or pay tips or make donations during or immediately before or after the
bingo game.
         B.   All prizes awarded during the course of the game are non-
monetary, and in the form of merchandise, goods, or entitlement to goods or
services only, and the total value of all prizes awarded during the game is
less than one hundred dollars ($100.00).
         C.   No commission, wages, salary, reward, tip, donation, gratuity, or
other form of compensation, either directly or indirectly, and regardless of
the source, is paid to any bingo game operator for work or labor performed at
the site of the bingo game.
         D.   The bingo game is not conducted either during or within ten hours
of any of the following:
            1.   A bingo session during which a charitable bingo game is
conducted pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2915.07 through 2915.11 or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance.
            2.   A scheme or game of chance, or bingo described in Ohio R.C.
2915.01(O)(2).
         E.   The number of players participating in the bingo game does not
exceed 50.
      (2)   A.   The participants do not pay money or any other thing of value
as an admission fee, and no participant is charged more than twenty-five cents
($0.25) to purchase a bingo card or sheet, objects to cover the spaces, or
other devices used in playing bingo.
         B.   The total amount of money paid by all of the participants for
bingo cards or sheets, objects to cover the spaces, or other devices used in
playing bingo does not exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00).
         C.   All of the money paid for bingo cards or sheets, objects to cover
spaces, or other devices used in playing bingo is used only to pay winners
monetary and nonmonetary prizes and to provide refreshments.
         D.   The total value of all prizes awarded during the game does not
exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00).
         E.   No commission, wages, salary, reward, tip, donation, gratuity, or
other form of compensation, either directly or indirectly, and regardless of
the source, is paid to any bingo game operator for work or labor performed at
the site of the bingo game.
         F.   The bingo game is not conducted during or within ten hours of
either of the following:
            1.   A bingo session during which a charitable bingo game is
conducted pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2915.07 through 2915.11 or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance;
            2.   A scheme of chance or a game of chance, or bingo described in
Ohio R.C. 2915.01(O)(2).
         G.   All of the participants reside at the premises where the bingo
game is conducted.
         H.   The bingo games are conducted on different days of the week and
not more than twice in a calendar week.
   (b)   The Attorney General or any local law enforcement agency may
investigate the conduct of a bingo game that purportedly is conducted for
purposes of amusement only if there is reason to believe that the purported
amusement bingo game does not comply with the requirements of either division
(a)(1) or (a)(2) of this section.  A local law enforcement agency may proceed
by action in the proper court to enforce this section if the local law
enforcement agency gives written notice to the Attorney General when commencing
the action.
(ORC 2915.12)
§ 630.10  PROHIBITIONS WHERE INSTANT BINGO GAME IS CONDUCTED.
   (a)   No charitable organization that conducts instant bingo shall do any of
the following:
      (1)   Fail to comply with the requirements of Ohio R.C. 2915.09(A)(1),
(A)(2), and (A)(3), or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance;
      (2)   Conduct instant bingo unless either of the following applies:
         A.   That organization is, and has received from the Internal Revenue
Service a determination letter that is currently in effect stating that the
organization is, exempt from federal income taxation under IRC 501(a), is
described in IRC 501(c)(3), is a charitable organization as defined in Ohio
R.C. 2915.01, is in good standing in the state pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2915.08,
and is in compliance with Ohio R.C. Chapter 1716;
         B.   That organization is, and has received from the Internal Revenue
Service a determination letter that is currently in effect stating that the
organization is, exempt from federal income taxation under IRC 501(a), is
described in IRC 501(c)(7), (c)(8), (c)(10), or (c)(19) or is a veteran’s
organization described in IRC 501(c)(4), and conducts instant bingo under Ohio
R.C. 2915.13.
      (3)   Conduct instant bingo on any day, at any time, or at any premises
not specified on the organization’s license issued pursuant to Ohio R.C.
2915.08;
      (4)   Permit any person whom the organization knows or should have known
has been convicted of a felony or gambling offense in any jurisdiction to be a
bingo game operator in the conduct of instant bingo;
      (5)   Purchase or lease supplies used to conduct instant bingo or punch
board games from any person except a distributor licensed under Ohio R.C.
2915.081;
      (6)   Sell or provide any instant bingo ticket or card for a price
different from the price printed on it by the manufacturer on either the
instant bingo ticket or card or on the game flare;
      (7)   Sell an instant bingo ticket or card to a person under 18 years of
age;
      (8)   Fail to keep unsold instant bingo tickets or cards for less than
three years;
      (9)   Pay any compensation to a bingo game operator for conducting
instant bingo that is conducted by the organization or for preparing, selling,
or serving food or beverages at the site of the instant bingo game, permit any
auxiliary unit or society of the organization to pay compensation to any bingo
game operator who prepares, sells, or serves food or beverages at an instant
bingo game conducted by the organization, or permit any auxiliary unit or
society of the organization to prepare, sell, or serve food or beverages at an
instant bingo game conducted by the organization, if the auxiliary unit or
society pays any compensation to the bingo game operators who prepare, sell, or
serve the food or beverages;
      (10)   Pay fees to any person for any services performed in relation to
an instant bingo game, except as provided in Ohio R.C. 2915.093(D);
      (11)   Pay fees to any person who provides refreshments to the
participants in an instant bingo game;
      (12)   A.   Allow instant bingo tickets or cards to be sold to bingo game
operators at a premises at which the organization sells instant bingo tickets
or cards or to be sold to employees of a D permit holder who are working at a
premises at which instant bingo tickets or cards are sold;
         B.   Division (a)(12)A. of this section does not prohibit a licensed
charitable organization or a bingo game operator from giving any person an
instant bingo ticket as a prize in place of a cash prize won by a participant
in an instant bingo game. In no case shall an instant bingo ticket or card be
sold or provided for a price different from the price printed on it by the
manufacturer on either the instant bingo ticket or card or on the game flare.
      (13)   Fail to display its bingo license, and the serial numbers of the
deal of instant bingo tickets or cards to be sold, conspicuously at each
premises at which it sells instant bingo tickets or cards;
      (14)   Possess a deal of instant bingo tickets or cards that was not
purchased from a distributor licensed under Ohio R.C. 2915.081 as reflected on
an invoice issued by the distributor that contains all of the information
required by Ohio R.C. 2915.10(E);
      (15)   Fail, once it opens a deal of instant bingo tickets or cards, to
continue to sell the tickets or cards in that deal until the tickets or cards
with the top two highest tiers of prizes in that deal are sold;
      (16)   Possess bingo supplies that were not obtained in accordance with
Ohio R.C. Chapter 2915.
   (b)   A charitable organization may purchase, lease, or use instant bingo
ticket dispensers to sell instant bingo tickets or cards.
   (c)   Pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2915.091(C), the Attorney General may adopt
rules in accordance with Ohio R.C. Chapter 119 that govern the conduct of
instant bingo by charitable organizations.
   (d)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section or a rule adopted under
division (c) of this section is guilty of illegal instant bingo conduct. Except
as otherwise provided in this division, illegal instant bingo conduct is a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted
of a violation of division (a) of this section or of such a rule adopted under
division (c) of this section, illegal instant bingo conduct is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(ORC 2915.091)
§ 630.11  RAFFLE DRAWINGS.
   (a)   (1)   Subject to division (a)(2) of this section, a charitable
organization, a public school, a chartered nonpublic school, a community
school, or a veteran’s organization, fraternal organization, or sporting
organization that is exempt from federal income taxation under IRC 501(a) and
is described in IRC 501(c)(3), 501(c)(4), 501(c)(7), 501(c)(8), 501(c)(10), or
501(c)(19) may conduct a raffle to raise money for the organization or school
and does not need a license to conduct bingo in order to conduct a raffle
drawing that is not for profit.
      (2)   If a charitable organization that is described in division (a)(1)
of this section, but that is not also described in IRC 501(c)(3), conducts a
raffle, the charitable organization shall distribute at least 50% of the net
profit from the raffle to a charitable purpose described in Ohio R.C. 2915.01
(V) or to a department or agency of the federal government, the state, or any
political subdivision.
   (b)   A chamber of commerce may conduct not more than one raffle per year to
raise money for the chamber of commerce.
   (c)   Except as provided in division (a) or (b) of this section, no person
shall conduct a raffle drawing that is for profit or a raffle drawing that is
not for profit.
   (d)   Whoever violates division (c) of this section is guilty of illegal
conduct of a raffle. Except as otherwise provided in this division, illegal
conduct of a raffle is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender
previously has been convicted of a violation of division (c) of this section,
illegal conduct of a raffle is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
(ORC 2915.092)
§ 630.12  INSTANT BINGO OTHER THAN AT BINGO SESSIONS.
   (a)   As used in this section, “retail income from all commercial activity”
means the income that a person receives from the provision of goods, services,
or activities that are provided at the location where instant bingo other than
at a bingo session is conducted, including the sale of instant bingo tickets. A
religious organization that is exempt from federal income taxation under IRC
501(a) and described in IRC 501(c)(3), at not more than one location at which
it conducts its charitable programs, may include donations from its members and
guests as retail income.
   (b)   (1)   If a charitable instant bingo organization conducts instant
bingo other than at a bingo session, the charitable instant bingo organization
shall enter into a written contract with the owner or lessor of the location at
which the instant bingo is conducted to allow the owner or lessor to assist in
the conduct of instant bingo other than at a bingo session, identify each
location where the instant bingo other than at a bingo session is being
conducted, and identify the owner or lessor of each location.
      (2)   A charitable instant bingo organization that conducts instant bingo
other than at a bingo session is not required to enter into a written contract
with the owner or lessor of the location at which the instant bingo is
conducted provided that the owner or lessor is not assisting in the conduct of
the instant bingo other than at a bingo session and provided that the conduct
of the instant bingo other than at a bingo session at that location is not more
than five days per calendar year and not more than ten hours per day.
   (c)   Except as provided in division (f) of this section, no charitable
instant bingo organization shall conduct instant bingo other than at a bingo
session at a location where the primary source of retail income from all
commercial activity at that location is the sale of instant bingo tickets.
   (d)   (1)   The owner or lessor of a location that enters into a contract
pursuant to division (b) of this section shall pay the full gross profit to the
charitable instant bingo organization, in return for the deal of instant bingo
tickets. The owner or lessor may retain the money that the owner or lessor
receives for selling the instant bingo tickets, provided, however, that after
the deal has been sold, the owner or lessor shall pay to the charitable instant
bingo organization the value of any unredeemed instant bingo prizes remaining
in the deal of instant bingo tickets.
      (2)   The charitable instant bingo organization shall pay 6% of the total
gross receipts of any deal of instant bingo tickets for the purpose of
reimbursing the owner or lessor for expenses described in this division.
      (3)   As used in this division, “expenses” means those items provided for
in Ohio R.C. 2915.01(GG)(4), (GG)(5), (GG)(6), (GG)(7), (GG)(8), (GG)(12), and
(GG)(13) and that percentage of the owner’s or lessor’s rent for the location
where instant bingo is conducted. Expenses, in the aggregate, shall not exceed
6% of the total gross receipts of any deal of instant bingo tickets.
      (4)   As used in this division, “full gross profit” means the amount by
which the total receipts of all instant bingo tickets, if the deal has been
sold in full, exceeds the amount that would be paid out if all prizes were
redeemed.
   (e)   A charitable instant bingo organization shall provide the Attorney
General with all of the following information:
      (1)   That the charitable instant bingo organization has terminated a
contract entered into pursuant to division (b) of this section with an owner or
lessor of a location;
      (2)   That the charitable instant bingo organization has entered into a
written contract pursuant to division (b) of this section with a new owner or
lessor of a location;
      (3)   That the charitable instant bingo organization is aware of conduct
by the owner or lessor of a location at which instant bingo is conducted that
is in violation of Ohio R.C. Chapter 2915.
   (f)   Division (c) of this section does not apply to a volunteer
firefighter’s organization that is exempt from federal income taxation under
IRC 501(a) and described in IRC 501(c)(3), that conducts instant bingo other
than at a bingo session on the premises where the organization conducts
firefighter training, that has conducted instant bingo continuously for at
least five years prior to July 1, 2003, and that, during each of those five
years, had gross receipts of at least one million five hundred thousand dollars
($1,500,000.00).
(ORC 2915.093)
   (g)   (1)   A veteran’s organization, a fraternal organization, or a
sporting organization authorized to conduct a bingo session pursuant to Ohio
R.C. Chapter 2915 may conduct instant bingo other than at a bingo session if
all of the following apply:
         A.   The veteran’s organization, fraternal organization, or sporting
organization limits the sale of instant bingo to 12 hours during any day,
provided that the sale does not begin earlier than 10:00 a.m. and ends not
later than 2:00 a.m.
         B.   The veteran’s organization, fraternal organization, or sporting
organization limits the sale of instant bingo to its own premises and to its
own members and invited guests.
         C.   The veteran’s organization, fraternal organization, or sporting
organization is raising money for an organization that is described in IRC 509
(a)(1), (a)(2), or (a)(3) and is either a governmental unit or an organization
that maintains its principal place of business in this state, that is exempt
from federal income taxation under IRC 501(a) and described in IRC 501(c)(3),
and that is in good standing in this state and executes a written contract with
that organization as required in division (g)(2) of this section.
      (2)   If a veteran’s organization, fraternal organization, or sporting
organization authorized to conduct instant bingo pursuant to division (g)(1) of
this section is raising money for another organization that is described in IRC
509(a)(1), (a)(2), or (a)(3) and is either a governmental unit or an
organization that maintains its principal place of business in this state, that
is exempt from federal income taxation under IRC 501(a) and described in IRC
501(c), and that is in good standing in this state, the veteran’s organization,
fraternal organization, or sporting organization shall execute a written
contract with the organization that is described in IRC 509(a)(1), (a)(2), or
(a)(3) and is either a governmental unit or an organization that maintains its
principal place of business in this state, that is exempt from federal income
taxation under IRC 501(a) and described in IRC 501(c), and that is in good
standing in this state in order to conduct instant bingo. That contract shall
include a statement of the percentage of the net proceeds that the veteran’s,
fraternal, or sporting organization will be distributing to the charitable
organization that is described in IRC 509(a)(1), (a)(2), or (a)(3) and is
either a governmental unit or an organization that maintains its principal
place of business in this state, that is exempt from federal income taxation
under IRC 501(a) and described in IRC 501(c), and that is in good standing in
this state.
      (3)   A.   If a veteran’s organization, fraternal organization, or
sporting organization authorized to conduct instant bingo pursuant to division
(g)(1) of this section has been issued a liquor permit under Ohio R.C. Chapter
4303, that permit may be subject to suspension, revocation, or cancellation if
the veteran’s organization, fraternal organization, or sporting organization
violates a provision of this chapter or Ohio R.C. Chapter 2915.
         B.   No veteran’s organization, fraternal organization, or sporting
organization that enters into a written contract pursuant to division (g)(2) of
this section shall violate any provision of this chapter or Ohio R.C. Chapter
2915, or permit, aid, or abet any other person in violating any provision of
this chapter or Ohio R.C. Chapter 2915.
      (4)   A veteran’s organization, fraternal organization, or sporting
organization shall give all required proceeds earned from the conduct of
instant bingo to the organization with which the veteran’s organization,
fraternal organization, or sporting organization has entered into a written
contract.
      (5)   Whoever violates division (g) of this section is guilty of illegal
instant bingo conduct. Except as otherwise provided in this division, illegal
instant bingo conduct is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender
previously has been convicted of a violation of division (g) of this section,
illegal instant bingo conduct is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
(ORC 2915.13)
§ 630.13  RESTRICTIONS ON OWNER OR LESSOR OF LOCATION AT INSTANT BINGO.
   (a)   No owner or lessor of a location shall assist a charitable instant
bingo organization in the conduct of instant bingo other than at a bingo
session at that location unless the owner or lessor has entered into a written
contract, as described in Ohio R.C. 2915.093, with the charitable instant bingo
organization to assist in the conduct of instant bingo other than at a bingo
session.
   (b)   The location of the lessor or owner shall be designated as a location
where the charitable instant bingo organization conducts instant bingo other
than at a bingo session.
   (c)   No owner or lessor of a location that enters into a written contract
as prescribed in division (a) of this section shall violate any provision of
this chapter or Ohio R.C. Chapter 2915, or permit, aid, or abet any other
person in violating any provision of this chapter or Ohio R.C. Chapter 2915.
   (d)   No owner or lessor of a location that enters into a written contract
as prescribed in division (a) of this section shall violate the terms of the
contract.
   (e)   (1)   Whoever violates division (c) or (d) of this section is guilty
of illegal instant bingo conduct.  Except as otherwise provided in this
division, illegal instant bingo conduct is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
If the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of division (c) or
(d) of this section, illegal instant bingo conduct is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.
      (2)   If an owner or lessor of a location knowingly, intentionally, or
recklessly violates division (c) or (d) of this section, any license that the
owner or lessor holds for the retail sale of any goods on the owner’s or
lessor’s premises that is issued by the state or a political subdivision is
subject to suspension, revocation, or payment of a monetary penalty at the
request of the Attorney General.
(ORC 2915.094)
§ 630.14  SKILL-BASED AMUSEMENT MACHINES; PROHIBITED CONDUCT.
   (a)   No person shall give to another person any item described in division
(ii)(1), (2), (3), or (4) of §
630.01 in exchange for a noncash prize, toy, or novelty received as a reward
for playing or operating a skill-based amusement machine or for a free or
reduced-price game won on a skill-based amusement machine.
   (b)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of skill-based
amusement machine prohibited conduct. A violation of division (a) of this
section is a misdemeanor of the first degree for each redemption of a prize
that is involved in the violation. If the offender previously has been
convicted of a violation of division (a) of this section, a violation of that
division is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (c)   Any regulation of skill-based amusement machines shall be governed by
this chapter or Ohio R.C. Chapter 2915 and not by Ohio R.C. Chapter 1345.
(ORC 2915.061)
CHAPTER 636:  OFFENSES RELATING TO PERSONS
Section
636.001   Definitions.
636.01   Negligent homicide.
636.02   Assault.
636.03   Negligent assault.
636.04   Aggravated menacing.
636.05   Menacing by stalking.
636.06   Menacing.
636.07   Unlawful restraint.
636.08   Failure to perform viability testing.
636.09   Criminal child enticement.
636.10   Coercion.
636.11   Nonsupport of dependents.
636.12   Endangering children.
636.13   Interference with custody.
636.14   Contributing to the unruliness or delinquency of a child.
636.15   Party lines to be yielded in emergencies. (Repealed)
636.16   Threatening or harassing  telecommunications.
636.17   Placing harmful substance or objects in food or confection.
636.18   Domestic violence.
636.19   Safety of crowds attending live entertainment performances.
636.20   Hazing.
636.21   Illegal distribution of cigarettes, other tobacco products, or
alternative nicotine products; transaction scans.
636.22   Ethnic intimidation.
636.23   Intimidation in connection with housing.
636.24   Failing to provide for a functionally impaired person.
636.25   Unlawful collection of bodily substances.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   See section histories for similar state law
   Juvenile Court - see Ohio R.C. Ch. 2151
   Parents’ liability for destructive acts of their children - see Ohio R.C.
3109.09
   Shelters for victims of domestic violence - see Ohio R.C. 3113.33 et seq.
   Vehicular homicide - see TRAF.
434.10
   Definitions generally - see GEN. OFF.
606.01
   “Physical harm to persons” defined - see GEN. OFF.
606.01(m)
   “Serious physical harm to persons” defined - see GEN. OFF.
606.01(y)
   Personal accountability for organizational conduct - see GEN. OFF.
606.10
   False report of child abuse or neglect - see GEN. OFF.
608.02
   Sales  to underage persons; prohibitions and  misrepresentations - see GEN.
OFF.
612.02
   Drugs - see GEN. OFF.
Ch. 624
   Disorderly conduct - see GEN. OFF.
648.04
   Loitering - see GEN. OFF.
648.10
   Minors curfew - see GEN. OFF.
648.11
   Sex related offenses - see GEN. OFF.
Ch. 666
   Underage purchase of a firearm or handgun - see GEN. OFF.
678.08
§ 636.001  DEFINITIONS.
   (a)   As used in this chapter and any other provision of these Codified
Ordinances:
      (1)   “Another’s unborn” or “other person’s unborn.”  A member of the
species Homo sapiens who is or was carried in the womb of another during a
period that begins with fertilization and that continues unless and until live
birth occurs.
      (2)   “Unlawful termination of another’s pregnancy.”  Causing the death
of an unborn member of the species Homo sapiens who is or was carried in the
womb of another, as a result of injuries inflicted during the period that
begins with fertilization and that continues unless and until live birth
occurs.
   (b)   Notwithstanding division (a) of this section, in no case shall the
definitions of the terms “another’s unborn,” “other person’s unborn” and
“unlawful termination of another’s pregnancy” that are set forth in division
(a) of this section be applied or construed in any of the following manners:
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (b)(1) of this section, in
a manner so that the offense prohibits or is construed as prohibiting any
pregnant woman or her physician from performing an abortion with the consent of
the pregnant woman, with the consent of the pregnant woman implied by law in a
medical emergency, or with the approval of one otherwise authorized by law to
consent to medical treatment on behalf of the pregnant woman.  An abortion that
violates the conditions described in the immediately preceding sentence may be
punished as any violation of Ohio R.C. 2903.01, 2903.02, 2903.03, 2903.04,
2903.05, 2903.06, 2903.08, 2903.11, 2903.12, 2903.13, 2903.14, 2903.21 or
2903.22, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, as applicable.  An
abortion that does not violate the conditions described in the second
immediately preceding sentence but that does violate Ohio R.C. 2919.12, 2919.13
(B), 2919.15, 2919.151, 2919.17 or 2919.18, or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, may be punished as a violation of such section, as
applicable.
      (2)   In a manner so that the offense is applied or is construed as
applying to a woman based on an act or omission of the woman that occurs while
she is or was pregnant and that results in any of the following:
         A.   Her delivery of a stillborn baby.
         B.   Her causing, in any other manner, the death in utero of a viable,
unborn human that she is carrying.
         C.   Her causing the death of her child who is born alive but who dies
from one or more injuries that are sustained while the child is a viable,
unborn human.
         D.   Her causing her child who is born alive to sustain one or more
injuries while the child is a viable, unborn human.
         E.   Her causing, threatening to cause, or attempting to cause, in any
other manner, an injury, illness, or other psychological illness or condition,
regardless of its duration or gravity, to a viable, unborn human that she is
carrying.
(ORC 2903.09)
§ 636.01  NEGLIGENT HOMICIDE.
   (a)   No person shall negligently cause the death of another or the unlawful
termination of another’s pregnancy by means of a deadly weapon or dangerous
ordnance, as defined in Ohio R.C. 2923.11.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of negligent homicide, a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(ORC 2903.05)
Statutory reference:
   Reckless homicide, felony offense, see Ohio R.C. 2903.041
§ 636.02  ASSAULT.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly cause or attempt to cause physical harm to
another or to another’s unborn.
   (b)   No person shall recklessly cause serious physical harm to another or
to another’s unborn.
   (c)   Whoever violates division (a) or (b) of this section is guilty of
assault.  Except as provided in Ohio R.C. 2903.13(C), assault is a misdemeanor
of the first degree.
   (d)   If an offender who is convicted of or pleads guilty to assault when it
is a misdemeanor also is convicted of or pleads guilty to a specification as
described in Ohio R.C. 2941.1423 (victim of the offense was a woman whom the
defendant knew was pregnant at the time of the offense) that was included in
the indictment, count in the indictment or information charging the offense,
the court shall sentence the offender to a mandatory jail term as provided in
Ohio R.C. 2929.24(G).
(ORC 2903.13)
Statutory reference:
   Aggravated and felonious assault, see Ohio R.C. 2903.11 and 2903.12
   Aggravated vehicular assault, felony, see Ohio R.C. 2903.08
   Felony offenses: assaulting functionally impaired person, peace officer,
investigator of the Bureau of Criminal Identification and Investigation,
firefighter, person performing emergency medical service, officer or employee
of a public children services agency or private child placing agency; assault
at a correctional institution; assault on school officials and school bus
drivers; health care professional, worker or security guard at a hospital under
certain circumstances; judge, magistrate, prosecutor or court official or
employee under certain circumstances, see Ohio R.C. 2903.13(C)
   Permitting child abuse, felony offense, see Ohio R.C. 2903.15
   Persons who may seek relief under anti-stalking  protection order; ex parte
orders, see Ohio R.C. 2903.214
   Protection order as pretrial condition of release, see Ohio R.C. 2903.213
§ 636.03  NEGLIGENT ASSAULT.
   (a)   No person shall negligently, by means of a deadly weapon or dangerous
ordnance as defined in Ohio R.C. 2923.11, cause physical harm to another or to
another’s unborn.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of negligent assault, a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(ORC 2903.14)
§ 636.04  AGGRAVATED MENACING.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly cause another to believe that the offender
will cause serious physical harm to the person or property of the other person,
such other person’s unborn, or a member of such other person’s immediate
family. In addition to any other basis for the other person’s belief that the
offender will cause serious physical harm to the person or property of the
other person, the other person’s unborn, or a member of the other person’s
immediate family, the other person’s belief may be based on words or conduct of
the offender that are directed at or identify a corporation, association, or
other organization that employs the other person or to which the other person
belongs.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of aggravated menacing. Except
as otherwise provided in this division (b), aggravated menacing is a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If the victim of the offense is an officer or
employee of a public children services agency or a private child placing agency
and the offense relates to the officer’s or employee’s performance or
anticipated performance of official responsibilities or duties, aggravated
menacing is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law or, if the
offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to an offense of
violence, the victim of that prior offense was an officer or employee of a
public children services agency or private child placing agency, and that prior
offense related to the officer’s or employee’s performance or anticipated
performance of official responsibilities or duties, a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.
   (c)   As used in this section, “Organization” includes an entity that is a
governmental employer.
(ORC 2903.21)
§ 636.05  MENACING BY STALKING.
   (a)   Prohibited conduct.
      (1)   A.   No person by engaging in a pattern of conduct shall knowingly
cause another person to believe that the offender will cause physical harm to
the other person or a family or household member of the other person or cause
mental distress to the other person or a family or household member of the
other person. In addition to any other basis for the other person’s belief that
the offender will cause physical harm to the other person or the other person’s
family or household member or mental distress to the other person or the other
person’s family or household member, the other person’s belief or mental
distress may be based on words or conduct of the offender that are directed at
or identify a corporation, association, or other organization that employs the
other person or to which the other person belongs.
         B.   No person, through the use of any form of written communication
or any electronic method of remotely transferring information, including but
not limited to any computer, computer network, computer program, computer
system, or telecommunication device, shall post a message or use any
intentionally written or verbal graphic gesture with purpose to do either of
the following:
            1.   Violate division (a)(1)A. of this section;
            2.   Urge or incite another to commit a violation of division (a)
(1)A. of this section.
         C.   No person, with a sexual motivation, shall violate division (a)
(1)A. or (a)(1)B. of this section.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (a)(1) of this section is guilty of
menacing by stalking.
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in division (a)(2)B. of this
section, menacing by stalking is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
         B.   Menacing by stalking is a felony, to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law, if any of the following applies:
            1.   The offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of Ohio R.C. 2903.211 or a violation of Ohio R.C.
2911.211, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance to either of these
offenses.
            2.   In committing the offense under division (a)(1)A., (a)(1)B. or
(a)(1)C. of this section, the offender made a threat of physical harm to or
against the victim, or as a result of an offense committed under division (a)
(1)B. or (a)(1)C. of this section, a third person induced by the offender’s
posted message made a threat of physical harm to or against the victim.
            3.   In committing the offense under division (a)(1)A., (a)(1)B. or
(a)(1)C. of this section, the offender trespassed on the land or premises where
the victim lives, is employed, or attends school, or as a result of an offense
committed under division (a)(1)B. or (a)(1)C. of this section, a third person
induced by the offender’s posted message trespassed on the land or premises
where the victim lives, is employed, or attends school.
            4.   The victim of the offense is a minor.
            5.   The offender has a history of violence towards the victim or
any other person or a history of other violent acts towards the victim or any
other person.
            6.   While committing the offense under division (a)(1)A. of this
section or a violation of division (a)(1)C. of this section based on conduct in
violation of division (a)(1)A. of this section, the offender had a deadly
weapon on or about the offender’s person or under the offender’s control.
Division (a)(2)B.6. of this section does not apply in determining the penalty
for a violation of division (a)(1)B. of this section or a violation of division
(a)(1)C. of this section based on conduct in violation of division (a)(1)B. of
this section.
            7.   At the time of the commission of the offense, the offender was
the subject of a protection order issued under Ohio R.C. 2903.213 or Ohio R.C.
2903.214, regardless of whether or not the person to be protected under the
order is the victim of the offense or another person.
            8.   In committing the offense under division (a)(1)A. , (a)(1)B.
or (a)(1)C. of this section, the offender caused serious physical harm to the
premises at which the victim resides, to the real property on which that
premises is located, or to any personal property located on that premises, or
as a result of an offense committed under division (a)(1)B. of this section or
an offense committed under division (a)(1)C. of this section based on a
violation of division (a)(1)B. of this section, a third person induced by the
offender’s posted message caused serious physical harm to that premises, that
real property, or any personal property on that premises.
            9.   Prior to committing the offense, the offender had been
determined to represent a substantial risk of physical harm to others as
manifested by evidence of then-recent homicidal or other violent behavior,
evidence of then-recent threats that placed another in reasonable fear of
violent behavior and serious harm, or other evidence of then-present
dangerousness.
            10.   The victim of the offense is an officer or employee of a
public children services agency or a private child placing agency and the
offense relates to the officer’s or employee’s performance or anticipated
performance of official responsibilities or duties.
            11.   The offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to an offense of violence, the victim of that prior offense was an
officer or employee of a public children services agency or private child
placing agency, and that prior offense related to the officer’s or employee’s
performance or anticipated performance of official responsibilities or duties.
      (3)   Ohio R.C. 2919.271 applies in relation to a defendant charged with
a violation of this section.
      (4)   As used in division (a) of this section:
         A.   “Computer,” “computer network,” “computer program,” “computer
system,” and “telecommunications device” have the same meanings as in Ohio R.C.
2913.01.
         B.   “Emergency facility person” is the singular of “emergency
facility personnel” as defined in Ohio R.C. 2909.04.
         C.   “Emergency medical services person” is the singular of “emergency
medical services personnel” as defined in Ohio R.C. 2133.21.
         D.   “Family or household member” means any of the following:
            1.   Any of the following who is residing or has resided with the
person against whom the act prohibited in division (a)(1) of this section is
committed:
               a.   A spouse, a person living as a spouse, or a former spouse
of the person;
               b.   A parent, a foster parent, or a child of the person, or
another person related by consanguinity or affinity to the person;
               c.   A parent or a child of a spouse, person living as a spouse,
or former spouse of the person, or another person related by consanguinity or
affinity to a spouse, person living as a spouse, or former spouse of the
person.
            2.   The natural parent of any child of whom the person against
whom the act prohibited in division (a)(1) of this section is committed is the
other natural parent or is the putative other natural parent.
         E.   “Mental distress” means any of the following:
            1.   Any mental illness or condition that involves some temporary
substantial incapacity;
            2.   Any mental illness or condition that would normally require
psychiatric treatment, psychological treatment, or other mental health
services, whether or not any person requested or received psychiatric
treatment, psychological treatment, or other mental health services.
         F.   “Organization.” Includes an entity that is a governmental
employer.
         G.   “Pattern of conduct” means two or more actions or incidents
closely related in time, whether or not there has been a prior conviction based
on any of those actions or incidents, or two or more actions or incidents
closely related in time, whether or not there has been a prior conviction based
on any of those actions or incidents, directed at one or more persons employed
by or belonging to the same corporation, association, or other organization.
Actions or incidents that prevent, obstruct, or delay the performance by a
public official, firefighter, rescuer, emergency medical services person, or
emergency facility person of any authorized act within the public official’s,
firefighter’s, rescuer’s, emergency medical services person’s, or emergency
facility person’s official capacity, or the posting of messages, use of
intentionally written or verbal graphic gestures, or receipt of information or
data through the use of any form of written communication or an electronic
method of remotely transferring information, including but not limited to a
computer, computer network, computer program, computer system, or
telecommunications device, may constitute a “pattern of conduct.”
         H.   “Person living as a spouse” means a person who is living or has
lived with the person against whom the act prohibited in division (a)(1) of
this section is committed in a common law marital relationship, who otherwise
is cohabiting with that person, or who otherwise has cohabited with the person
within five years prior to the date of the alleged commission of the act in
question.
         I.   “Post a message” means transferring, sending, posting,
publishing, disseminating, or otherwise communicating, or attempting to
transfer, send, post, publish, disseminate, or otherwise communicate, any
message or information, whether truthful or untruthful, about an individual,
and whether done under one’s own name, under the name of another, or while
impersonating another.
         J.   “Public official” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2921.01.
         K.   “Sexual motivation” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2971.01.
         L.   “Third person” means, in relation to conduct as described in
division (a)(1)B. of this section, an individual who is neither the offender
nor the victim of the conduct.
      (5)   The prosecution does not need to prove in a prosecution under
division (a) of this section that a person requested or received psychiatric
treatment, psychological treatment, or other mental health services in order to
show that the person was caused mental distress as described in division (a)
(4)D.2. of this  section.
      (6)   A.   Division (a) of this section does not apply to a person solely
because the person provided access or connection to or from an electronic
method of remotely transferring information not under that person’s control,
including having provided capabilities that are incidental to providing access
or connection to or from the electronic method of remotely transferring the
information, and that do not include the creation of the content of the
material that is the subject of the access or connection. In addition, any
person providing access or connection to or from an electronic method of
remotely transferring information not under that person’s control shall not be
liable for any action voluntarily taken in good faith to block the receipt or
transmission through its service of any information that it believes is or will
be sent in violation of division (a) of this section.
         B.   Division (a)(6)A. of this section does not create an affirmative
duty for any person providing access or connection to or from an electronic
method of remotely transferring information not under that person’s control to
block the receipt or transmission through its service of any information that
it believes is or will be sent in violation of division (a) of this section
except as otherwise provided by law.
         C.   Division (a)(6)A. of this section does not apply to a person who
conspires with a person actively involved in the creation or knowing
distribution of material in violation of division (a) of this section or who
knowingly advertises the availability of material of that nature.
(ORC 2903.211)
   (b)   Protection order.  Consult Ohio R.C. 2903.213 for current provisions
regarding protection orders, consent agreements, anti-stalking protection
orders and orders issued by a court of another state.
   (c)   Violating a protection order, consent agreement, anti-stalking
protection order or order issued by a court of another state.
      (1)   No person shall recklessly violate the terms of any of the
following:
         A.   A protection order issued or consent agreement approved pursuant
to Ohio R.C. 2919.26 or Ohio R.C. 3113.31;
         B.   A protection order issued pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2151.34, 2903.213
or 2903.214;
         C.   A protection order issued by a court of another state.
      (2)   A.   Whoever violates division (c) of this section is guilty of
violating a protection order.
         B.   Except as otherwise provided in division (c)(2)C. or D. of this
section, violating a protection order is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
         C.   Violating a protection order is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law if the offender previously has been convicted of, pleaded
guilty to, or been adjudicated a delinquent child for any of the following:
            1.   A violation of a protection order issued or consent agreement
approved pursuant to R.C. § 2151.34, 2903.213, 2903.214, 2919.26, or 3113.31,
or any substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance;
            2.   Two or more violations of R.C. § 2903.21, 2903.211, 2903.22,
or 2911.211, or any substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance,
or any combination of those offenses, that involved the same person who is the
subject of the protection order or consent agreement;
            3.   One or more violations of this section, or any substantially
equivalent state law or municipal ordinance.
         D.   If the offender violates a protection order or consent agreement
while committing a felony offense, violating a protection order is a felony to
be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
         E.   If the protection order violated by the offender was an order
issued pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2151.34 or 2903.214 that required electronic
monitoring of the offender pursuant to that section, the court may require in
addition to any other sentence imposed upon the offender that the offender be
electronically monitored for a period not exceeding five years by a law
enforcement agency designated by the court. If the court requires under this
division that the offender be electronically monitored, unless the court
determines that the offender is indigent, the court shall order that the
offender pay the costs of the installation of the electronic monitoring device
and the cost of monitoring the electronic monitoring device. If the court
determines that the offender is indigent and subject to the maximum amount
allowable and the rules promulgated by the Attorney General under R.C.
2903.214, the costs of the installation of the electronic monitoring device and
the cost of monitoring the electronic monitoring device may be paid out of
funds from the reparations fund created pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2743.191. The
total amount paid from the Reparations Fund created pursuant to Ohio R.C.
2743.191 for electronic monitoring under Ohio R.C. 2151.34, 2903.214 and
2919.27 shall not exceed three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) per year.
      (3)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (c)(1)C. of
this section that the protection order issued by a court of another state does
not comply with the requirements specified in 18 U.S.C. 2265(b) for a
protection order that must be accorded full faith a credit by a court of this
state or that it is not entitled to full faith and credit under 18 U.S.C. 2265
(c).
      (4)   In a prosecution for a violation of this section, it is not
necessary for the prosecution to prove that the protection order or consent
agreement was served on the defendant if the prosecution proves that the
defendant was shown the protection order or consent agreement or a copy of
either or a judge, magistrate, or law enforcement officer informed the
defendant that a protection order or consent agreement had been issued, and
proves that the defendant recklessly violated the terms of the order or
agreement.
      (5)   As used in this section, “protection order issued by a court of
another state” means an injunction or another order issued by a criminal court
of another state for the purpose of preventing violent or threatening acts or
harassment against, contact or communication with, or physical proximity to
another person including a temporary order, and means an injunction or order of
that nature issued by a civil court of another state, including a temporary
order and a final order issued in an independent action or as a pendente lite
order in a proceeding for other relief, if the court issued it in response to a
complaint, petition or motion filed by or on behalf of a person seeking
protection.  The term does not include an order for support or for custody of a
child issued pursuant to the divorce and child custody laws of another state,
except to the extent that the order for support or for custody of a child is
entitled to full faith and credit under the laws of the United States.
(ORC 2919.27)
§ 636.06  MENACING.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly cause another to believe that the offender
will cause physical harm to the person or property of the other person, the
other person’s unborn,  or a member of the other person’s immediate family. In
addition to any other basis for the other person’s belief that the offender
will cause physical harm to the person or property of the other person, the
other person’s unborn, or a member of the other person’s immediate family, the
other person’s belief may be based on words or conduct of the offender that are
directed at or identify a corporation, association, or other organization that
employs the other person or to which the other person belongs.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of menacing. Except as
otherwise provided in this division (b), menacing is a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree. If the victim of the offense is an officer or employee of a
public children services agency or a private child placing agency and the
offense relates to the officer’s or employee’s performance or anticipated
performance of official responsibilities or duties, menacing is a misdemeanor
of the first degree or, if the offender previously has been convicted of or
pleaded guilty to an offense of violence, the victim of that prior offense was
an officer or employee of a public children services agency or private child
placing agency, and that prior offense related to the officer’s or employee’s
performance or anticipated performance of official responsibilities or duties,
a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (c)   As used in this section, “Organization” includes an entity that is a
governmental employer.
(ORC 2903.22)
§ 636.07  UNLAWFUL RESTRAINT.
   (a)   No person, without privilege to do so, shall knowingly restrain
another of the other person’s liberty.
   (b)   No person, without privilege to do so and with a sexual motivation,
shall knowingly restrain another of the other person’s liberty.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of unlawful restraint, a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (d)   As used in this section, “sexual motivation” has the same meaning as
in Ohio R.C. 2971.01.
(ORC 2905.03)
§ 636.08  FAILURE TO PERFORM VIABILITY TESTING.
   (a)   Except in a medical emergency that prevents compliance with this
division, no physician shall perform or induce or attempt to perform or induce
an abortion on a pregnant woman after the beginning of the twentieth week of
gestation unless, prior to the performance or inducement of the abortion or the
attempt to perform or induce the abortion, the physician determines, in the
physician’s good faith medical judgment, that the unborn child is not viable,
and the physician makes that determination after performing a medical
examination of the pregnant woman and after performing or causing to be
performed those tests for assessing gestational age, weight, lung maturity, or
other tests that the physician, in that physician’s good faith medical
judgment, believes are necessary to determine whether an unborn child is
viable.
   (b)   Except in a medical emergency that prevents compliance with this
division, no physician shall perform or induce or attempt to perform or induce
an abortion on a pregnant woman after the beginning of the twentieth week of
gestation without first entering the determination made in division (a) of this
section and the associated findings of the medical examination and tests in the
medical record of the pregnant woman.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of failure to perform
viability testing, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
   (d)   The State Medical Board shall suspend a physician’s license to
practice medicine in this state for a period of not less than six months if the
physician violates this section.
(ORC 2919.18)
§ 636.09  CRIMINAL CHILD ENTICEMENT.
   (a)   No person, by any means and without privilege to do so, shall
knowingly solicit, coax, entice, or lure any child under 14 years of age to
accompany the person in any manner, including entering into any vehicle or onto
any vessel, whether or not the offender knows the age of the child, if both of
the following apply:
      (1)   The actor does not have the express or implied permission of the
parent, guardian, or other legal custodian of the child in undertaking the
activity.
      (2)   The actor is not a law enforcement officer, medic, firefighter, or
other person who regularly provides emergency services, and is not an employee
or agent of, or a volunteer acting under the direction of, any board of
education, or the actor is any such person, but at the time the actor
undertakes the activity, the actor is not acting within the scope of the
actor’s lawful duties in that capacity.
   (b)   No person, with a sexual motivation, shall violate division (a) of
this section.
   (c)   No person, for any unlawful purpose other than, or in addition to,
that proscribed by division (a) of this section, shall engage in any activity
described in division (a) of this section.
   (d)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (a) of this
section that the actor undertook the activity in response to a bona fide
emergency situation or that the actor undertook the activity in a reasonable
belief that it was necessary to preserve the health, safety, or welfare of the
child.
   (e)   Whoever violates division (a), (b) or (c) of this section is guilty of
criminal child enticement, a misdemeanor of the first degree.  If the offender
previously has been convicted of a violation of this section, a substantially
equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, Ohio R.C. 2907.02 or 2907.03 or
former Ohio R.C. 2907.12, or Ohio R.C. 2905.01 or 2907.05 when the victim of
that prior offense was under 17 years of age at the time of the offense,
criminal child enticement is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state
law.
   (f)   As used in this section:
      (1)   “Sexual motivation” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2971.01.
      (2)   “Vehicle” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 4501.01.
      (3)   “Vessel” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 1546.01.
(ORC 2905.05)
§ 636.10  COERCION.
   (a)   No person, with purpose to coerce another into taking or refraining
from action concerning which he or she has a legal freedom of choice, shall do
any of the following:
      (1)   Threaten to commit any offense.
      (2)   Utter or threaten any slander against any person.
      (3)   Expose or threaten to expose any matter tending to subject any
person to hatred, contempt, or ridicule, or to damage his or her personal or
business repute, or to impair his or her credit.
      (4)   Institute or threaten criminal proceedings against any person.
      (5)   Take or withhold, or threaten to take or withhold official action,
or cause or threaten to cause official action to be taken or withheld.
   (b)   Divisions (a)(4) and (5) of this section shall not be construed to
prohibit a prosecutor or court from doing any of the following in good faith
and in the interests of justice:
      (1)   Offering or agreeing to grant, or granting immunity from
prosecution pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2945.44.
      (2)   In return for a plea of guilty to one or more offenses charged or
to one or more other or lesser offenses, or in return for the testimony of the
accused in a case to which he or she is not a party, offering or agreeing to
dismiss, or dismissing one or more charges pending against an accused, or
offering or agreeing to impose, or imposing a certain sentence or modification
of sentence.
      (3)   Imposing probation on certain conditions, including without
limitation requiring the offender to make restitution or redress to the victim
of his or her offense.
   (c)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (a)(3), (4),
or (5) of this section that the actor’s conduct was a reasonable response to
the circumstances which occasioned it, and that his or her purpose was limited
to:
      (1)   Compelling another to refrain from misconduct or to desist from
further misconduct.
      (2)   Preventing or redressing a wrong or injustice.
      (3)   Preventing another from taking action for which the actor
reasonably believed the other person to be disqualified.
      (4)   Compelling another to take action which the actor reasonably
believed the other person to be under a duty to take.
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of coercion, a misdemeanor of
the second degree.
   (e)   As used in this section, “threat” includes a direct threat and a
threat by innuendo.
(ORC 2905.12)
§ 636.11  NONSUPPORT OF DEPENDENTS.
   (a)   No person shall abandon, or fail to provide adequate support to:
      (1)   His or her spouse, as required by law;
      (2)   His or her legitimate or illegitimate child who is under age 18, or
mentally or physically disabled child who is under age 21;
      (3)   His or her aged or infirm parent or adoptive parent, who from lack
of ability and means is unable to provide adequately for his or her own
support.
   (b)   (1)   No person shall abandon, or fail to provide support as
established by a court order to, another person whom, by court order or decree,
the person:
         A.   Is legally obligated to support; or
         B.   Was legally obligated to support, and an amount for support:
            1.   Was due and owing prior to the date the person’s duty to pay
current support terminated; and
            2.   Remains unpaid.
      (2)   The period of limitation under Ohio R.C. 2901.13 applicable to
division (b)(1)B. of this section shall begin to run on the date the person’s
duty to pay current support terminates.
   (c)   No person shall aid, abet, induce, cause, encourage, or contribute to
a child or a ward of the juvenile court becoming a dependent child, as defined
in Ohio R.C. 2151.04, or a neglected child, as defined in Ohio R.C. 2151.03.
   (d)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge of failure to provide
adequate support under division (a) of this section or a charge of failure to
provide support established by a court order under division (b) of this section
that the accused was unable to provide adequate support or the established
support, but did provide the support that was within his or her ability and
means.
   (e)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (a)(3) of this
section that the parent abandoned the accused, or failed to support the accused
as required by law, while the accused was under age 18, or was mentally or
physically disabled and under age 21.
   (f)   It is not a defense to a charge under division (b) of this section
that the person whom a court has ordered the accused to support is being
adequately supported by someone other than the accused.
   (g)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (a) or (b) of this section is guilty of nonsupport of dependents, a
misdemeanor of the first degree.  If the offender previously has been convicted
of or pleaded guilty to a violation of division (a)(2) or (b) of this section
or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, or if the
offender has failed to provide support under division (a)(2) or (b) of this
section for a total accumulated period of 26 weeks out of 104 consecutive
weeks, whether or not the 26 weeks were consecutive, then a violation of
division (a)(2) or (b) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law. 
      (2)   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty
to a felony violation of this section or a substantially equivalent state law
or municipal ordinance, a violation of division (a)(2) or (b) of this section
is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.  If the offender is
guilty of nonsupport of dependents by reason of failing to provide support to
his or her child as required by a child support order issued on or after April
15, 1985, pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2151.23, 2151.231, 2151.232, 2151.33, 3105.21,
3109.05, 3111.13, 3113.04, 3113.31, 3115.401, or former Ohio R.C. 3115.31, the
court, in addition to any other sentence imposed, shall assess all court costs
arising out of the charge against the person and require the person to pay any
reasonable attorney’s fees of any adverse party other than the state, as
determined by the court, that arose in relation to the charge.
      (3)   Whoever violates division (c) of this section is guilty of
contributing to the nonsupport of dependents, a misdemeanor of the first
degree.  Each day of a violation of division (c) of this section is a separate
offense.
(ORC 2919.21)
§ 636.12  ENDANGERING CHILDREN.
   (a)   No person, who is the parent, guardian, custodian, person having
custody or control, or person in loco parentis of a child under 18 years of age
or a mentally or physically disabled child under 21 years of age, shall create
a substantial risk to the health or safety of the child by violating a duty of
care, protection, or support.  It is not a violation of a duty of care,
protection, or support under this division when the parent, guardian,
custodian, or person having custody or control of a child treats the physical
or mental illness or disability of the child by spiritual means through prayer
alone, in accordance with the tenets of a recognized religious body.
   (b)   No person shall do any of the following to a child under 18 years of
age or a mentally or physically disabled child under 21 years of age:
      (1)   Abuse the child.
      (2)   Torture or cruelly abuse the child.
      (3)   Administer corporal punishment or other physical disciplinary
measure, or physically restrain the child in a cruel manner or for a prolonged
period, which punishment, discipline or restraint is excessive under the
circumstances and creates a substantial risk of serious physical harm to the
child.
      (4)   Repeatedly administer unwarranted disciplinary measures to a child
when there is a substantial risk that such conduct, if continued, will
seriously impair or retard the child’s mental health or development.
      (5)   Entice, coerce, permit, encourage, compel, hire, employ, use, or
allow the child to act, model, or in any other way participate in, or be
photographed for, the production, presentation, dissemination, or advertisement
of any material or performance that the offender knows or reasonably should
know is obscene, is sexually oriented matter, or is nudity-oriented matter.
      (6)   Allow the child to be on the same parcel of real property and
within 100 feet of, or, in the case of more than one housing unit on the same
parcel of real property, in the same housing unit and within 100 feet of, any
act in violation of Ohio R.C. 2925.04 or 2925.041 when the person knows that
the act is occurring, whether or not any person is prosecuted for or convicted
of the violation of Ohio R.C. 2925.04 or 2925.041 that is the basis of the
violation of this division.
   (c)   (1)   No person shall operate a vehicle, as defined by Ohio R.C.
4511.01, within the municipality and in violation of Ohio R.C. 4511.19(A), or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, when one or more children under
18 years of age are in the vehicle.  Notwithstanding any other provision of
law, a person may be convicted at the same trial or proceeding of a violation
of this division and a violation of Ohio R.C. 4511.19(A), or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, that constitutes the basis of the charge of the
violation of this division.  For purposes of Ohio R.C. 4511.191 to 4511.197 and
all related provisions of law, a person arrested for a violation of this
division shall be considered to be under arrest for operating a vehicle while
under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, a combination of them or for
operating a vehicle with a prohibited concentration of alcohol, a controlled
substance, or a metabolite of a controlled substance in the whole blood, blood
serum or plasma, breath, or urine.
      (2)   As used in division (c)(1) of this section:
         A.   “Controlled substance” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C.
3719.01.
         B.   “Vehicle” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 4511.01.
   (d)   (1)   Division (b)(5) of this section does not apply to any material
or performance that is produced, presented, or disseminated for a bona fide
medical, scientific, educational, religious, governmental, judicial, or other
proper purpose, by or to a physician, psychologist, sociologist, scientist,
teacher, person pursing bona fide studies for research, librarian, member of
the clergy, prosecutor, judge, or other person having a proper interest in the
material or performance.
      (2)   Mistake of age is not a defense to a charge under division (b)(5)
of this section.
      (3)   In a prosecution under division (b)(5) of this section, the trier
of fact may infer that an actor, model, or participant in the material or
performance involved is a juvenile if the material or performance, through its
title, text, visual representation, or otherwise, represents or depicts the
actor, model, or participant as a juvenile.
      (4)   As used in this division and division (b)(5) of this section:
         A.   “Material,” “performance,” “obscene,” and “sexual activity” have
the same meanings as in Ohio R.C. 2907.01.
         B.   “Nudity-oriented matter” means any material or performance that
shows a minor in a state of nudity and that, taken as a whole by the average
person applying contemporary community standards, appeals to the prurient
interest.
         C.   “Sexually oriented matter” means any material or performance that
shows a minor participating or engaging in sexual activity, masturbation, or
bestiality.
   (e)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of endangering children.
      (1)   If the offender violates division (a) or (b)(1) of this section,
endangering children is one of the following:
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in division (e)(1)B., C., or D., a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
         B.   If the offender previously has been convicted of an offense under
this section or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, or
of any offense involving neglect, abandonment, or contributing to the
delinquency of or physical abuse of a child, except as otherwise provided in
division (e)(1)C. or D. of this section, endangering children is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
         C.   If the violation is a violation of division (a) of this section
and results in serious physical harm to the child involved, endangering
children is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
         D.   If the violation is a violation of division (b)(1) of this
section and results in serious physical harm to the child involved, endangering
children is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   If the offender violates division (b)(2), (3), (4), (5) or (6) of
this section, endangering children is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
      (3)   If the offender violates division (c) of this section, the offender
shall be punished as follows:
         A.   Except as provided in (e)(3)B. or C., endangering children in
violation of division (c) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
         B.   If the violation results in serious physical harm to the child or
if the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of this section or
a substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, or of any offense
involving neglect, abandonment, or contributing to the delinquency of or
physical abuse of a child, except as otherwise provided in division (e)(3)C. of
this section, endangering children in violation of division (c) of this section
is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
         C.   If the violation results in serious physical harm to the child
and if the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of this
section, Ohio R.C. 2903.06, 2903.08, 2919.22(C) or former Ohio R.C. 2903.07 as
it existed prior to March 23, 2000, or Ohio R.C. 2903.04, in a case in which
the offender was subject to the sanctions described in division (D) of that
section, endangering children in violation of division (c) of this section is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
         D.   In addition to any term of imprisonment, fine, or other sentence,
penalty or sanction it imposes upon the offender pursuant to divisions (e)
(3)A., B. or C. of this section or pursuant to any other provision of law and
in addition to any suspension of the offender’s driver’s license or commercial
driver’s license or permit or nonresident operating privilege under Ohio R.C.
Chapter 4506, 4509, 4510, or 4511, or any other provision of law, the court
also may impose upon the offender a class seven suspension of the offender’s
driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit or nonresident operating
privilege from the range specified in Ohio R.C. 4510.02(A)(7).
         E.   In addition to any term of imprisonment, fine, or other sentence,
penalty or sanction imposed upon the offender pursuant to division (e)(3)A.,
B., C. or D. of this section or pursuant to any other provision of law for the
violation of division (c) of this section, if as a part of the same trial or
proceeding the offender also is convicted of or pleads guilty to a separate
charge charging the violation of Ohio R.C. 4511.19(A), or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, that was the basis of the charge of the
violation of division (c) of this section, the offender also shall be sentenced
in accordance with Ohio R.C. 4511.19, or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, for that violation of Ohio R.C. 4511.19(A), or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (f)   (1)   If a person violates division (c) of this section and if, at the
time of the violation, there were two or more children under 18 years of age in
the motor vehicle involved in the violation, the offender may be convicted of a
violation of division (c) of this section for each of the children, but the
court may sentence the offender for only one of the violations.
      (2)   A.   If a person is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of
division (c) of this section but the person is not also convicted of and does
not also plead guilty to a separate charge of violating Ohio R.C. 4511.19(A),
or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, that was the basis of the
charge of the violation of division (c) of this section, both the following
apply:
            1.   For purposes of the provisions of Ohio R.C. 4511.19, or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, that set forth the penalties and
sanctions for a violation of Ohio R.C. 4511.19(A), or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, the conviction of or plea of guilty to the
violation of division (c) of this section shall not constitute a violation of
Ohio R.C. 4511.19(A), or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
            2.   For purposes of the provisions of law that refers to a
conviction of or plea of guilty to a violation of Ohio R.C. 4511.19(A), or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, and that is not described in
division (f)(2)A.1. of this section, the conviction of or plea of guilty to the
violation of division (c) of this section shall constitute a conviction or plea
of guilty to a violation of Ohio R.C. 4511.19(A), or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance.
         B.   If a person is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of
division (c) of this section and the person also is convicted of or pleads
guilty to a separate charge of violating Ohio R.C. 4511.19(A), or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, that was the basis of the charge
of the violation of division (c) of this section, the conviction of or plea of
guilty to the violation of division (c) of this section shall not constitute,
for the purposes of any provision of law that refers to a conviction of or a
plea of guilty to a violation of Ohio R.C. 4511.19(A) or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, a conviction of or a plea of guilty to a
violation of Ohio R.C. 4511.19(A) or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance.
(ORC 2919.22(A) - (E), (H))
Statutory reference:
   Community service, requirements, see Ohio R.C. 2919.22(F)
   License suspension, requirements, see Ohio R.C. 2919.22(G)
   Permitting child abuse, felony offense, see Ohio R.C. 2903.15
§ 636.13  INTERFERENCE WITH CUSTODY.
   (a)   No person, knowing that he or she is without privilege to do so or
being reckless in that regard, shall entice, take, keep, or harbor a person
identified in division (a)(1), (2) or (3) of this section from the parent,
guardian, or custodian of the person identified in division (a)(1), (2) or (3)
of this section:
      (1)   A child under the age of 18, or a mentally or physically disabled
child under the age of 21;
      (2)   A person committed by law to an institution for delinquent, unruly,
neglected, abused, or dependent children;
      (3)   A person committed by law to an institution for the mentally ill or
an institution for persons with intellectual disabilities.
   (b)   No person shall aid, abet, induce, cause, or encourage a child or a
ward of the juvenile court who has been committed to the custody of any person,
department, or public or private institution to leave the custody of that
person, department, or institution without legal consent.
   (c)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge of enticing or taking under
division (a)(1) of this section that the actor reasonably believed that his or
her conduct was necessary to preserve the child’s health or safety.  It is an
affirmative defense to a charge of keeping or harboring under division (a) of
this section that the actor in good faith gave notice to law enforcement or
judicial authorities within a reasonable time after the child or committed
person came under his or her shelter, protection, or influence.
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of interference with custody.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this subdivision, a violation of
division (a)(1) above is a misdemeanor of the first degree.  If the child who
is the subject of a violation of division (a)(1) is removed from the state or
if the offender previously has been convicted of an offense under this section
or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, a violation of
division (a)(1) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.  If the child who is the subject of a violation of division (a)(1)
suffers physical harm as a result of the violation, a violation of division (a)
(1) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   A violation of division (a)(2) or (3) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (3)   A violation of division (b) of this section is a misdemeanor of the
first degree.  Each day of a violation of division (b) is a separate offense.
(ORC 2919.23)
§ 636.14  CONTRIBUTING TO THE UNRULINESS OR DELINQUENCY OF A CHILD.
   (a)   As used in this section:
      (1)   “Delinquent child.” Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2152.02.
      (2)   “Unruly child.” Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2151.022.
   (b)   No person, including a parent, guardian, or other custodian of a
child, shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Aid, abet, induce, cause, encourage, or contribute to a child or a
ward of the juvenile court becoming an unruly child or a delinquent child;
      (2)   Act in a way tending to cause a child or a ward of the juvenile
court to become an unruly child or a delinquent child;
      (3)   Act in a way that contributes to an adjudication of the child as a
delinquent child based on the child’s violation of a court order adjudicating
the child an unruly child for being an habitual truant;
      (4)   If the person is the parent, guardian, or custodian of a child who
has the duties under R.C. Chapters 2152 and 2950 to register, register a new
residence address, and periodically verify a residence address, and, if
applicable, to send a notice of intent to reside, and if the child is not
emancipated, as defined in R.C. § 2919.121, fail to ensure that the child
complies with those duties under R.C. Chapters 2152 and 2950.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of contributing to the
unruliness or delinquency of a child, a misdemeanor of the first degree. Each
day of violation of this section is a separate offense.
(ORC 2919.24)
§ 636.15  PARTY LINES TO BE YIELDED IN EMERGENCIES.  (REPEALED)
   (EDITOR’S NOTE:  Section 636.15, based on Ohio R.C. 4931.30, is obsolete and
has been removed as part of the 2007 updating and revision of this Municipal
Code.)
§ 636.16  THREATENING OR HARASSING TELECOMMUNICATIONS.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly make or cause to be made a
telecommunication, or knowingly permit a telecommunication to be made from a
telecommunications device under the person’s control, to another, if the caller
does any of the following:
      (1)   Makes the telecommunication with purpose to harass, intimidate, or
abuse any person at the premises to which the telecommunication is made,
whether or not actual communication takes place between the caller and a
recipient;
      (2)   Describes, suggests, requests, or proposes that the caller, the
recipient of the telecommunication, or any other person engage in sexual
activity, and the recipient or another person at the premises to which the
telecommunication is made has requested, in a previous telecommunication or in
the immediate telecommunication, that the caller not make a telecommunication
to the recipient or to the premises to which the telecommunication is made;
      (3)   During the telecommunication, violates Ohio R.C. 2903.21 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance;
      (4)   Knowingly states to the recipient of the telecommunication that the
caller intends to cause damage to or destroy public or private property, and
the recipient, any member of the recipient’s family, or any other person who
resides at the premises to which the telecommunication is made owns, leases,
resides, or works in, will at the time of the destruction or damaging be near
or in, has the responsibility of protecting, or insures the property that will
be destroyed or damaged;
      (5)   Knowingly makes the telecommunication to the recipient of the
telecommunication, to another person at the premises to which the
telecommunication is made, or to those premises, and the recipient or another
person at those premises previously has told the caller not to make a
telecommunication to those premises or to any persons at those premises;
      (6)   Knowingly makes any comment, request, suggestion, or proposal to
the recipient of the telecommunication that is threatening, intimidating,
menacing, coercive, or obscene with the intent to abuse, threaten, or harass
the recipient;
      (7)   Without a lawful business purpose, knowingly interrupts the
telecommunication service of any person;
      (8)   Without a lawful business purpose, knowingly transmits to any
person, regardless of whether the telecommunication is heard in its entirety,
any file, document, or other communication that prevents that person from using
the person’s telephone service or electronic communication device;
      (9)   Knowingly makes any false statement concerning the death, injury,
illness, disfigurement, reputation, indecent conduct, or criminal conduct of
the recipient of the telecommunication or family or household member of the
recipient with purpose to abuse, threaten, intimidate, or harass the recipient;
      (10)   Knowingly incites another person through a telecommunication or
other means to harass or participate in the harassment of a person;
      (11)   Knowingly alarms the recipient by making a telecommunication
without a lawful purpose at an hour or hours known to be inconvenient to the
recipient and in an offensive or repetitive manner.
   (b)   (1)   No person shall make or cause to be made a telecommunication or
permit a telecommunication to be made from a telecommunications device under
the person’s control, with purpose to abuse, threaten, or harass another
person.
      (2)   No person shall knowingly post a text or audio statement or an
image on an internet web site or web page for the purpose of abusing,
threatening, or harassing another person.
   (c)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of telecommunications
harassment.
      (2)   A violation of division (a)(1), (a)(2), (a)(3), (a)(5), (a)(6), (a)
(7), (a)(8), (a)(9), (a)(10), or (a)(11) or (b) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the first degree on a first offense and a felony on each
subsequent offense, which shall be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (3)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (c)(3), a violation
of division (a)(4) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree on a
first offense and a felony on each subsequent offense, to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.  If a violation of division (a)(4) of this section
results in economic harm of one thousand dollars ($1,000) or more,
telecommunications harassment is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
   (d)   No cause of action may be asserted in any court of this municipality
against any provider of a telecommunications service, interactive computer
service as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 230, or information service, or against any
officer, employee, or agent of a telecommunications service, interactive
computer service as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 230, or information service, for any
injury, death, or loss to person or property that allegedly arises out of the
provider’s, officer’s, employee’s, or agent’s provision of information,
facilities, or assistance in accordance with the terms of a court order that is
issued in relation to the investigation or prosecution of an alleged violation
of this section.  A provider of a telecommunications service, interactive
computer service as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 230, or information service, or an
officer, employee, or agent of a telecommunications service, interactive
computer service as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 230, or information service, is
immune from any civil or criminal liability for injury, death, or loss to
person or property that allegedly arises out of the provider’s, officer’s,
employee’s, or agent’s provision of information, facilities, or assistance in
accordance with the terms of a court order that is issued in relation to the
investigation or prosecution of an alleged violation of this section.
   (e)   (1)   This section does not apply to a person solely because the
person provided access or connection to or from an electronic method of
remotely transferring information not under that person’s control, including
having provided capabilities that are incidental to providing access or
connection to or from the electronic method of remotely transferring the
information, and that do not include the creation of the content of the
material that is the subject of the access or connection. In addition, any
person providing access or connection to or from an electronic method of
remotely transferring information not under that person’s control shall not be
liable for any action voluntarily taken in good faith to block the receipt or
transmission through its service of any information that the person believes
is, or will be sent, in violation of this section.
      (2)   Division (e)(1) of this section does not create an affirmative duty
for any person providing access or connection to or from an electronic method
of remotely transferring information not under that person’s control to block
the receipt or transmission through its service of any information that it
believes is, or will be sent, in violation of this section except as otherwise
provided by law.
      (3)   Division (e)(1) of this section does not apply to a person who
conspires with a person actively involved in the creation or knowing
distribution of material in violation of this section or who knowingly
advertises the availability of material of that nature.
      (4)   A provider or user of an interactive computer service, as defined
in 47 U.S.C. § 230, shall neither be treated as the publisher or speaker of any
information provided by another information content provider, as defined in 47
U.S.C. § 230, nor held civilly or criminally liable for the creation or
development of information provided by another information content provider, as
defined in 47 U.S.C. § 230. Nothing in this division shall be construed to
protect a person from liability to the extent that the person developed or
created any content in violation of this section.
   (f)   Divisions (a)(5) to (a)(11) and (b)(2) of this section do not apply to
a person who, while employed or contracted by a newspaper, magazine, press
association, news agency, news wire service, cable channel or cable operator,
or radio or television station, is gathering, processing, transmitting,
compiling, editing, or disseminating information for the general public within
the scope of the person’s employment in that capacity or the person’s
contractual authority in that capacity.
   (g)   As used in divisions (a) through (d) of this section:
      (1)   “Cable operator” has the same meaning as in R.C. § 1332.21.
      (2)   “Caller” means the person described in division (a) of this section
who makes or causes to be made a telecommunication or who permits a
telecommunication to be made from a telecommunications device under that
person’s control.
      (3)   “Economic harm” means all direct, incidental and consequential
pecuniary harm suffered by a victim as a result of the criminal conduct.  The
term includes but is not limited to all of the following:
         A.   All wages, salaries or other compensation lost as a result of the
criminal conduct;
         B.   The cost of all wages, salaries or other compensation paid to
employees for time those employees are prevented from working as a result of
the criminal conduct;
         C.   The overhead costs incurred from the time that a business is shut
down as a result of the criminal conduct;
         D.   The loss of value to tangible or intangible property that was
damaged as a result of the criminal conduct.
      (4)   “Family or household member” means any of the following:
         A.   Any of the following who is residing or has resided with the
recipient of the telecommunication against whom the act prohibited in division
(a)(9) of this section is committed:
            1.   A spouse, a person living as a spouse, or a former spouse of
the recipient;
            2.   A parent, a foster parent, or a child of the recipient, or
another person related by consanguinity or affinity to the recipient;
            3.   A parent or a child of a spouse, person living as a spouse, or
former spouse of the recipient, or another person related by consanguinity or
affinity to a spouse, person living as a spouse, or former spouse of the
recipient.
         B.   The natural parent of any child of whom the recipient of the
telecommunication against whom the act prohibited in division (a)(9) of this
section is committed is the other natural parent or is the putative other
natural parent.
      (5)   “Person living as a spouse” means a person who is living or has
lived with the recipient of the telecommunication against whom the act
prohibited in division (a)(9) of this section is committed in a common law
marital relationship, who otherwise is cohabiting with the recipient, or who
otherwise has cohabited with the recipient within five years prior to the date
of the alleged commission of the act in question.
      (6)   “Sexual activity” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2907.01.
      (7)   “Telecommunication” and “telecommunications device” have the same
meanings as in Ohio R.C. 2913.01.
   (h)   Nothing in this section prohibits a person from making a
telecommunication to a debtor that is in compliance with the “Fair Debt
Collection Practices Act,” 15 U.S.C. 1692, as amended, or the “Telephone
Consumer Protection Act,” 47 U.S.C. 227, as amended.
(ORC 2917.21)
§ 636.17  PLACING HARMFUL SUBSTANCE OR OBJECTS IN FOOD OR CONFECTION.
   (a)   No person shall do either of the following, knowing or having
reasonable cause to believe that any person may suffer physical harm or be
seriously inconvenienced or annoyed thereby:
      (1)   Place a pin, razor blade, glass, laxative, drug of abuse, or other
harmful or hazardous object or substance in any food or confection.
      (2)   Furnish to any person any food or confection which has been
adulterated in violation of division (a)(1) of this section.
(ORC 3716.11)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(ORC 3716.99(C))
§ 636.18  DOMESTIC VIOLENCE.
   (a)   Prohibited conduct.
      (1)   No person shall knowingly cause or attempt to cause physical harm
to a family or household member.
      (2)   No person shall recklessly cause serious physical harm to a family
or household member.
      (3)   No person, by threat of force, shall knowingly cause a family or
household member to believe that the offender will cause imminent physical harm
to the family or household member.
      (4)   A.   Whoever violates this section is guilty of domestic violence,
and the court shall sentence the offender as provided in divisions (a)(4)B. to
(a)(4)E. of this section.
         B.   Except as otherwise provided in division (a)(4)C., (a)(4)D. or
(a)(4)E. of this section, a violation of division (a)(3) is a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree and a violation of division (a)(1) or (a)(2) is a misdemeanor
of the first degree.
         C.   Except as otherwise provided in division (a)(4)D. of this
section, if the offender previously has pleaded guilty to or been convicted of
domestic violence, a violation of an existing or former municipal ordinance or
law of this or any other state or the United States that is substantially
equivalent to domestic violence, a violation of Ohio R.C. 2903.14, 2909.06,
2909.07, 2911.12, 2911.211 or 2919.22 if the victim of the violation was a
family or household member at the time of the violation, a violation of an
existing or former municipal ordinance or law of this or any other state or the
United States that is substantially equivalent to any of those sections if the
victim of the violation was a family or household member at the time of the
commission of the violation, or any offense of violence if the victim of the
offense was a family or household member at the time of the commission of the
offense, a violation of division (a)(1) or (a)(2) is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law, and a violation of division (a)(3) is a
misdemeanor of the second degree.
         D.   If the offender previously has pleaded guilty to or been
convicted of two or more offenses of domestic violence or two or more
violations or offenses of the type described in division (a)(4)C. of this
section involving a person who was a family or household member at the time of
the violations or offenses, a violation of division (a)(1) or (a)(2) of this
section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law, and a
violation of division (a)(3) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
         E.   Except as otherwise provided in division (a)(4)C. or (a)(4)D. of
this section, if the offender knew that the victim of the violation was
pregnant at the time of the violation, a violation of division (a)(1) or (a)(2)
of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law, and a
violation of division (a)(3) of this section is a misdemeanor of the third
degree.
      (5)   Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, no court or
unit of state or local government shall charge any fee, cost, deposit or money
in connection with the filing of charges against a person alleging that the
person violated this section or a municipal ordinance substantially equivalent
to this section or in connection with the prosecution of any charges so filed.
      (6)   As used in this section:
         A.   “Family or household member.” Any of the following:
            1.   Any of the following who is residing or has resided with the
offender:
               a.   A spouse, a person living as a spouse as defined below, or
a former spouse of the offender;
               b.   A parent, a foster parent, or a child of the offender, or
another person related by consanguinity or affinity to the offender;
               c.   A parent or a child of a spouse, person living as a spouse,
or former spouse of the offender, or another person related by consanguinity or
affinity to a spouse, person living as a spouse, or former spouse of the
offender.
            2.   The natural parent of any child of whom the offender is the
other natural parent or is the putative other natural parent.
         B.   “Person living as a spouse.” A person who is living or has lived
with the offender in a common law marital relationship, who otherwise is
cohabiting with the offender, or who otherwise has cohabited with the offender
within five years prior to the date of the alleged commission of the act in
question.
(ORC 2919.25)
   (b)   Temporary protection order.  Consult Ohio R.C. 2919.26 for current
provisions regarding protection orders.
   (c)   Violating a protection order, consent agreement, anti-stalking
protection order or order issued by a court of another state.  See §
636.05(c) for current provisions.
§ 636.19  SAFETY OF CROWDS ATTENDING LIVE ENTERTAINMENT PERFORMANCES.
   (a)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   “Concert.”  A musical performance of which the primary component is
a presentation by persons singing or playing musical instruments, that is
intended by its sponsors mainly, but not necessarily exclusively, for the
listening enjoyment of the audience, and that is held in a facility. A
“concert” does not include any performance in which music is a part of the
presentation and the primary component of which is acting, dancing, a motion
picture, a demonstration of skills or talent other than singing or playing an
instrument, an athletic event, an exhibition or a speech.
      (2)   “Facility.”  Any structure that has a roof or partial roof and that
has walls that wholly surround the area on all sides, including, but not
limited to, a stadium, hall, arena, armory, auditorium, ballroom, exhibition
hall, convention center or music hall.
      (3)   “Live entertainment performance.” Any live speech; any live musical
performance, including a concert; any live dramatic performance; any live
variety show; and any other live performance with respect to which the primary
intent of the audience can be construed to be viewing the performers. A “live
entertainment performance” does not include any form of entertainment with
respect to which the person purchasing a ticket routinely participates in
amusements as well as views performers.
      (4)   “Person.”  Includes, in addition to an individual or entity
specified in Ohio R.C. 1.59(C), any governmental entity.
      (5)   “Restricted entertainment area.”  Any wholly or partially enclosed
area, whether indoors or outdoors, that has limited access through established
entrances or established turnstiles or similar devices.
   (b)   (1)   No person shall sell, offer to sell, or offer in return for a
donation, any ticket that is not numbered and that does not correspond to a
specific seat for admission to either of the following:
         A.   A live entertainment performance that is not exempted under
division (d) of this section, that is held in a restricted entertainment area,
and for which more than 8,000 tickets are offered to the public;
         B.   A concert that is not exempted under division (d) of this section
and for which more than 3,000 tickets are offered to the public.
      (2)   No person shall advertise any live entertainment performance as
described in division (b)(1)A. of this section or any concert as described in
division (b)(1)B. of this section, unless the advertisement contains the words
“Reserved Seats Only.”
   (c)   Unless exempted by division (d)(1) of this section, no person who owns
or operates any restricted entertainment area shall fail to open, maintain and
properly staff at least the number of entrances designated under division (e)
of this section for a minimum of 90 minutes prior to the scheduled start of any
live entertainment performance that is held in the restricted entertainment
area and for which more than 3,000 tickets are sold, offered for sale or
offered in return for a donation.
   (d)   (1)   A live entertainment performance, other than a concert, is
exempted from the provisions of divisions (b) and (c) of this section if both
of the following apply:
         A.   The restricted entertainment area in which the performance is
held has at least eight entrances or, if both entrances and separate admission
turnstiles or similar devices are used, has at least eight turnstiles or
similar devices.
         B.   The eight entrances or, if applicable, the eight turnstiles or
similar devices, are opened, maintained and properly staffed at least one hour
prior to the scheduled start of the performance.
      (2)   A.   The officer responsible for public safety in the municipality
may, upon application of the sponsor of a concert covered by division (b) of
this section, exempt the concert from the provisions of that division if such
officer finds that the health, safety and welfare of the participants and
spectators would not be substantially affected by failure to comply with the
provisions of that division.  In determining whether to grant an exemption, the
officer shall consider the following factors:
            1.   The size and design of the facility in which the concert is
scheduled;
            2.   The size, age and anticipated conduct of the crowd expected to
attend the concert;
            3.   The ability of the sponsor to manage and control the expected
crowd. If the sponsor of any concert desires to obtain an exemption under this
division, the sponsor shall apply to the appropriate official on a form
prescribed by that official. The official shall issue an order that grants or
denies the exemption within five days after receipt of the application. The
sponsor may appeal any order that denies an exemption to the Court of Common
Pleas of the county in which the facility is located.
         B.   If an official grants an exemption under division (d)(2)A. of
this section, the official shall designate an on-duty law enforcement officer
to be present at the concert. The designated officer has authority to issue
orders to all security personnel at the concert to protect the health, safety
and welfare of the participants and spectators.
      (3)   Notwithstanding division (d)(2) of this section, in the case of a
concert held in a facility located on the campus of an educational institution
covered by Ohio R.C. 3345.04, a state university law enforcement officer
appointed pursuant to Ohio R.C. 3345.04 and 3345.21 shall do both of the
following:
         A.   Exercise the authority to grant exemptions provided by division
(d)(2)A. of this section in lieu of an official designated in that division;
         B.   If the officer grants an exemption under division (d)(3)A. of
this section, designate an on-duty state university law enforcement officer to
be present at the concert. The designated officer has authority to issue orders
to all security personnel at the concert to protect the health, safety and
welfare of the participants and spectators.
   (e)   (1)   Unless a live entertainment performance is exempted by division
(d)(1) of this section, the officer responsible for public safety within the
municipality shall designate, for purposes of division (c) of this section, the
minimum number of entrances required to be opened, maintained and staffed at
each live entertainment performance so as to permit crowd control and reduce
congestion at the entrances.  The designation shall be based on such factors as
the size and nature of the crowd expected to attend the live entertainment
performance, the length of time prior to the live entertainment performance
that crowds are expected to congregate at the entrances and the amount of
security provided at the restricted entertainment area.
      (2)   Notwithstanding division (e)(1) of this section, a state university
law enforcement officer appointed pursuant to Ohio R.C. 3345.04 and 3345.21
shall designate the number of entrances required to be opened, maintained and
staffed in the case of a live entertainment performance that is held at a
restricted entertainment area located on the campus of an educational
institution covered by Ohio R.C. 3345.04.
   (f)   No person shall enter into any contract for a live entertainment
performance that does not permit or require compliance with this section.
   (g)   (1)   This section does not apply to a live entertainment performance
held in a restricted entertainment area if one admission ticket entitles the
holder to view or participate in three or more different games, rides,
activities or live entertainment performances occurring simultaneously at
different sites within the restricted entertainment area and if the initial
admittance entrance to the restricted entertainment area, for which the ticket
is required, is separate from the entrance to any specific live entertainment
performance and an additional ticket is not required for admission to the
particular live entertainment performance.
      (2)   This section does not apply to a symphony orchestra performance, a
ballet performance, horse races, dances or fairs.
   (h)   This section does not prohibit the Council from imposing additional
requirements, not in conflict with the section, for the promotion or holding of
live entertainment performances.
   (i)   Whoever violates division (b), (c) or (f) of this section is guilty of
a misdemeanor of the first degree.  If any individual suffers physical harm to
his or her person as a result of a violation of this section, the sentencing
court shall consider this factor in favor of imposing a term of imprisonment
upon the offender.
(ORC 2917.40)
§ 636.20  HAZING.
   (a)   As used in this section, “hazing” means doing any act or coercing
another, including the victim, to do any act of initiation into any student or
other organization that causes or creates a substantial risk of causing mental
or physical harm to any person.
   (b)   (1)   No person shall recklessly participate in the hazing of another.
      (2)   No administrator, employee, or faculty member of any primary,
secondary, or post-secondary school or of any other educational institution,
public or private, shall recklessly permit the hazing of any person.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of hazing, a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree.
(ORC 2903.31)
Statutory reference:
   Civil liability for hazing, see Ohio R.C. 2307.44
§ 636.21  ILLEGAL DISTRIBUTION OF CIGARETTES OR OTHER TOBACCO PRODUCTS;
TRANSACTION SCANS.
   (a)   Illegal distribution of cigarettes, other tobacco products, or
alternative nicotine products.
      (1)   As used in this section:
         A.   “Age verification.” A service provided by an independent third
party (other than a manufacturer, producer, distributor, wholesaler, or
retailer of cigarettes, other tobacco products, alternative nicotine products,
or papers used to roll cigarettes) that compares information available from a
commercially available database, or aggregate of databases, that regularly are
used by government and businesses for the purpose of age and identity
verification to personal information provided during an internet sale or other
remote method of sale to establish that the purchaser is 18 years of age or
older.
         B.   “Alternative nicotine product.”
            1.   Subject to division 2. of this definition, an electronic
cigarette or any other product or device that consists of or contains nicotine
that can be ingested into the body by any means, including, but not limited to,
chewing, smoking, absorbing, dissolving, or inhaling.
            2.   The phrase does not include any of the following:
               a.   Any cigarette or other tobacco product;
               b.   Any product that is a “drug” as that term is defined in 21
U.S.C. § 321(g)(1);
               c.   Any product that is a “device” as that term is defined in
21 U.S.C. § 321(h);
               d.   Any product that is a “combination product” as described in
21 U.S.C. § 353(g).
         C.   “Child.” Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2151.011.
         D.   “Cigarette.” Includes clove cigarettes and hand-rolled
cigarettes.
         E.   “Distribute.”  Means to furnish, give, or provide cigarettes,
other tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or papers used to roll
cigarettes to the ultimate consumer of the cigarettes, other tobacco products,
alternative nicotine products, or papers used to roll cigarettes.
         F.   “Electronic cigarette.”
            1.   Subject to division 2. of this definition, any electronic
product or device that produces a vapor that delivers nicotine or any other
substance to the person inhaling from the device to simulate smoking and that
is likely to be offered to or purchased by consumers as an electronic
cigarette, electronic cigar, electronic cigarillo, or electronic pipe.
            2.   The phrase does not include any item, product, or device
described in division 2. of the definition for “alternative nicotine product”
in this section.
         G.   “Proof of age.” Means a driver’s license, a commercial driver’s
license, a military identification card, a passport, or an identification card
issued under R.C. §§ 4507.50 to 4507.52 that shows that a person is 18 years of
age or older.
         H.   “Tobacco product.” Means any product that is made from tobacco,
including, but not limited to, a cigarette, a cigar, pipe tobacco, chewing
tobacco, or snuff.
         I.   “Vending machine.” Has the same meaning as “coin machine” in R.C.
§ 2913.01.
      (2)   No manufacturer, producer, distributor, wholesaler, or retailer of
cigarettes, other tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or papers
used to roll cigarettes, no agent, employee, or representative of a
manufacturer, producer, distributor, wholesaler, or retailer of cigarettes,
other tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or papers used to roll
cigarettes, and no other person shall do any of the following:
         A.   Give, sell, or otherwise distribute cigarettes, other tobacco
products, alternative nicotine products, or papers used to roll cigarettes to
any child;
         B.   Give away, sell, or distribute cigarettes, other tobacco
products, alternative nicotine products, or papers used to roll cigarettes in
any place that does not have posted in a conspicuous place a sign stating that
giving, selling, or otherwise distributing cigarettes, other tobacco products,
alternative nicotine products, or papers used to roll cigarettes to a person
under 18 years of age is prohibited by law;
         C.   Knowingly furnish any false information regarding the name, age,
or other identification of any child with purpose to obtain cigarettes, other
tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or papers used to roll
cigarettes for that child;
         D.   Manufacture, sell, or distribute in this state any pack or other
container of cigarettes containing fewer than 20 cigarettes or any package of
roll-your-own tobacco containing less than six-tenths of one ounce of tobacco;
         E.   Sell cigarettes or alternative nicotine products in a smaller
quantity than that placed in the pack or other container by the manufacturer;
         F.   Give, sell, or otherwise distribute alternative nicotine
products, papers used to roll cigarettes, or tobacco products other than
cigarettes over the internet or through another remote method without age
verification.
      (3)   No person shall sell or offer to sell cigarettes, other tobacco
products, or alternative nicotine products by or from a vending machine, except
in the following locations:
         A.   An area within a factory, business, office, or other place not
open to the general public;
         B.   An area to which children are not generally permitted access;
         C.   Any other place not identified in division (a)(3)A. or (a)(3)B.
of this section, upon all of the following conditions:
            1.   The vending machine is located within the immediate vicinity,
plain view, and control of the person who owns or operates the place, or an
employee of that person, so that all cigarettes, other tobacco product, and
alternative nicotine product purchases from the vending machine will be readily
observed by the person who owns or operates the place or an employee of that
person. For the purpose of this section, a vending machine located in any
unmonitored area, including an unmonitored coatroom, restroom, hallway, or
outer waiting area, shall not be considered located within the immediate
vicinity, plain view, and control of the person who owns or operates the place,
or an employee of that person.
            2.   The vending machine is inaccessible to the public when the
place is closed.
      (4)   The following are affirmative defenses to a charge under division
(a)(2)A. of this section:
         A.   The child was accompanied by a parent, spouse who is 18 years of
age or older, or legal guardian of the child.
         B.   The person who gave, sold, or distributed cigarettes, other
tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or papers used to roll
cigarettes to a child under division (a)(2)A. of this section is a parent,
spouse who is 18 years of age or older, or legal guardian of the child.
      (5)   It is not a violation of division (a)(2)A. or (a)(2)B. of this
section for a person to give or otherwise distribute to a child cigarettes,
other tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or papers used to roll
cigarettes while the child is participating in a research protocol if all of
the following apply:
         A.   The parent, guardian, or legal custodian of the child has
consented in writing to the child participating in the research protocol.
         B.   An institutional human subjects protection review board, or an
equivalent entity, has approved the research protocol.
         C.   The child is participating in the research protocol at the
facility or location specified in the research protocol.
      (6)   A.   Whoever violates division (a)(2)A., (a)(2)B., (a)(2)D., (a)
(2)E., or (a)(2)F. or (a)(3) of this section is guilty of illegal distribution
of cigarettes, other tobacco products, or alternative nicotine products. Except
as otherwise provided in this division, illegal distribution of cigarettes,
other tobacco products, or alternative nicotine products is a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of a violation
of division (a)(2)A., (a)(2)B., (a)(2)D., (a)(2)E., or (a)(2)F. or (a)(3) of
this section or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance,
illegal distribution of cigarettes, other tobacco products, or alternative
nicotine products is a misdemeanor of the third degree.
         B.   Whoever violates division (a)(2)C. of this section is guilty of
permitting children to use cigarettes, other tobacco products, or alternative
nicotine products. Except as otherwise provided in this division, permitting
children to use cigarettes, other tobacco products, or alternative nicotine
products is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If the offender previously has
been convicted of a violation of division (a)(2)C. of this section or a
substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, permitting children
to use cigarettes, other tobacco products, or alternative nicotine products is
a misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (7)   Any cigarettes, other tobacco products, alternative nicotine
products, or papers used to roll cigarettes that are given, sold, or otherwise
distributed to a child in violation of this section and that are used,
possessed, purchased, or received by a child in violation of R.C. § 2151.87 are
subject to seizure and forfeiture as contraband under R.C. Chapter 2981.
(ORC 2927.02)
   (b)   Transaction scan.
      (1)   As used in this division and division (c) of this section:
         A.   “Card holder” means any person who presents a driver’s or
commercial driver’s license or an identification card to a seller, or an agent
or employee of a seller, to purchase or receive cigarettes, other tobacco
products, or alternative nicotine products from a seller, agent or employee.
         B.   “Identification card” means an identification card issued under
Ohio R.C. 4507.50 to 4507.52.
         C.   “Seller.” A seller of cigarettes, other tobacco products, or
alternative nicotine products and includes any person whose gift of or other
distribution of cigarettes, other tobacco products, or alternative nicotine
products is subject to the prohibitions of division (a) of this section.
         D.   “Transaction scan” means the process by which a seller or an
agent or employee of a seller checks, by means of a transaction scan device,
the validity of a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or an identification
card that is presented as a condition for purchasing or receiving cigarettes,
other tobacco products, or alternative nicotine products.
         E.   “Transaction scan device” means any commercial device or
combination of devices used at a point of sale that is capable of deciphering
in an electronically readable format the information encoded on the magnetic
strip or bar code of a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or an
identification card.
      (2)   A.   A seller or an agent or employee of a seller may perform a
transaction scan by means of a transaction scan device to check the validity of
a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or identification card presented by a
card holder as a condition for selling, giving away, or otherwise distributing
to the card holder cigarettes, other tobacco products, or alternative nicotine
products.
         B.   If the information deciphered by the transaction scan performed
under division (b)(2)A. of this section fails to match the information printed
on the driver’s or commercial driver’s license or identification card presented
by the card holder, or if the transaction scan indicates that the information
so printed is false or fraudulent, neither the seller nor any agent or employee
of the seller shall sell, give away, or otherwise distribute any cigarettes,
other tobacco products, or alternative nicotine products to the card holder.
         C.   Division (b)(2)A. of this section does not preclude a seller or
an agent or employee of a seller from using a transaction scan device to check
the validity of a document other than a driver’s or commercial driver’s license
or identification card, if the document includes a bar code or magnetic strip
that may be scanned by the device, as a condition for selling, giving away, or
otherwise distributing cigarettes, other tobacco products, or alternative
nicotine products to the person presenting the document.
      (3)   Rules adopted by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles under Ohio R.C.
4301.61(C) apply to the use of transaction scan devices for purposes of this
division (b) and division (c) of this section.
      (4)   A.   No seller or agent or employee of a seller shall
electronically or mechanically record or maintain any information derived from
a transaction scan, except for the following:
            1.   The name and date of birth of the person listed on the
driver’s or commercial driver’s license or identification card presented by the
card holder;
            2.   The expiration date and identification number of the driver’s
or commercial driver’s license or identification card presented by the card
holder.
         B.   No seller or agent or employee of a seller shall use the
information that is derived from a transaction scan or that is permitted to be
recorded and maintained under division (b)(4)A. of this section, except for
purposes of division (c) of this section.
         C.   No seller or agent or employee of a seller shall use a
transaction scan device for a purpose other than the purpose specified in
division (c)(2)A. of this section.
         D.   No seller or agent or employee of a seller shall sell or
otherwise disseminate the information derived from a transaction scan to any
third party, including but not limited to selling or otherwise disseminating
that information for any marketing, advertising, or promotional activities, but
a seller or agent or employee of a seller may release that information pursuant
to a court order or as specifically authorized by division (c) of this section
or another section of these Codified Ordinances or the Ohio Revised Code.
      (5)   Nothing in this division (b) or division (c) of this section
relieves a seller or an agent or employee of a seller of any responsibility to
comply with any other applicable local, state or federal laws or rules
governing the sale, giving away, or other distribution of cigarettes, other
tobacco products, or alternative nicotine products.
      (6)   Whoever violates division (b)(2)B. or (b)(4) of this section is
guilty of engaging in an illegal tobacco product or alternative nicotine
product transaction scan, and the court may impose upon the offender a civil
penalty of up to $1,000 for each violation. The Clerk of the Court shall pay
each collected civil penalty to the County Treasurer for deposit into the
County Treasury.
(ORC 2927.021)
   (c)   Affirmative defenses.
      (1)   A seller or an agent or employee of a seller may not be found
guilty of a charge of a violation of division (a) of this section in which the
age of the purchaser or other recipient of cigarettes, other tobacco products,
or alternative nicotine products is an element of the alleged violation, if the
seller, agent or employee raises and proves as an affirmative defense that all
of the following occurred:
         A.   A card holder attempting to purchase or receive cigarettes, other
tobacco products, or alternative nicotine products presented a driver’s or
commercial driver’s license or an identification card.
         B.   A transaction scan of the driver’s or commercial driver’s license
or identification card that the card holder presented indicated that the
license or card was valid.
         C.   The cigarettes, other tobacco products, or alternative nicotine
products were sold, given away or otherwise distributed to the card holder in
reasonable reliance upon the identification presented and the completed
transaction scan.
      (2)   In determining whether a seller or an agent or employee of a seller
has proven the affirmative defense provided by division (c)(1) of this section,
the trier of fact in the action for the alleged violation of division (a) of
this section shall consider any written policy that the seller has adopted and
implemented and that is intended to prevent violations of division (a) of this
section.  For purposes of division (c)(1)C. of this section, the trier of fact
shall consider that reasonable reliance upon the identification presented and
the completed transaction scan may require a seller or an agent or employee of
a seller to exercise reasonable diligence to determine, and that the use of a 
transaction scan device does not excuse a seller or an agent or employee of a
seller from exercising reasonable diligence to determine, the following:
         A.   Whether a person to whom the seller or agent or employee of a
seller sells, gives away, or otherwise distributes cigarettes, other tobacco
products, or alternative nicotine products is 18 years of age or older;
         B.   Whether the description and picture appearing on the driver’s or
commercial driver’s license or identification card presented by a card holder
is that of the card holder.
      (3)   In any criminal action in which the affirmative defense provided by
division (c)(1) of this section is raised, the Registrar of Motor Vehicles or a
deputy registrar who issued an identification card under Ohio R.C. 4507.50 to
4507.52 shall be permitted to submit certified copies of the records of that
issuance in lieu of the testimony of the personnel of or contractors with the
Bureau of Motor Vehicles in the action.
(ORC 2927.022)
   (d)   Shipment of tobacco products.
      (1)   As used in this division (d):
         A.   “Authorized recipient of tobacco products” means a person who is:
            1.   Licensed as a cigarette wholesale dealer under Ohio R.C.
5743.15;
            2.   Licensed as a retail dealer as long as the person purchases
cigarettes with the appropriate tax stamp affixed;
            3.   An export warehouse proprietor as defined in Section 5702 of
the Internal Revenue Code;
            4.   An operator of a customs bonded warehouse under 19 U.S.C. §
1311 or 19 U.S.C. § 1555;
            5.   An officer, employee, or agent of the federal government or of
this state acting in the person’s official capacity;
            6.   A department, agency, instrumentality, or political
subdivision of the federal government or of this state;
            7.   A person having a consent for consumer shipment issued by the
Tax Commissioner under Ohio R.C. 5743.71.
         B.   “Motor carrier.”  Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 4923.01.
      (2)   The purpose of this division (d) is to prevent the sale of
cigarettes to minors and to ensure compliance with the Master Settlement
Agreement, as defined in Ohio R.C. 1346.01.
      (3)   A.   No person shall cause to be shipped any cigarettes to any
person in this municipality other than an authorized recipient of tobacco
products.
         B.   No motor carrier or other person shall knowingly transport
cigarettes to any person in this municipality that the carrier or other person
reasonably believes is not an authorized recipient of tobacco products. If
cigarettes are transported to a home or residence, it shall be presumed that
the motor carrier or other person knew that the person to whom the cigarettes
were delivered was not an authorized recipient of tobacco products.
      (4)   No person engaged in the business of selling cigarettes who ships
or causes to be shipped cigarettes to any person in this municipality in any
container or wrapping other than the original container or wrapping of the
cigarettes shall fail to plainly and visibly mark the exterior of the container
or wrapping in which the cigarettes are shipped with the words “cigarettes.”
      (5)   A court shall impose a fine of up to one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) for each violation of division (d)(3)A., (d)(3)B. or (d)(4) of this
section.
(ORC 2927.023)
§ 636.22  ETHNIC INTIMIDATION.
   (a)   No person shall violate Ohio R.C. 2903.21, 2903.22, 2909.06, or
2909.07, or Ohio R.C. 2917.21(A)(3), (4), or (5), or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance to any of these sections, by reason of the race,
color, religion, or national origin of another person or group of persons.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of ethnic intimidation. 
Ethnic intimidation is an offense of the next higher degree than the offense
the commission of which is a necessary element of ethnic intimidation.  In the
case of an offense that is a misdemeanor of the first degree, ethnic
intimidation is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(ORC 2927.12)
§ 636.23  INTIMIDATION IN CONNECTION WITH HOUSING.
   (a)   No person, whether or not acting under color of law, shall by force or
threat of force willfully injure, intimidate, or interfere with, or attempt to
injure, intimidate, or interfere with any of the following:
      (1)   Any person because of race, color, religion, sex, familial status,
as defined in Ohio R.C. 4112.01, national origin, military status as defined in
that section, disability as defined in that section, or ancestry and because
that person is or has been selling, purchasing, renting, financing, occupying,
contracting, or negotiating for the sale, purchase, rental, financing, or
occupation of any housing accommodations, or applying for or participating in
any service, organization, or facility relating to the business of selling or
renting housing accommodations.
      (2)   Any person because that person is or has been doing, or in order to
intimidate that person or any other person or any class of persons from doing
either of the following:
         A.   Participating, without discrimination on account of race, color,
religion, sex, familial status, as defined in Ohio R.C. 4112.01, national
origin, military status as defined in that section, disability as defined in
that section, or ancestry, in any of the activities, services, organizations,
or facilities described in division (a)(1) of this section;
         B.   Affording another person or class of persons opportunity or
protection so to participate.
      (3)   Any person because that person is or has been, or in order to
discourage that person or any other person from, lawfully aiding or encouraging
other persons to participate, without discrimination on account of race, color,
religion, sex, familial status as defined in Ohio R.C. 4112.01, national
origin, military status as defined in that section, disability as defined in
that section, or ancestry, in any of the activities, services, organizations,
or facilities described in division (a)(1) of this section, or participating
lawfully in speech or peaceful assembly opposing any denial of the opportunity
to so participate.
   (b)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(ORC 2927.03)
§ 636.24  FAILING TO PROVIDE FOR A FUNCTIONALLY IMPAIRED PERSON.
   (a)   No caretaker shall knowingly fail to provide a functionally impaired
person under his or her care with any treatment, care, goods, or service that
is necessary to maintain the health or safety of the functionally impaired
person when this failure results in physical harm or serious physical harm to
the functionally impaired person.
   (b)   No caretaker shall recklessly fail to provide a functionally impaired
person under his or her care with any treatment, care, goods, or service that
is necessary to maintain the health or safety of the functionally impaired
person when this failure results in serious physical harm to the functionally
impaired person.
   (c)   (1)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of
knowingly failing to provide for a functionally impaired person, a misdemeanor
of the first degree.  If the functionally impaired person under the offender’s
care suffers serious physical harm as a result of the violation of this
section, a violation of division (a) of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of
recklessly failing to provide for a functionally impaired person, a misdemeanor
of the second degree.  If the functionally impaired person under the offender’s
care suffers serious physical harm as a result of the violation of this
section, a violation of division (b) of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(ORC 2903.16)
   (d)   As used in this section:
      (1)   “Caretaker” means a person who assumes the duty to provide for the
care and protection of a functionally impaired person on a voluntary basis, by
contract, through receipt of payment for care and protection, as a result of a
family relationship, or by order of a court of competent jurisdiction. 
“Caretaker” does not include a person who owns, operates, or administers, or
who is an agent or employee of, a care facility, as defined in Ohio R.C.
2903.33.
      (2)   “Functionally impaired person” means any person who has a physical
or mental impairment that prevents the person from providing for his or her own
care or protection or whose infirmities caused by aging prevent the person from
providing for his or her own care or protection.
(ORC 2903.10)
§ 636.25  UNLAWFUL COLLECTION OF BODILY SUBSTANCES.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly collect any blood, urine, tissue, or other
bodily substance of another person without privilege or consent to do so.
   (b)   (1)   Division (a) of this section does not apply to any of the
following:
         A.   The collection of any bodily substance of a person by a law
enforcement officer, or by another person pursuant to the direction or advice
of a law enforcement officer, for purposes of a chemical test or tests of the
substance under Ohio R.C. 1547.111(A)(1) or 4511.191(A)(2) to determine the
alcohol, drug, controlled substance, metabolite of a controlled substance, or
combination content of the bodily substance;
         B.   The collection of any bodily substance of a person by a peace
officer, or by another person pursuant to the direction or advice of a peace
officer, for purposes of a test or tests of the substance as provided in Ohio
R.C. 4506.17(A) to determine the person’s alcohol concentration or the presence
of any controlled substance or metabolite of a controlled substance.
      (2)   Division (b)(1) of this section shall not be construed as implying
that the persons identified in divisions (b)(1)A. and B. of this section do not
have privilege to collect the bodily substance of another person as described
in those divisions or as limiting the definition of “privilege” set forth in
Ohio R.C.2901.01.
   (c)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of unlawful
collection of a bodily substance. Except as otherwise provided in this
division, unlawful collection of a bodily substance is a misdemeanor of the
first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of division (a) of this section or a substantially
equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, unlawful collection of a bodily
substance is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(ORC 2927.15)
CHAPTER 642:  OFFENSES RELATING TO PROPERTY
Section
642.01   Definitions.
642.02   Possession of municipal property.
642.03   Unauthorized use of property.
642.04   Injuring vines, bushes, trees or crops.
642.05   Desecration.
642.06   Arson.
642.07   Determining property value in arson.
642.08   Criminal damaging or endangering; vehicular vandalism.
642.09   Criminal mischief.
642.10   Criminal trespass.
642.11   Aggravated trespass.
642.12   Assaulting police dog or horse or handicapped assistance dog.
642.13   Damaging public park.
642.14   Railroad vandalism; criminal trespass; interference with operation of
train; grade crossing device vandalism.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   See section histories for similar state law
   Value of written instrument or evidence of debt - see Ohio R.C. 1.07
   Parents’ liability for destructive acts of their children - see Ohio R.C.
3109.09
   Alteration, injury, removal of traffic control devices - see TRAF.
414.08
   Definitions generally - see GEN. OFF.
606.01
   “Physical harm to property” defined - see GEN. OFF.
606.01(n)
   “Property” defined - see GEN. OFF.
606.01(p)
   “Serious physical harm to property” defined - see GEN. OFF.
606.01(y)
   Disposition of unclaimed or forfeited property held by Police Department -
see GEN. OFF.
608.16
   Detention of shoplifters and those committing motion picture piracy;
protection of institutional property - see GEN. OFF.
608.17
   Theft and fraud - see GEN. OFF.
Ch. 672
   Endangering aircraft and airport operations - see GEN. OFF.
678.11
   Possessing criminal tools - see GEN. OFF.
678.12
§ 642.01  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter and
Chapter 672, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
   (a)   “Active duty service member.” Any member of the armed forces of the
United States performing active duty under Title 10 of the United States Code.
   (b)   “Anhydrous ammonia.” A compound formed by the combination of two
gaseous elements, nitrogen and hydrogen, in the manner described below.
Anhydrous ammonia is one part nitrogen to three parts hydrogen (NH3). Anhydrous
ammonia by weight is fourteen parts nitrogen to three parts hydrogen, which is
approximately 82% nitrogen to 18% hydrogen.
   (c)   “Assistance dog” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 955.011.
   (d)   “Cable television service.”  Any services provided by or through the
facilities of any cable television system or other similar closed circuit
coaxial cable communications system, or any microwave or similar transmission
service used in connection with any cable television system or other similar
closed circuit coaxial cable communications system.
   (e)   “Coin machine.”  Any mechanical or electronic device designed to do
both of the following:
      (1)   Receive a coin or bill, or token made for that purpose;
      (2)   In return for the insertion or deposit of a coin, bill, or token,
automatically dispense property, provide a service, or grant a license.
   (f)   “Computer.”  An electronic device that performs logical, arithmetic,
and memory functions by the manipulation of electronic or magnetic impulses. 
“Computer” includes, but is not limited to, all input, output, processing,
storage, computer program, or communication facilities that are connected, or
related, in a computer system or network to an electronic device of that
nature.
   (g)   “Computer contaminant.”  Means a computer program that is designed to
modify, damage, destroy, disable, deny or degrade access to, allow unauthorized
access to, functionally impair, record, or transmit information within a
computer, computer system, or computer network without the express or implied
consent of the owner or other person authorized to give consent and that is of
a type or kind described in divisions (1) through (4) of this definition or of
a type or kind similar to a type or kind described in divisions (1) through (4)
of this definition:
      (1)   A group of computer programs commonly known as “viruses” and
“worms” that are self-replicating or self-propagating and that are designed to
contaminate other computer programs, compromise computer security, consume
computer resources, modify, destroy, record, or transmit data, or disrupt the
normal operation of the computer, computer system, or computer network;
      (2)   A group of computer programs commonly known as “Trojans” or “Trojan
horses” that are not self-replicating or self-propagating and that are designed
to compromise computer security, consume computer resources, modify, destroy,
record, or transmit data, or disrupt the normal operation of the computer,
computer system, or computer network;
      (3)   A group of computer programs commonly known as “zombies” that are
designed to use a computer without the knowledge and consent of the owner, or
other person authorized to give consent, and that are designed to send large
quantities of data to a targeted computer network for the purpose of degrading
the targeted computer’s or network’s performance, or denying access through the
network to the targeted computer or network, resulting in what is commonly
known as “denial of service” or “distributed denial of service” attacks;
      (4)   A group of computer programs commonly known as “trap doors,” “back
doors,” or “root kits” that are designed to bypass standard authentication
software and that are designed to allow access or use of a computer without the
knowledge or consent of the owner, or other person authorized to give consent.
   (h)   “Computer hacking.”
      (1)   “Computer hacking” means any of the following:
         A.   Gaining access or attempting to gain access to all or part of a
computer, computer system, or a computer network without express or implied
authorization with the intent to defraud or with intent to commit a crime;
         B.   Misusing computer or network services including but not limited
to mail transfer programs, file transfer programs, proxy servers, and web
servers by performing functions not authorized by the owner of the computer,
computer system, or computer network or other person authorized to give
consent. As used in this division, “misuse of computer and network services”
includes but is not limited to the unauthorized use of any of the following:
            1.   Mail transfer programs to send mail to persons other than the
authorized users of that computer or computer network;
            2.   File transfer program services or proxy servers to access
other computers, computer systems, or computer networks;
            3.   Web servers to redirect users to other web pages or web
servers.
         C.   1.   Subject to division (1)C.2. of this definition, using a
group of computer programs commonly known as “port scanners” or “probes” to
intentionally access any computer, computer system, or computer network without
the permission of the owner of the computer, computer system, or computer
network or other person authorized to give consent. The group of computer
programs referred to in this division includes but is not limited to those
computer programs that use a computer network to access a computer, computer
system, or another computer network to determine any of the following: the
presence or types of computers or computer systems on a network; the computer
network’s facilities and capabilities; the availability of computer or network
services; the presence or versions of computer software including but not
limited to operating systems, computer services, or computer contaminants; the
presence of a known computer software deficiency that can be used to gain
unauthorized access to a computer, computer system, or computer network; or any
other information about a computer, computer system, or computer network not
necessary for the normal and lawful operation of the computer initiating the
access.
            2.   The group of computer programs referred to in division (1)C.1.
of this definition does not include standard computer software used for the
normal operation, administration, management, and test of a computer, computer
system, or computer network including but not limited to domain name services,
mail transfer services, and other operating system services, computer programs
commonly called “ping,” “tcpdump,” and “traceroute” and other network
monitoring and management computer software, and computer programs commonly
knows as “nslookup” and “whois” and other systems administration computer
software.
         D.   The intentional use of a computer, computer system, or a computer
network in a manner that exceeds any right or permission granted by the owner
of the computer, computer system, or computer network or other person
authorized to give consent.
      (2)   “Computer hacking” does not include the introduction of a computer
contaminant, as defined in this section, into a computer, computer system,
computer program, or computer network.
   (i)   “Computer network.”  A set of related and remotely-connected computers
and communication facilities that includes more than one computer system that
has the capability to transmit among the connected computers and communication
facilities through the use of computer facilities.
   (j)   “Computer program.”  An ordered set of data representing coded
instructions or statements that, when executed by a computer, causes the
computer to process data.
   (k)   “Computer services.”  Includes, but is not limited to, the use of a
computer system, computer network, computer program, data that is prepared for
computer use, or data that is contained within a computer system or computer
network.
   (l)   “Computer software.”  Computer programs, procedures, and other
documentation associated with the operation of a computer system.
   (m)   “Computer system.”  A computer and related devices, whether connected
or unconnected, including, but not limited to, data input, output, and storage
devices, data communications links, and computer programs and data that make
the system capable of performing specified special purpose data processing
tasks.
   (n)   “Counterfeit telecommunications device.”  A telecommunications device
that, alone or with another telecommunications device, has been altered,
constructed, manufactured, or programmed to acquire, intercept, receive, or
otherwise facilitate the use of a telecommunications service or information
service without the authority or consent of the provider of the
telecommunications service or information service.  The phrase includes but is
not limited to a clone telephone, clone microchip, tumbler telephone, or
tumbler microchip; a wireless scanning device capable of acquiring,
intercepting, receiving, or otherwise facilitating the use of
telecommunications service or information service without immediate detection;
or a device, equipment, hardware, or software designed for, or capable of,
altering or changing the electronic serial number in a wireless telephone.
   (o)   “Create a substantial risk of serious physical harm to any person.” 
Includes the creation of a substantial risk of serious physical harm to any
emergency personnel.
   (p)   “Credit card.”  Includes, but is not limited to, a card, code, device,
or other means of access to a customer’s account for the purpose of obtaining
money, property, labor, or services on credit, or for initiating an electronic
fund transfer at a point-of-sale terminal, an automated teller machine, or a
cash dispensing machine. It also includes a county procurement card issued
under Ohio R.C. 301.29.
   (q)   “Dangerous drug.” Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 4729.01.
   (r)   “Data.”  A representation of information, knowledge, facts, concepts,
or instructions that are being or have been prepared in a formalized manner and
that are intended for use in a computer, computer system, or computer network.
   (s)   “Deception.”  To knowingly deceive another or cause another to be
deceived by any false or misleading representation, by withholding information,
by preventing another from acquiring information, or by any other conduct, act,
or omission that creates, confirms, or perpetuates a false impression in
another, including a false impression as to law, value, state of mind, or other
objective or subjective fact.
   (t)   “Defraud.”  To knowingly obtain, by deception, some benefit for
oneself or another, or to knowingly cause, by deception, some detriment to
another.
   (u)   “Deprive.”  To do any of the following:
      (1)   To withhold property of another permanently, or for a period that
appropriates a substantial portion of its value or use, or with purpose to
restore it only upon payment of a reward or other consideration;
      (2)   To dispose of property so as to make it unlikely that the owner
will recover it;
      (3)   To accept, use, or appropriate money, property, or services, with
purpose not to give proper consideration in return for the money, property, or
services, and without reasonable justification or excuse for not giving proper
consideration.
   (v)   “Disabled adult.”  A person who is 18 years of age or older and has
some impairment of body or mind that makes the person unable to work at any
substantially remunerative employment that the person otherwise would be able
to perform and that will, with reasonable probability, continue for a period of
at least 12 months without any present indication of recovery from the
impairment, or who is 18 years of age or older and has been certified as
permanently and totally disabled by an agency of this state or the United
States that has the function of so classifying persons.
   (w)   “Drug abuse offense.”  Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2925.01.
   (x)   “Elderly person.”  A person who is 65 years of age or older.
   (y)   “Electronic fund transfer.”  Has the same meaning as in 92 Stat. 3728,
15 U.S.C. 1693a, as amended.
   (z)   “Emergency personnel.”  Means any of the following persons:
      (1)   A peace officer, as defined in Ohio R.C. 2935.01;
      (2)   A member of a fire department or other firefighting agency of a
municipal corporation, township, township fire district, joint fire district,
other political subdivision, or combination of political subdivisions;
      (3)   A member of a private fire company, as defined in Ohio R.C. 9.60,
or a volunteer firefighter;
      (4)    A member of a joint ambulance district or joint emergency medical
services district;
      (5)   An emergency medical technician-basic, emergency medical
technician-intermediate, emergency medical technician-paramedic, ambulance
operator, or other member of an emergency medical service that is owned of
operated by a political subdivision or a private entity;
      (6)   The State Fire Marshal, the Chief Deputy State Fire Marshal, or an
assistant state fire marshal;
      (7)   A fire prevention officer of a political subdivision or an arson,
fire, or similar investigator of a political subdivision.
   (aa)   “Federally-licensed firearms dealer.” Has the same meaning as in Ohio
R.C. 5502.63.
   (bb)   “Firearm” and “dangerous ordnance.”  Have the same meaning as in Ohio
R.C. 2923.11.
   (cc)   “Forge.”  To fabricate or create, in whole or in part and by any
means, any spurious writing, or to make, execute, alter, complete, reproduce,
or otherwise purport to authenticate any writing, when the writing in fact is
not authenticated by that conduct.
   (dd)   “Gain access.”  To approach, instruct, communicate with, store data
in, retrieve data from, or otherwise make use of any resources of a computer,
computer system, or computer network, or any cable service or cable system both
as defined in Ohio R.C. 2913.04.
   (ee)   “Information service.”
      (1)   Subject to division (2) of this definition, the offering of a
capability for generating, acquiring, storing, transforming, processing,
retrieving, utilizing, or making available information via telecommunications,
including but not limited to electronic publishing.
      (2)   “Information service” does not include any use of a capability of a
type described in division (1) of this definition for the management, control,
or operation of a telecommunications system or the management of a
telecommunications service.
   (ff)   “Internet.”  Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 341.42.
   (gg)   “Motor vehicle.”  Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 4501.01.
   (hh)   “Occupied structure.”  Means any house, building, outbuilding,
watercraft, aircraft, railroad car, truck, trailer, tent, or other structure,
vehicle, or shelter, or any portion thereof, to which any of the following
applies:
      (1)   It is maintained as a permanent or temporary dwelling, even though
it is temporarily unoccupied and whether or not any person is actually present;
      (2)   At the time, it is occupied as the permanent or temporary
habitation of any person, whether or not any person is actually present;
      (3)   At the time, it is specially adapted for the overnight
accommodation of any person, whether or not any person is actually present;
      (4)   At the time, any person is present or likely to be present in it.
   (ii)   “Owner.”  Unless the context requires a different meaning, any
person, other than the actor, who is the owner of, who has possession or
control of, or who has any license or interest in property or services, even
though the ownership, possession, control, license, or interest is unlawful.
   (jj)   “Police dog or horse” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2921.321.
   (kk)   “Political subdivision.”  Has the same meaning  as in Ohio R.C.
2744.01.
   (ll)   “Rented property.”  Personal property in which the right of
possession and use of the property is for a short and possibly indeterminate
term in return for consideration; the rentee generally controls the duration of
possession of the property within any applicable minimum or maximum term; and
the amount of consideration is generally determined by the duration of
possession of the property.
   (mm)   “Services.”  Includes labor, personal services, professional
services, rental services, public utility services including wireless service
as defined in Ohio R.C. 5507.01(F)(1), common carrier services, and food,
drink, transportation, entertainment, and cable television services and, for
purposes of Ohio R.C. 2913.04 or any substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, includes cable services as defined in that section.
   (nn)   “Slug.”  An object that, by virtue of its size, shape, composition,
or other quality, is capable of being inserted or deposited in a coin machine
as an improper substitute for a genuine coin, bill, or token made for that
purpose.
   (oo)   “State.”  Has the same meaning  as in Ohio R.C. 2744.01.
   (pp)   “Telecommunication.”  The origination, emission, dissemination,
transmission, or reception of data, images, signals, sounds, or other
intelligence or equivalence or intelligence of any nature over any
communications system by any method, including but not limited to a fiber
optic, electronic, magnetic, optical, digital or analog method.
   (qq)   “Telecommunications device.”  Any instrument, equipment, machine, or
other device that facilitates telecommunication, including but not limited to a
computer, computer network, computer chip, computer circuit, scanner,
telephone, cellular telephone, pager, personal communications device,
transponder, receiver, radio, modem, or device that enables the use of a modem.
   (rr)   “Telecommunications service.”  The providing, allowing, facilitating,
or generating of any form of telecommunication through the use of a
telecommunications device over a telecommunications system.
   (ss)   “Theft offense.”  Any of the following:
      (1)   A violation of Ohio R.C. 2911.01, 2911.02, 2911.11, 2911.12,
2911.13, 2911.31, 2911.32, 2913.02, 2913.03, 2913.04, 2913.041, 2913.11,
2913.21, 2913.31, 2913.32, 2913.33, 2913.34, 2913.40, 2913.42, 2913.43,
2913.44, 2913.45, 2913.47, 2913.48, former Ohio R.C. 2913.47 or 2913.48, or
Ohio R.C. 2913.51, 2915.05, or 2921.41;
      (2)   A violation of an existing or former municipal ordinance or law of
this or any other state or of the United States substantially equivalent to any
section listed in division (1) of this definition, or a violation of Ohio R.C.
2913.41, 2913.81 or 2915.06 as it existed prior to July 1, 1996;
      (3)   An offense under an existing or former municipal ordinance or law
of this or any other state or the United States involving robbery, burglary,
breaking and entering, theft, embezzlement, wrongful conversion, forgery,
counterfeiting, deceit, or fraud;
      (4)   A conspiracy to commit, attempt to commit, or complicity in
committing any offense under division (1), (2), or (3) of this definition.
   (tt)   “Utter.”  To issue, publish, transfer, use, put or send into
circulation, deliver, or display.
   (uu)   “Writing.”  Any computer software, document, letter, memorandum,
note, paper, plate, data, film, or other thing having in or upon it any
written, type-written, or printed matter, and any token, stamp, seal, credit
card, badge, trademark, label, or other symbol of value, right, privilege,
license, or identification.
(ORC 2909.01, 2913.01)
§ 642.02  POSSESSION OF MUNICIPAL PROPERTY.
   (a)   No person shall, without being authorized, have in his or her control
or possession any equipment, tools, implements or other property belonging to
the municipality.
(ORC 5589.12)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 5589.99(B))
§ 642.03  UNAUTHORIZED USE OF PROPERTY.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly use or operate the property of another
without the consent of the owner or person authorized to give consent.
   (b)   No person, in any manner and by any means, including but not limited
to computer hacking, shall knowingly gain access to, attempt to gain access to,
or cause access to be gained to any computer, computer system, computer
network, cable service, cable system, telecommunications device,
telecommunications service, or information service without the consent of, or
beyond the scope of the express or implied consent of, the owner of the
computer, computer system, computer network, cable service, cable system,
telecommunications device, telecommunications service, or information service
or other person authorized to give consent.
   (c)   Except as permitted under Ohio R.C. 5503.101, no person shall
knowingly gain access to, attempt to gain access to, cause access to be granted
to, or disseminate information gained from access to the law enforcement
automated database system created pursuant to Ohio R.C. 5503.10 without the
consent of, or beyond the scope of the express or implied consent of, the chair
of the Law Enforcement Automated Data System Steering Committee.
   (d)   No person shall knowingly gain access to, attempt to gain access to,
cause access to be granted to, or disseminate information gained from access to
the Ohio law enforcement gateway established and operated pursuant to Ohio R.C.
109.57(C)(1) without the consent of, or beyond the scope of the express or
implied consent of, the Superintendent of the Bureau of Criminal Identification
and Investigation.
   (e)   The affirmative defenses contained in Ohio R.C. 2913.03(C) are
affirmative defenses to a charge under this section.
   (f)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of
unauthorized use of property.  Except as otherwise provided in this division,
unauthorized use of property is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
      (1)   If unauthorized use of property is committed for the purpose of
devising or executing a scheme to defraud or to obtain property or services,
unauthorized use of property is whichever of the following is applicable:
         A.   Except as otherwise provided below, unauthorized use of property
is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
         B.   If the value of the property or services or the loss to the
victim is one thousand dollars ($1,000) or more, it is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   If the victim of the offense is an elderly person or disabled
adult, unauthorized use of property is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
   (g)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of
unauthorized use of computer, cable,  or telecommunication property, a felony
to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (h)   Whoever violates division (c) of this section is guilty of
unauthorized use of the law enforcement automated database system, a felony to
be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (i)   Whoever violates division (d) of this section is guilty of
unauthorized use of the Ohio law enforcement gateway, a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.
   (j)   As used in this section:
      (1)   “Cable operator” means any person or group of persons that does
either of the following:
         A.   Provides cable service over a cable system and directly through
one or more affiliates owns a significant interest in that cable system;
         B.   Otherwise controls or is responsible for, through any
arrangement, the management and operation of a cable system.
      (2)   “Cable service” means any of the following:
         A.   The one-way transmission to subscribers of video programming or
of information that a cable operator makes available to all subscribers
generally;
         B.   Subscriber interaction, if any, that is required for the
selection or use of video programming or of information that a cable operator
makes available to all subscribers generally, both as described in division (f)
(2)A. above;
         C.   Any cable television service.
      (3)   “Cable system” means any facility, consisting of a set of closed
transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception, and control
equipment that is designed to provide cable service that includes video
programming and that is provided to multiple subscribers within a community. 
“Cable system” does not include any of the following:
         A.   Any facility that serves only to retransmit the television
signals of one or more television broadcast stations;
         B.   Any facility that serves subscribers without using any public
right-of-way;
         C.   Any facility of a common carrier that, under 47 U.S.C. 522(7)(c),
is excluded from the term “cable system” as defined in 47 U.S.C. 522(7);
         D.   Any open video system that complies with 47 U.S.C. 573;
         E.   Any facility of any electric utility used solely for operating
its electric utility system.
(ORC 2913.04)
Statutory reference:
   Telecommunications: fraud and unlawful use of a device, felony offenses, see
Ohio R.C. 2913.05 and 2913.06
§ 642.04  INJURING VINES, BUSHES, TREES OR CROPS.
   (a)   No person, without privilege to do so, shall recklessly cut down,
destroy, girdle, or otherwise injure a vine, bush, shrub, sapling, tree, or
crop standing or growing on the land of another or upon public land.
   (b)   In addition to the penalty provided in division (c) of this section,
whoever violates this section is liable in treble damages for the injury
caused.
(ORC 901.51)
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.
(ORC 901.99(A))
§ 642.05  DESECRATION.
   (a)   No person, without privilege to do so, shall purposely deface, damage,
pollute or otherwise physically mistreat any of the following:
      (1)   Any public monument;
      (2)   Any historical or commemorative marker, or any structure, Indian
mound or earthwork, cemetery, thing or site of great historical or
archeological interest;
      (3)   A place of worship, its furnishings, or religious artifacts or
sacred texts within the place of worship or within the grounds upon which the
place of worship is located;
      (4)   A work of art or museum piece;
      (5)   Any other object of reverence or sacred devotion.
   (b)   As used in this section, “cemetery” means any place of burial and
includes burial sites that contain American Indian burial objects placed with
or containing American Indian human remains.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of desecration. A violation of
division (a)(1), (2), (4) or (5) of this section is a misdemeanor of the second
degree. A violation of division (a)(3) of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(ORC 2927.11)
§ 642.06  ARSON.
   (a)   No person, by means of fire or explosion, shall knowingly do any of
the following:
      (1)   Cause, or create a substantial risk of, physical harm to any
property of another without the other person’s consent;
      (2)   Cause, or create a substantial risk of, physical harm to any
property of the offender or another, with purpose to defraud;
      (3)   Cause, or create a substantial risk of, physical harm to the
statehouse or a courthouse, school building, or other building or structure
that is owned or controlled by the state, any political subdivision, or any
department, agency, or instrumentality of the state or a political subdivision,
and that is used for public purposes;
      (4)   Cause, or create a substantial risk of, physical harm, through the
offer or the acceptance of an agreement for hire or other consideration, to any
property of another without the other person’s consent or to any property of
the offender or another with purpose to defraud;
      (5)   Cause, or create a substantial risk of, physical harm to any park,
preserve, wildlands, brush-covered land, cut-over land, forest, timberland,
greenlands, woods, or similar real property that is owned or controlled by
another person, the state, or a political subdivision without the consent of
the other person, the state, or the political subdivision;
      (6)   With purpose to defraud, cause, or create a substantial risk of,
physical harm to any park, preserve, wildlands, brush-covered land, cut-over
land, forest, timberland, greenlands, woods, or similar real property that is
owned or controlled by the offender, another person, the state, or a political
subdivision.
   (b)   No person, by means of fire or explosion, shall knowingly do any of
the following:
      (1)   Cause, or create a substantial risk of, physical harm to any
structure of another that is not an occupied structure;
      (2)   Cause, or create a substantial risk of, physical harm, through the
offer or the acceptance of an agreement for hire or other consideration, to any
structure of another that is not an occupied structure;
      (3)   Cause, or create a substantial risk of, physical harm to any
structure that is not an occupied structure and that is in or on any park,
preserve, wildlands, brush-covered land, cut-over land, forest, timberland,
greenlands, woods, or similar real property that is owned or controlled by
another person, the state, or a political subdivision.
   (c)   (1)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (b)(1)
or (b)(2) of this section that the defendant acted with the consent of the
other person.
      (2)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (b)(3) of
this section that the defendant acted with the consent of the other person, the
state, or the political subdivision.
   (d)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of arson.
      (2)   A violation of division (a)(1) or (b)(1) of this section is one of
the following:
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in division (d)(2)B. of this
section, a misdemeanor of the first degree;
         B.   If the value of the property or the amount of the physical harm
involved is $1,000 or more, a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state
law.
      (3)   A violation of division (a)(2), (a)(3), (a)(4), (a)(5), (a)(6), (b)
(2) or (b)(3) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
(ORC 2909.03)
Statutory reference:
   Aggravated arson, felony provisions, see Ohio R.C. 2909.02
   Arson, felony provisions generally, see Ohio R.C. 2909.03
   Convicted arsonist to make restitution to public agency, see Ohio R.C.
2929.28
§ 642.07  DETERMINING PROPERTY VALUE IN ARSON.
   (a)   The following criteria shall be used in determining the value of
property or amount of physical harm involved in a violation of §
642.06:
      (1)   If the property is an heirloom, memento, collector’s item, antique,
museum piece, manuscript, document, record, or other thing that is either
irreplaceable or is replaceable only on the expenditure of substantial time,
effort, or money, the value of the property or the amount of physical harm
involved is the amount that would compensate the owner for its loss.
      (2)   If the property is not covered under division (a)(1) of this
section, and the physical harm is such that the property can be restored
substantially to its former condition, the amount of physical harm involved is
the reasonable cost of restoring the property.
      (3)   If the property is not covered under division (a)(1) of this
section, and the physical harm is such that the property cannot be restored
substantially to its former condition, the value of the property, in the case
of personal property, is the cost of replacing the property with new property
of like kind and quality, and in the case of real property or real property
fixtures, is the difference in the fair market value of the property
immediately before and immediately after the offense.
   (b)   As used in this section, “fair market value” has the same meaning as
in Ohio R.C. 2913.61.
   (c)   Prima facie evidence of the value of property, as provided in Ohio
R.C. 2913.61(D), may be used to establish the value of property pursuant to
this section.
(ORC 2909.11(B) - (D))
§ 642.08  CRIMINAL DAMAGING OR ENDANGERING; VEHICULAR VANDALISM.
   (a)   Criminal damaging or endangering.
      (1)   No person shall cause or create a substantial risk of physical harm
to any property of another without the other person’s consent:
         A.   Knowingly, by any means; or
         B.   Recklessly, by means of fire, explosion, flood, poison gas,
poison, radioactive material, caustic or corrosive material, or other
inherently dangerous agency or substance.
      (2)   Whoever violates this division (a) is guilty of criminal damaging
or endangering, a misdemeanor of the second degree.  If violation of this
division (a) creates a risk of physical harm to any person, criminal damaging
or endangering is a misdemeanor of the first degree.  If the property involved
in a violation of this division (a) is an aircraft, an aircraft engine,
propeller, appliance, spare part, or any other equipment or implement used or
intended to be used in the operation of an aircraft and if the violation
creates a risk of physical harm to any person, criminal damaging or endangering
is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.  If the property
involved in a violation of this division (a) is an aircraft, an aircraft
engine, propeller, appliance, spare part, or any other equipment or implement
used or intended to be used in the operation of an aircraft and if the
violation creates a substantial risk of physical harm to any person or if the
property involved in a violation of this division (a) is an occupied aircraft,
criminal damaging or endangering is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
(ORC 2909.06)
   (b)   Vehicular vandalism.
      (1)   As used in this division (b):
         A.   “Alley,” “street,” and “vehicle” have the same meanings as in
Ohio R.C. 4511.01.
         B.   “Highway” means any highway as defined in Ohio R.C. 4511.01 or
any lane, road, street, alley, bridge, or overpass.
         C.   “Vessel” and “waters in this state” have the same meanings as in
Ohio R.C. 1546.01.
      (2)   No person shall knowingly, and by any means, drop or throw any
object at, onto, or in the path of any of the following:
         A.   Any vehicle on a highway;
         B.   Any boat or vessel on any of the waters in this state.
      (3)   Whoever violates this division (b) is guilty of vehicular
vandalism.  Except as otherwise provided in this division (b)(3), vehicular
vandalism is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the violation of this
division (b) creates a substantial risk of physical harm to any person or the
violation of this division (b) causes serious physical harm to property,
vehicular vandalism is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
If the violation of this division (b) causes physical harm to any person or
serious physical harm to any person, vehicular vandalism is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(ORC 2909.09)
Statutory reference:
   Disrupting public services, felony offense, see Ohio R.C. 2909.04
   Railroad grade crossing device vandalism, see Ohio R.C. 2909.101
   Railroad vandalism, see Ohio R.C. 2909.10
   Vandalism, felony offense, see Ohio R.C. 2909.05
§ 642.09  CRIMINAL MISCHIEF.
   (a)   No person shall:
      (1)   Without privilege to do so, knowingly move, deface, damage,
destroy, or otherwise improperly tamper with the either of the following:
         A.   The property of another;
         B.   One’s own residential real property with the purpose to decrease
the value of or enjoyment of the residential real property, if both of the
following apply:
            1.   The residential real property is subject to a mortgage.
            2.   The person has been served with a summons and complaint in a
pending residential mortgage loan foreclosure action relating to that real
property. As used in this division, “pending” includes the time between
judgment entry and confirmation of sale.
      (2)   With purpose to interfere with the use or enjoyment of property of
another, employ a tear gas device, stink bomb, smoke generator, or other device
releasing a substance that is harmful or offensive to persons exposed, or that
tends to cause public alarm;
      (3)   Without privilege to do so, knowingly move, deface, damage,
destroy, or otherwise improperly tamper with a bench mark, triangulation
station, boundary marker, or other survey station, monument, or marker;
      (4)   Without privilege to do so, knowingly move, deface, damage,
destroy, or otherwise improperly tamper with any safety device, the property of
another, or the property of the offender when required or placed for the safety
of others, so as to destroy or diminish its effectiveness or availability for
its intended purpose;
      (5)   With purpose to interfere with the use or enjoyment of the property
of another, set a fire on the land of another or place personal property that
has been set on fire on the land of another, which fire or personal property is
outside and apart from any building, other structure, or personal property that
is on that land;
      (6)   Without privilege to do so, and with intent to impair the
functioning of any computer, computer system, computer network, computer
software, or computer program, knowingly do any of the following:
         A.   In any manner or by any means, including but not limited to,
computer hacking, alter, damage, destroy, or modify a computer, computer
system, computer network, computer software, or computer program or data
contained in a computer, computer system, computer network, computer software,
or computer program;
         B.   Introduce a computer contaminant into a computer, computer
system, computer network, computer software, or computer program.
   (b)   As used in this section, “safety device” means any fire extinguisher,
fire hose, or fire axe, or any fire escape, emergency exit, or emergency escape
equipment, or any life line, life-saving ring, life preserver, or life boat or
raft, or any alarm, light, flare, signal, sign, or notice intended to warn of
danger or emergency, or intended for other safety purposes, or any guard
railing or safety barricade, or any traffic sign or signal, or any railroad
grade crossing sign, signal, or gate, or any first aid or survival equipment,
or any other device, apparatus, or equipment intended for protecting or
preserving the safety of persons or property.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of criminal mischief, and
shall be punished as provided in division (c)(1) or (c)(2) of this section.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, criminal mischief
committed in violation of division (a)(1), (a)(2), (a)(3), (a)(4), or (a)(5) of
this section is a misdemeanor of the third degree. Except as otherwise provided
in this division, if the violation of division (a)(1), (a)(2), (a)(3), (a)(4),
or (a)(5) of this section creates a risk of physical harm to any person,
criminal mischief committed in violation of division (a)(1), (a)(2), (a)(3),
(a)(4), or (a)(5) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree.  If the
property involved in the violation of division (a)(1), (a)(2), (a)(3), (a)(4),
or (a)(5) of this section is an aircraft, an aircraft engine, propeller,
appliance, spare part, fuel, lubricant, hydraulic fluid, any other equipment,
implement, or material used or intended to be used in the operation of an
aircraft, or any cargo carried or intended to be carried in an aircraft and if
the violation creates any risk of physical harm to any person, or if the
aircraft in question is an occupied aircraft, criminal mischief committed in
violation of division (a)(1), (a)(2), (a)(3), (a)(4), or (a)(5) of this section
is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, criminal mischief
committed in violation of division (a)(6) of this section is a misdemeanor of
the first degree.  If the value of the computer, computer system, computer
network, computer software, computer program, or data involved in the violation
of division (a)(6) of this section or the loss to the victim resulting from the
violation is one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or more, or if the computer,
computer system, computer network, computer software, computer program, or data
involved in the violation of division (a)(6) is used or intended to be used in
the operation of an aircraft and the violation creates any risk of physical
harm to any person, or if the aircraft in question is an occupied aircraft,
criminal mischief committed in violation of division (a)(6) of this section is
a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(ORC 2909.07)
§ 642.10  CRIMINAL TRESPASS.
   (a)   No person, without privilege to do so, shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Knowingly enter or remain on the land or premises of another;
      (2)   Knowingly enter or remain on the land or premises of another, the
use of which is lawfully restricted to certain persons, purposes, modes, or
hours, when the offender knows the offender is in violation of any such
restriction or is reckless in that regard;
      (3)   Recklessly enter or remain on the land or premises of another, as
to which notice against unauthorized access or presence is given by actual
communication to the offender, or in a manner prescribed by law, or by posting
in a manner reasonably calculated to come to the attention of potential
intruders, or by fencing or other enclosure manifestly designed to restrict
access;
      (4)   Being on the land or premises of another, negligently fail or
refuse to leave upon being notified by signage posted in a conspicuous place or
otherwise being notified to do so by the owner or occupant, or the agent or
servant of either.
   (b)   It is no defense to a charge under this section that the land or
premises involved was owned, controlled, or in custody of a public agency.
   (c)   It is no defense to a charge under this section that the offender was
authorized to enter or remain on the land or premises involved, when the
authorization was secured by deception.
   (d)   (1)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of
criminal trespass, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
      (2)   Notwithstanding Ohio R.C. 2929.28, if the person, in committing the
violation of this section, used a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle or all-
purpose vehicle, the court shall impose a fine of two times the usual amount
imposed for the violation.
      (3)   If an offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty
to two or more violations of this section, Ohio R.C. 2911.21 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, and the offender, in committing each violation,
used a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle, the court, in
addition to or independent of all other penalties imposed for the violation,
may impound the certificate of registration of that snowmobile or off-highway
motorcycle or the certificate of registration and license plate of that all-
purpose vehicle for not less than 60 days. In such a case, Ohio R.C. 4519.47
applies.
   (e)   Notwithstanding any provision of the Ohio Revised Code, if the
offender, in committing the violation of this section, used an all-purpose
vehicle, the Clerk of the Court shall pay the fine imposed pursuant to this
section to the State Recreational Vehicle Fund created by Ohio R.C. 4519.11.
   (f)   As used in this section:
      (1)   “All-purpose vehicle”, “off-highway motorcycle” and “snowmobile”
have the same meanings as in Ohio R.C. 4519.01.
      (2)   “Land” or “premises” includes any land, building, structure or
place belonging to, controlled by or in custody of another, and any separate
enclosure or room, or portion thereof.
(ORC 2911.21)
   (g)   Criminal trespass on a place of public amusement.
      (1)   As used in this division (g), “place of public amusement” means a
stadium, theater, or other facility, whether licensed or not, at which a live
performance, sporting event, or other activity takes place for entertainment of
the public and to which access is made available to the public, regardless of
whether admission is charged.
      (2)   No person, without privilege to do so, shall knowingly enter or
remain on any restricted portion of a place of public amusement and, as a
result of that conduct, interrupt or cause the delay of the live performance,
sporting event, or other activity taking place at the place of public amusement
after a printed written notice has been given as provided in division (g)(4)A.
of this section that the general public is restricted from access to that
restricted portion of the place of public amusement. A restricted portion of a
place of public amusement may include, but is not limited to, a playing field,
an athletic surface, or a stage located at the place of public amusement.
      (3)   An owner or lessee of a place of public amusement, an agent of the
owner or lessee, or a performer or participant at a place of public amusement
may use reasonable force to restrain and remove a person from a restricted
portion of the place of public amusement if the person enters or remains on the
restricted portion of the place of public amusement and, as a result of that
conduct, interrupts or causes the delay of the live performance, sporting
event, or other activity taking place at the place of public amusement. This
division does not provide immunity from criminal liability for any use of force
beyond reasonable force by an owner or lessee of a place of public amusement,
an agent of either the owner or lessee, or a performer or participant at a
place of public amusement.
      (4)   A.   Notice has been given that the general public is restricted
from access to a portion of a place of public amusement if a printed written
notice of the restricted access has been conspicuously posted or exhibited at
the entrance to that portion of the place of public amusement. If a printed
written notice is posted or exhibited as described in this division regarding a
portion of a place of public amusement, in addition to that posting or
exhibition, notice that the general public is restricted from access to that
portion of the place of public amusement also may be given, but is not required
to be given, by either of the following means:
            1.   By notifying the person personally, either orally or in
writing, that access to that portion of the place of public amusement is
restricted;
            2.   By broadcasting over the public address system of the place of
public amusement an oral warning that access to that portion of the place of
public amusement is restricted.
         B.   If notice that the general public is restricted from access to a
portion of a place of public amusement is provided by the posting or exhibition
of a printed written notice as described in division (g)(4)A. of this section,
the municipality, in a criminal prosecution for a violation of division (g)(2)
of this section, is not required to prove that the defendant received actual
notice that the general public is restricted from access to a portion of a
place of public amusement.
      (5)   A.   Whoever violates division (g)(2) of this section is guilty of
criminal trespass on a place of public amusement, a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
         B.   In addition to any jail term, fine, or other sentence, penalty,
or sanction it imposes upon the offender pursuant to division (g)(5)A. of this
section, a court may require an offender who violates this section to perform
not less than 30 and not more than 120 hours of supervised community service
work.
(ORC 2911.23)
§ 642.11  AGGRAVATED TRESPASS.
   (a)   No person shall enter or remain on the land or premises of another
with purpose to commit on that land or those premises a misdemeanor, the
elements of which involve causing physical harm to another person or causing
another person to believe that the offender will cause physical harm to him or
her.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of aggravated trespass, a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(ORC 2911.211)
§ 642.12  ASSAULTING POLICE DOG OR HORSE OR HANDICAPPED ASSISTANCE DOG.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly cause, or attempt to cause, physical harm to
a police dog or horse in either of the following circumstances:
      (1)   The police dog or horse is assisting a law enforcement officer in
the performance of the officer’s official duties at the time the physical harm
is caused or attempted.
      (2)   The police dog or horse is not assisting a law enforcement officer
in the performance of the officer’s official duties at the time the physical
harm is caused or attempted, but the offender has actual knowledge that the dog
or horse is a police dog or horse.
   (b)   No person shall recklessly do any of the following:
      (1)   Taunt, torment, or strike a police dog or horse;
      (2)   Throw an object or substance at a police dog or horse;
      (3)   Interfere with or obstruct a police dog or horse, or interfere with
or obstruct a law enforcement officer who is being assisted by a police dog or
horse, in a manner that does any of the following:
         A.   Inhibits or restricts the law enforcement officer’s control of
the police dog or horse;
         B.   Deprives the law enforcement officer of control of the police dog
or horse;
         C.   Releases the police dog or horse from its area of control;
         D.   Enters the area of control of the police dog or horse without the
consent of the law enforcement officer, including placing food or any other
object or substance into that area;
         E.   Inhibits or restricts the ability of the police dog or horse to
assist a law enforcement officer;
      (4)   Engage in any conduct that is likely to cause serious physical
injury or death to a police dog or horse;
      (5)   If the person is the owner, keeper, or harborer of a dog, fail to
reasonably restrain the dog from taunting, tormenting, chasing, approaching in
a menacing fashion or apparent attitude of attack, or attempting to bite or
otherwise endanger a police dog or horse that at the time of the conduct is
assisting a law enforcement officer in the performance of the officer’s duties
or that the person knows is a police dog or horse.
   (c)   No person shall knowingly cause, or attempt to cause, physical harm to
an assistance dog in either of the following circumstances:
      (1)   The dog is assisting or serving a blind, deaf or hearing impaired,
or mobility impaired person at the time the physical harm is caused or
attempted.
      (2)   The dog is not assisting or serving a blind, deaf or hearing
impaired, or mobility impaired person at the time the physical harm is caused
or attempted, but the offender has actual knowledge that the dog is an
assistance dog.
   (d)   No person shall recklessly do any of the following:
      (1)   Taunt, torment, or strike an assistance dog;
      (2)   Throw an object or substance at an assistance dog;
      (3)   Interfere with or obstruct an assistance dog, or interfere with or
obstruct a blind, deaf or hearing impaired, or mobility impaired person who is
being assisted or served by an assistance dog, in a manner that does any of the
following:
         A.   Inhibits or restricts the assisted or served person’s control of
the dog;
         B.   Deprives the assisted or served person of control of the dog;
         C.   Releases the dog from its area of control;
         D.   Enters the area of control of the dog without the consent of the
assisted or served person, including placing food or any other object or
substance into that area;
         E.   Inhibits or restricts the ability of the dog to assist the
assisted or served person;
      (4)   Engage in any conduct that is likely to cause serious physical
injury or death to an assistance dog;
      (5)   If the person is the owner, keeper, or harborer of a dog, fail to
reasonably restrain the dog from taunting, tormenting, chasing, approaching in
a menacing fashion or apparent attitude of attack, or attempting to bite or
otherwise endanger an assistance dog that at the time of the conduct is
assisting or serving a blind, deaf or hearing impaired, or mobility impaired
person or that the person knows is an assistance dog.
   (e)   (1)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of
assaulting a police dog or horse. Except as otherwise provided in this
division, assaulting a police dog or horse is a misdemeanor of the second
degree. If the violation results in physical harm to the police dog or horse
other than death or serious physical harm, assaulting a police dog or horse is
a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the violation results in serious physical
harm to the police dog or horse or results in its death, assaulting a police
dog or horse is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of
harassing a police dog or horse. Except as otherwise provided this division,
harassing a police dog or horse is a misdemeanor of the second degree. If the
violation results in physical harm to the police dog or horse but does not
result in its death or in serious physical harm to it, harassing a police dog
or horse is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the violation results in
serous physical harm to the police dog or horse or results in its death,
harassing a police dog or horse is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
      (3)   Whoever violates division (c) of this section is guilty of
assaulting an assistance dog. Except as otherwise provided in this division,
assaulting an assistance dog is a misdemeanor of the second degree. If the
violation results in physical harm to the assistance dog other than death or
serious physical harm, assaulting an assistance dog is a misdemeanor of the
first degree. If the violation results in serious physical harm to the
assistance dog or results in its death, assaulting an assistance dog is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (4)   Whoever violates division (d) of this section is guilty of
harassing an assistance dog. Except as otherwise provided in this division,
harassing an assistance dog is a misdemeanor of the second degree. If the
violation results in physical harm to the assistance dog but does not result in
the death or in serious physical harm to it, harassing an assistance dog is a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If the violation results in serious physical
harm to the assistance dog or results in its death, harassing an assistance dog
is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (5)   In addition to any other sanctions or penalty imposed for the
offense under this section, Ohio R.C. Chapter 2929 or any other provision of
the Revised Code or this code, whoever violates division (a), (b), (c), or (d)
of this section is responsible for the payment of all of the following:
         A.   Any veterinary bill or bill for medication incurred as a result
of the violation by the Police Department regarding a violation of division (a)
or (b) of this section or by the blind, deaf or hearing impaired, or mobility
impaired person assisted or served by the assistance dog regarding a violation
of division (c) or (d) of this section;
         B.   The cost of any damaged equipment that results from the
violation;
         C.   If the violation did not result in the death of the police dog or
horse or the assistance dog that was the subject of the violation and if, as a
result of that dog or horse being the subject of the violation, the dog or
horse needs further training or retraining to be able to continue in the
capacity of a police dog or horse or an assistance dog, the cost of any further
training or retraining of that dog or horse by a law enforcement officer or by
the blind, deaf or hearing impaired, or mobility impaired person assisted or
served by the assistance dog;
         D.   If the violation resulted in the death of the assistance dog that
was the subject of the violation or resulted in serious physical harm to the
police dog or horse or the assistance dog that was the subject of the violation
to the extent that the dog or horse needs to be replaced on either a temporary
or a permanent basis, the cost of replacing that dog or horse and of any
further training of a new police dog or horse or a new assistance dog by a law
enforcement officer or by the blind, deaf or hearing impaired, or mobility
impaired person assisted or served by the assistance dog, which replacement or
training is required because of the death of or the serious physical harm to
the dog or horse that was the subject of the violation.
   (f)   This section does not apply to a licensed veterinarian whose conduct
is in accordance with Ohio R.C. Chapter 4741.
   (g)   This section only applies to an offender who knows or should know at
the time of the violation that the police dog or horse or assistance dog that
is the subject of a violation under this section is a police dog or horse or an
assistance dog.
   (h)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   “Assistance dog,” “blind” and “mobility impaired person” have the
same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 955.011.
      (2)   “Physical harm” means any injury, illness, or other psychological
impairment, regardless of its gravity or duration.
      (3)   “Police dog or horse” means a dog or horse that has been trained
and may be used to assist law enforcement officers in the performance of their
official duties.
      (4)   “Serious physical harm” means any of the following:
         A.   Any physical harm that carries a substantial risk of death.
         B.   Any physical harm that causes permanent maiming or that involves
some temporary, substantial maiming.
         C.   Any physical harm that causes acute pain of a duration that
results in substantial suffering.
(ORC 2921.321)
§ 642.13  DAMAGING PUBLIC PARK.
   (a)   That portion of the Public Square at the intersection of Park Avenue
and Main Street, located between the curb and sidewalks at each corner of such
Public Square, is hereby designated as a public park.  No person shall drive
over or upon any of such public park or do anything that would deface or
disfigure the appearance of such park.
(Ord. 412, passed 2-19-1924)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third
degree and shall be subject to the penalty provided in §
698.02.
(1974 Code, § 541.08(b))
§ 642.14  RAILROAD VANDALISM; CRIMINAL TRESPASS; INTERFERENCE WITH OPERATION OF
TRAIN; GRADE CROSSING DEVICE VANDALISM.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly, and by any means, drop or throw any object
at, onto, or in the path of, any railroad rail, railroad track, locomotive,
engine, railroad car, or other vehicle of a railroad company while such vehicle
is on a railroad track.
   (b)   No person, without privilege to do so, shall climb upon or into any
locomotive, engine, railroad car, or other vehicle of a railroad company when
it is on a railroad track.
   (c)   No person, without privilege to do so, shall disrupt, delay, or
prevent the operation of any train or other vehicle of a railroad company while
such vehicle is on a railroad track.
   (d)   No person, without privilege to do so, shall knowingly enter or remain
on the land or premises of a railroad company.
   (e)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of railroad
vandalism. Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of criminal
trespass on a locomotive, engine, railroad car, or other railroad vehicle.
Whoever violates division (c) of this section is guilty of interference with
the operation of a train. Except as otherwise provided in this division,
railroad vandalism; criminal trespass on a locomotive, engine, railroad car, or
other railroad vehicle; and interference with the operation of a train each is
a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the violation of division (a), (b), or
(c) of this section causes serious physical harm to property or creates a
substantial risk of physical harm to any person, causes physical harm to any
person, or causes serious physical harm to any person, the violation is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (f)   Whoever violates division (d) of this section is guilty of criminal
trespass on the land or premises of a railroad company, a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree.
(ORC 2909.10)
   (g)   No person shall knowingly deface, damage, obstruct, remove, or
otherwise impair the operation of any railroad grade crossing warning signal or
other protective device, including any gate, bell, light, crossbuck, stop sign,
yield sign, advance warning sign, or advance pavement marking.
   (h)   Whoever violates division (g) of this section is guilty of railroad
grade crossing device vandalism. Except as otherwise provided in this division,
railroad grade crossing device vandalism is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
If the violation of division (g) of this section causes serious physical harm
to property or creates a substantial risk of physical harm to any person,
causes physical harm to any person, or causes serious physical harm to any
person, railroad grade crossing device vandalism is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.
(ORC 2909.101)
CHAPTER 648:  PEACE DISTURBANCES
Section
648.01   Riot.
648.02   Failure to disperse.
648.03   Justifiable use of force to suppress riot.
648.04   Disorderly conduct.
648.05   Disturbing a lawful meeting.
648.06   Misconduct at an emergency.
648.07   Inducing panic.
648.08   Making false alarms.
648.09   Inciting to violence.
648.10   Loitering.
648.11   Minors curfew.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   See section histories for similar state law
   Power to regulate peace disturbances - see Ohio R.C. 715.49
   Cordoning off riot areas; prohibiting sales of firearms and explosives - see
Ohio R.C. 3761.16
   Suspension of beer and liquor sales by Ohio Director of Liquor Control 
during emergency - see Ohio R.C. 4301.251
   Riot and civil disorder assistance by State Highway Patrol - see Ohio R.C.
5503.02(B)
   “Peeling;” cracking exhaust noises - see TRAF.
432.37
   Horn, siren and theft alarm signal - see TRAF.
438.20
   Muffler; muffler cutout; excessive smoke, gas or noise - see TRAF.
438.21
   Definitions generally - see GEN. OFF.
606.01
   “Deadly force” defined - see GEN. OFF.
606.01(c)
   “Force” defined - see GEN. OFF.
606.01(f)
   Resisting arrest - see GEN. OFF.
608.08
   Interfering with civil rights - see GEN. OFF.
608.13
   Detention of shoplifters and those committing motion picture piracy;
protection of institutional property - see GEN. OFF.
608.17
   Liquor sale to intoxicated person - see GEN. OFF.
612.03
   Barking or howling dogs - see GEN. OFF.
618.07
   Assault - see GEN. OFF.
636.02,
636.03
   Menacing - see GEN. OFF.
636.04 et seq.
   Desecration - see GEN. OFF.
642.05
   Arson - see GEN. OFF.
642.06
   Trespass - see GEN. OFF.
642.10,
642.11
   Pointing and discharging firearms and other weapons - see GEN. OFF.
678.09
   Fireworks - see GEN. OFF.
678.10
§ 648.01  RIOT.
   (a)   No person shall participate with four or more others in a course of
disorderly conduct in violation of Ohio R.C. 2917.11 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance:
      (1)   With purpose to commit or facilitate the commission of a
misdemeanor, other than disorderly conduct;
      (2)   With purpose to intimidate a public official or employee into
taking or refraining from official action, or with purpose to hinder, impede,
or obstruct a function of government;
      (3)   With purpose to hinder, impede, or obstruct the orderly process of
administration or instruction at an educational institution, or to interfere
with or disrupt lawful activities carried on at the institution.
   (b)   No person shall participate with four or more others with purpose to
do an act with unlawful force or violence, even though the act might otherwise
be lawful.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of riot, a misdemeanor of the
first degree.
(ORC 2917.03)
   (d)   For the purposes of prosecuting violations of this section, the
prosecution is not required to allege or prove that the offender expressly
agreed with four or more others to commit any act that constitutes a violation
this section prior to or while committing those acts.
(ORC 2917.031)
Statutory reference:
   Aggravated riot, felony provisions, see Ohio R.C. 2917.02
§ 648.02  FAILURE TO DISPERSE.
   (a)   Where five or more persons are participating in a course of disorderly
conduct in violation of Ohio R.C. 2917.11 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, and there are other persons in the vicinity whose presence
creates the likelihood of physical harm to persons or property or of serious
public inconvenience, annoyance, or alarm, a law enforcement officer or other
public official may order the participants and the other persons to disperse. 
No person shall knowingly fail to obey the order.
   (b)   Nothing in this section requires persons to disperse who are peaceably
assembled for a lawful purpose.
   (c)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of failure to disperse.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in division (c)(3) of this section,
failure to disperse is a minor misdemeanor.
      (3)   Failure to disperse is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree if the
failure to obey the order described in division (a) of this section creates the
likelihood of physical harm to persons or is committed at the scene of a fire,
accident, disaster, riot, or emergency of any kind.
(ORC 2917.04)
§ 648.03  JUSTIFIABLE USE OF FORCE TO SUPPRESS RIOT.
   A law enforcement officer or firefighter engaged in suppressing a riot or in
protecting persons or property during a riot:
   (a)   Is justified in using force, other than deadly force, when and to the
extent he or she has probable cause to believe such force is necessary to
disperse or apprehend rioters;
   (b)   Is justified in using force, including deadly force, when and to the
extent he or she has probable cause to believe such force is necessary to
disperse or apprehend rioters whose conduct is creating a substantial risk of
serious physical harm to persons.
(ORC 2917.05)
§ 648.04  DISORDERLY CONDUCT.
   (a)   No person shall recklessly cause inconvenience, annoyance, or alarm to
another, by doing any of the following:
      (1)   Engaging in fighting, in threatening harm to persons or property,
or in violent or turbulent behavior;
      (2)   Making unreasonable noise or an offensively coarse utterance,
gesture, or display, or communicating unwarranted and grossly abusive language
to any person;
      (3)   Insulting, taunting, or challenging another, under circumstances in
which that conduct is likely to provoke a violent response;
      (4)   Hindering or preventing the movement of persons on a public street,
road, highway, or right-of-way, or to, from, within, or upon public or private
property, so as to interfere with the rights of others, and by any act that
serves no lawful and reasonable purpose of the offender;
      (5)   Creating a condition that is physically offensive to persons or
that presents a risk of physical harm to persons or property, by any act that
serves no lawful and reasonable purpose of the offender.
   (b)   No person while voluntarily intoxicated shall do either of the
following:
      (1)   In a public place or in the presence of two or more persons, engage
in conduct likely to be offensive or to cause inconvenience, annoyance, or
alarm to persons of ordinary sensibilities, which conduct the offender, if he
or she were not intoxicated, should know is likely to have such effect on
others;
      (2)   Engage in conduct or create a condition that presents a risk of
physical harm to himself, herself or another, or to the property of another.
   (c)   Violation of any statute or ordinance of which an element is operating
a motor vehicle, locomotive, watercraft, aircraft, or other vehicle while under
the influence of alcohol or any drug of abuse is not a violation of division
(b) of this section.
   (d)   If a person appears to an ordinary observer to be intoxicated, it is
probable cause to believe that the person is voluntarily intoxicated for
purposes of division (b) of this section.
   (e)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of disorderly conduct.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (e)(2) and (e)(3) of this
section, disorderly conduct is a minor misdemeanor.
      (2)   Disorderly conduct is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree if any of
the following applies:
         A.   The offender persists in disorderly conduct after reasonable
warning or request to desist.
         B.   The offense is committed in the vicinity of a school or in a
school safety zone.
         C.   The offense is committed in the presence of any law enforcement
officer, firefighter, rescuer, medical person, emergency medical services
person, or other authorized person who is engaged in the person’s duties at the
scene of a fire, accident, disaster, riot, or emergency of any kind.
         D.   The offense is committed in the presence of any emergency
facility person who is engaged in the person’s duties in an emergency facility.
      (3)   If an offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty
to three or more violations of division (b) of this section, Ohio R.C. 2917.11
(B), or any substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, a
violation of division (b) of this section is a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.
   (f)   As used in this section:
      (1)   “Committed in the vicinity of a school” has the same meaning as in
Ohio R.C. 2925.01.
      (2)   “Emergency facility” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2909.04.
      (3)   “Emergency facility person” is the singular of “emergency facility
personnel” as defined in Ohio R.C. 2909.04.
      (4)   “Emergency medical services person” is the singular of “emergency
medical services personnel” as defined in Ohio R.C. 2133.21.
(ORC 2917.11)
§ 648.05  DISTURBING A LAWFUL MEETING.
   (a)   No person, with purpose to prevent or disrupt a lawful meeting,
procession, or gathering, shall do either of the following:
      (1)   Do any act which obstructs or interferes with the due conduct of
the meeting, procession, or gathering.
      (2)   Make any utterance, gesture, or display which outrages the
sensibilities of the group.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of disturbing a lawful
meeting, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(ORC 2917.12)
§ 648.06  MISCONDUCT AT AN EMERGENCY.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly do any of the following:
      (1)   Hamper the lawful operations of any law enforcement officer,
firefighter, rescuer, medical person, emergency medical services person, or
other authorized person engaged in the person’s duties at the scene of a fire,
accident, disaster, riot, or emergency of any kind;
      (2)   Hamper the lawful activities of any emergency facility person who
is engaged in the person’s duties in an emergency facility;
      (3)   Fail to obey the lawful order of any law enforcement officer
engaged in the law enforcement officer’s duties at the scene of or in
connection with a fire, accident, disaster, riot, or emergency of any kind.
   (b)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit access or deny
information to any news media representative in the lawful exercise of the news
media representative’s duties.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of misconduct at an
emergency.  Except as otherwise provided in this division, misconduct at an
emergency is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.  If violation of this section
creates a risk of physical harm to persons or property, misconduct at an
emergency is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
   (d)   As used in this section:
      (1)   “Emergency facility” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2909.04.
      (2)   “Emergency facility person” is the singular of “emergency facility
personnel” as defined in Ohio R.C. 2909.04.
      (3)   “Emergency medical services person” is the singular of “emergency
medical services personnel” as defined in Ohio R.C. 2133.21.
(ORC 2917.13)
§ 648.07  INDUCING PANIC.
   (a)   No person shall cause the evacuation of any public place, or otherwise
cause serious public inconvenience or alarm, by doing any of the following:
      (1)   Initiating or circulating a report or warning of an alleged or
impending fire, explosion, crime, or other catastrophe, knowing that the report
or warning is false.
      (2)   Threatening to commit any offense of violence.
      (3)   Committing any offense, with reckless disregard of the likelihood
that its commission will cause serious public inconvenience or alarm.
   (b)   Division (a)(1) of this section does not apply to any person
conducting an authorized fire or emergency drill.
   (c)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of inducing panic.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in division (c)(3), inducing panic is
a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (3)   If a violation of this section results in physical harm to any
person, inducing panic is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state
law.  If a violation of this section results in economic harm of one thousand
dollars ($1,000) or more, inducing panic is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.  If the public place involved in a violation of division
(a)(1) is a school or an institution of higher education, inducing panic is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.  If a violation of this
section pertains to a purported, threatened or actual use of a weapon of mass
destruction, inducing panic is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
   (d)   (1)   It is not a defense to a charge under this section that pertains
to a purported or threatened use of a weapon of mass destruction that the
offender did not possess or have the ability to use a weapon of mass
destruction or that what was represented to be a weapon of mass destruction was
not a weapon of mass destruction.
      (2)   Any act that is a violation of this section and any other section
of the Ohio Revised Code or these Codified Ordinances may be prosecuted under
this section, the other section, or both sections.
   (e)   As used in this section:
      (1)   “Biological agent” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2917.33.
      (2)   “Economic harm” means any of the following:
         A.   All direct, incidental and consequential pecuniary harm suffered
by a victim as a result of the criminal conduct.  “Economic harm” as described
in this division includes but is not limited to all of the following:
            1.   All wages, salaries or other compensation lost as a result of
the criminal conduct;
            2.   The cost of all wages, salaries or other compensation paid to
employees for time those employees are prevented from working as a result of
the criminal conduct;
            3.   The overhead costs incurred from the time that a business is
shut down as a result of the criminal conduct;
            4.   The loss of value to tangible or intangible property that was
damaged as a result of the criminal conduct.
         B.   All costs incurred by the state or any political subdivision as a
result of, or in making any response to, the criminal conduct that constituted
the violation of this section or Ohio R.C. 2917.32, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, including but not limited to all costs so
incurred by any law enforcement officers, firefighters, rescue personnel, or
emergency medical services personnel of the state or the political subdivision.
      (3)   “Emergency medical services personnel” has the same meaning as in
Ohio R.C. 2133.21.
      (4)   “Institution of higher education” means any of the following:
         A.   A state university or college as defined in Ohio R.C. 3345.12(A)
(1), community college, state community college, university branch, or
technical college;
         B.   A private, nonprofit college, university or other post-secondary
institution located in this state that possesses a certificate of authorization
issued by the Ohio Board of Regents pursuant to Ohio R.C. Chapter 1713;
         C.   A post-secondary institution with a certificate of registration
issued by the State Board of Career Colleges and Schools pursuant to Ohio R.C.
Chapter 3332.
      (5)   “School” means any school operated by a board of education or any
school for which the State Board of Education prescribes minimum standards
under Ohio R.C. 3301.07, whether or not any instruction, extracurricular
activities, or training provided by the school is being conducted at the time a
violation of this section is committed.
      (6)   “Weapon of mass destruction” means any of the following:
         A.   Any weapon that is designed or intended to cause death or serious
physical harm through the release, dissemination, or impact of toxic or
poisonous chemicals, or other precursors;
         B.   Any weapon involving a disease organism or biological agent;
         C.   Any weapon that is designed to release radiation or radioactivity
at a level dangerous to human life;
         D.   Any of the following, except to the extent that the item or
device in question is expressly excepted from the definition of “destructive
device” pursuant to 18 U.S.C. 921(a)(4) and regulations issued under that
section:
            1.   Any explosive, incendiary, or poison gas bomb, grenade, rocket
having a propellant charge of more than four ounces, missile having an
explosive or incendiary charge of more than one-quarter ounce, mine, or similar
device;
            2.   Any combination of parts either designed or intended for use
in converting any item or device into any item or device described in division
D.1. of this definition and from which an item or device described in that
division may be readily assembled.
(ORC 2917.31)
§ 648.08  MAKING FALSE ALARMS.
   (a)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Initiate or circulate a report or warning of an alleged or
impending fire, explosion, crime, or other catastrophe, knowing that the report
or warning is false and likely to cause public inconvenience or alarm.
      (2)   Knowingly cause a false alarm of fire or other emergency to be
transmitted to or within any organization, public or private, for dealing with
emergencies involving a risk of physical harm to persons or property.
      (3)   Report to any law enforcement agency an alleged offense or other
incident within its concern, knowing that the offense did not occur.
   (b)   This section does not apply to any person conducting an authorized
fire or emergency drill.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of making false alarms. 
Except as otherwise provided in this division, making false alarms is a
misdemeanor of the first degree.  If a violation of this section results in
economic harm of one thousand dollars ($1,000) or more, making false alarms is
a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.  If a violation of this
section pertains to a purported, threatened, or actual use of a weapon of mass
destruction, making false alarms is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
   (d)   (1)   It is not a defense to a charge under this section that pertains
to a purported or threatened use of a weapon of mass destruction that the
offender did not possess or have the ability to use a weapon of mass
destruction or that what was represented to be a weapon of mass destruction was
not a weapon of mass destruction.
      (2)   Any act that is a violation of this section and any other section
of the Ohio Revised Code or these Codified Ordinances may be prosecuted under
this section, the other section, or both sections.
   (e)   As used in this section, “economic harm” and “weapon of mass
destruction” have the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2917.31.
(ORC 2917.32)
§ 648.09  INCITING TO VIOLENCE.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly engage in conduct designed to urge or incite
another to commit any offense of violence when either of the following apply:
      (1)   The conduct takes place under circumstances that create a clear and
present danger that any offense of violence will be committed.
      (2)   The conduct proximately results in the commission of any offense of
violence.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of inciting to violence.  If
the offense of violence that the other person is being urged or incited to
commit is a misdemeanor, inciting to violence is a misdemeanor of the first
degree.  If the offense of violence that the other person is being urged or
incited to commit is a felony, inciting to violence is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(ORC 2917.01)
§ 648.10  LOITERING.
   (a)   No person shall loiter or prowl in any public or private place at a
time, in a manner or under circumstances which warrant alarm for the safety of
persons or security of property in the surrounding area.
   (b)   Without limitation, the following circumstances may be considered in
determining whether such alarm is warranted:
      (1)   The flight of a person upon the appearance of a police officer;
      (2)   Attempted concealment by a person upon the appearance of a police
officer;
      (3)   The systematic checking by a person of doors, windows or other
means of access to buildings, houses or vehicles.
   (c)   Unless flight by the actor or other circumstances make it
impracticable, a police officer shall, prior to any arrest for an offense under
this section, afford the actor an opportunity to dispel any alarm which would
otherwise be warranted, by requesting him or her to identify himself or herself
and explain his or her presence and conduct.  No person shall be convicted of
an offense under this section if the police officer did not comply with the
preceding sentence, or if it appears at trial that the explanation given by the
actor was true, and if believed by the police officer at the time, would have
dispelled the alarm.
   (d)   For the purposes of this section, the following words and phrases
shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them:
      (1)   “Loitering” includes the following activities: lingering, hanging
around, delaying, sauntering and moving slowly about, where such conduct is not
due to physical defects or conditions.
      (2)   “Private place” means places privately owned but open to the public
generally, such as shopping centers, retail stores, transportation terminals,
movie theaters, office buildings, restaurants, and all distinctly private
places such as homes or private residences and apartment houses.
      (3)   “Public place” means public streets and alleyways, public
restrooms, public sidewalks, public parks, public buildings and municipal
airports.
      (4)   “Surrounding area” means that area easily and immediately
accessible to the person under observation.
   (e)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor and
shall be subject to the penalty provided in §
698.02.
(1974 Code, § 509.08)
§ 648.11  MINORS CURFEW.
   (a)   No child under the age of sixteen years shall congregate, loaf, loiter
or be upon any of the public streets, alleys or highways of the municipality
after the hour of 10:00 p.m. on Sundays, Mondays, Tuesdays, Wednesdays or
Thursdays, or after 11:00 p.m. on Fridays or Saturdays of any weekend, to 6:00
a.m. of the following day.  No child who has attained his or her sixteenth
birthday but has not passed his or her eighteenth birthday shall be upon any of
the public streets, alleys or highways of the municipality after the hour of
11:00 p.m. on Sundays, Mondays, Tuesdays, Wednesdays or Thursdays or after 12:
00 p.m. on Fridays or Saturdays to 6:00 a.m. of the following day.  The
provisions of this section shall not apply when the child is accompanied by his
or her parents or parent, guardian or person in loco parentis or some other
person over 21 years of age who has been given permission by the parent or
parents, guardian or person in loco parentis to accompany the child, nor shall
they apply under the conditions stipulated in divisions (b) and (c) hereof. 
This section does not apply to a minor who is:
      (1)   Accompanied by a parent, guardian, or custodian;
      (2)   Accompanied by an adult specified by a parent, guardian, or
custodian;
      (3)   Carrying out an errand or other lawful activity as directed by a
parent, guardian, or custodian; or
      (4)   Occupying the sidewalk of the place where the minor resides, or the
sidewalk of a place where the minor has permission from his or her parent or
guardian to be, or the sidewalk of a next-door neighbor not communicating an
objection to a police officer.
      (5)   Participating in, going to, or returning from:
         (a)   Lawful employment; or
         (b)   A lawful athletic, educational, entertainment, religious, or
social event.
         (c)   Interstate travel.
   (b)   Any school, church, lodge or other organization which desires to keep
or hold any entertainment for children under the age of 18 years, which
entertainment shall require children to be out at a later hour than that called
for in division (a) hereof shall make application to the Chief of Police for
permission to have such children stay out to this later hour.  Such application
shall state the time the entertainment will end and the children who attend
such function shall be required to be off the public streets, alleys or
highways one-half hour after such function is ended.
   (c)   Any child who has passed the age of 16 years and who has a working
certificate and whose work may require him or her to be out at hours later than
those specified in this section may make application to the Chief of Police for
written permission to do so.  The Chief of Police may grant permission, but
such child shall not be out later than one-half hour beyond the time that the
work of such child terminates.
   (d)   (1)   Any child found in violation of this section shall be taken to
the Municipal Building, and the parents, guardians or persons in loco parentis
shall be notified to come to the Municipal Building and take personal charge of
such child.  Such child shall be released only to such parents, guardians or
persons in loco parentis or to the county juvenile authorities.
      (2)   Any child found in violation of this section who has been once
before held by the authorities for violation of this section shall be held for
the juvenile authorities for proper disposition.
      (3)   Any parent who knowingly permits such child to violate any of the
provisions of this section shall, upon the first offense, be warned; upon the
second or subsequent offense is guilty of a minor misdemeanor and shall be
subject to the penalty provided in §
698.02.
(1974 Code, § 509.09)
CHAPTER 654:  RAILROADS
Section
654.01   Obstructing streets by railroad companies. (Repealed)
654.02   Climbing upon railroad cars. (Repealed)
654.03   Duties of locomotive engineer. (Repealed)
654.04   Direction of traffic during repairs on grade crossings. (Repealed)
654.05   Speed limit. (Repealed)
   CROSS REFERENCES
   See section histories for similar state law
   Lighting railroads - see Ohio R.C. 723.33 et seq.
   Duties of engineers - see Ohio R.C. 4999.04
   Driving across grade crossings - see TRAF.
432.33 et seq.
   Definitions generally - see GEN. OFF.
606.01
   Organizational criminal liability - see GEN. OFF.
606.09
   Personal accountability for organizational conduct - see GEN. OFF.
606.10
   Livestock in railroad cars or compartments - see GEN. OFF.
618.05
EDITOR’S NOTE:  The United States Circuit Court of Appeals for the Sixth
Circuit has held in a recent case that the Federal Railway Safety Act preempts
local ordinances regarding railroad obstructions and railroad safety.  See CSX
Transportation, Inc. v. City of Plymouth, 86 F.3d 626 (6th Cir. 1996). 
Therefore, the provisions in this chapter have been repealed.  For current
enforcement, please consult appropriate state law.
§ 654.01  OBSTRUCTING STREETS BY RAILROAD COMPANIES. (REPEALED)
Statutory reference:
   Obstructing streets by railroad companies, see Ohio R.C. 5589.21
§ 654.02  CLIMBING UPON RAILROAD CARS. (REPEALED)
Statutory reference:
   Climbing upon railroad cars, see Ohio R.C. 4999.02
§ 654.03  DUTIES OF LOCOMOTIVE ENGINEER.  (REPEALED)
Statutory reference:
   Duties of locomotive engineer, see Ohio R.C. 4999.04
§ 654.04  DIRECTION OF TRAFFIC DURING REPAIRS ON GRADE CROSSINGS.   (REPEALED)
§ 654.05  SPEED LIMIT.  (REPEALED)
CHAPTER 660:  SAFETY, SANITATION AND HEALTH
Section
660.01   Venting of heaters and burners.
660.02   Spreading contagion.
660.03   Littering.
660.04   Noxious odors; filthy accumulations; polluting and diverting
watercourses.
660.05   Duty to keep sidewalks in repair and clean.
660.06   Abandoned refrigerators and airtight containers.
660.07   Storage of junk vehicles.
660.08   Open burning.
660.09   Barricades and warning lights.
660.10   Sidewalk obstructions; damage or injury.
660.11   Notice to fill lots, remove putrid substances.
660.12   Fences.
660.13   Smoking in places of public assembly.
660.14   Smoking in municipal buildings or vehicles.
660.15   Water on sidewalks.
660.16   Trees, awnings, signs, overhanging public ways.
660.17   Weeds.
660.18   Illumination of adjoining property.
660.19   Recovery of expenses incurred in responding to hazardous material
emergencies.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   See section histories for similar state law
   Excavation liability - see Ohio R.C. 723.49 et seq.
   Nuisances - see Ohio R.C. Ch. 3767
   Placing injurious material or obstruction in street - see TRAF.
412.01
   Littering from motor vehicles - see TRAF.
432.42
   Safety and equipment for motor vehicles - see TRAF.
Ch. 438
   Loads dropping or leaking; tracking mud; removal required - see TRAF.
440.06
   Willfully leaving vehicles on private or public property - see TRAF.
452.05
   Rabies quarantine - see GEN. OFF.
618.11
   Animal nuisances - see GEN. OFF.
618.13
   Removal of defecation from public or private property - see GEN. OFF.
618.16
   Placing harmful substance or objects in food or confection - see GEN. OFF.
636.17
   Riot - see GEN. OFF.
648.01 et seq.
   Inducing panic - see GEN. OFF.
648.07
   Weapons and explosives - see GEN. OFF.
Ch. 678
§ 660.01  VENTING OF HEATERS AND BURNERS.
   (a)   The use of a brazier, salamander, space heater, room heater, furnace,
water heater, or other burner or heater using wood, coal, coke, fuel oil,
kerosene, gasoline, natural gas, liquid petroleum gas or similar fuel, and
tending to give off carbon monoxide or other harmful gases must comply with the
following provisions;
      (1)   When used in living quarters, or in any enclosed building or space
in which persons are usually present, shall be used with a flue or vent so
designed, installed, and maintained as to vent the products of combustion
outdoors; except in storage, factory, or industrial buildings which are
provided with sufficient ventilation to avoid the danger of carbon monoxide
poisoning.
      (2)   When used as a portable or temporary burner or heater at a
construction site, or in a warehouse, shed, or structure in which persons are
temporarily present, shall be vented as provided in division (a)(1) or used
with sufficient ventilation to avoid the danger of carbon monoxide poisoning.
   (b)   This section does not apply to domestic ranges, laundry stoves, gas
logs installed in a fireplace with an adequate flue, or hot plates, unless the
same are used as space or room heaters.
   (c)   No person shall negligently use, or, being the owner, person in
charge, or occupant of premises, negligently permit the use of a burner or
heater in violation of the standards for venting and ventilation provided in
this section.
   (d)   Division (a) above does not apply to any kerosene-fired space or room
heater that is equipped with an automatic extinguishing tip-over device, or to
any natural gas-fired or liquid petroleum gas-fired space or room heater that
is equipped with an oxygen depletion safety shut-off system, and that has its
fuel piped from a source outside the building in which it is located, that are
approved by an authoritative source recognized by the State Fire Marshal in the
State Fire Code adopted by him or her under Ohio R.C. 3737.82.
   (e)   The State Fire Marshal may make rules to ensure the safe use of
unvented kerosene, natural gas, or liquid petroleum gas heaters exempted from
division (a) above when used in assembly buildings, business buildings, high
hazard buildings, institutional buildings, mercantile buildings, and type R-
1 and R-2 residential buildings, as these groups of buildings are defined in
rules adopted by the Board of Building Standards under Ohio R.C. 3781.10.  No
person shall negligently use, or, being the owner, person in charge or occupant
of premises, negligently permit the use of a heater in violation of any rules
adopted under this division.
   (f)   The State Fire Marshal may make rules prescribing standards for
written instructions containing ventilation requirements and warning of any
potential fire hazards that may occur in using a kerosene, natural gas, or
liquid petroleum gas heater.  No person shall sell or offer for sale any
kerosene, natural gas, or liquid petroleum gas heater unless the manufacturer
provides with the heater written instructions that comply with any rules
adopted under this division.
   (g)   No product labeled as a fuel additive for kerosene heaters and having
a flash point below 100°F or 37.8°C shall be sold, offered for sale, or used in
any kerosene space heater.
   (h)   No device that prohibits any safety feature on a kerosene, natural
gas, or liquid petroleum gas space heater from operating shall be sold, offered
for sale, or used in connection with any kerosene, natural gas, or liquid
petroleum gas space heater.
   (i)   No person shall sell or offer for sale any kerosene-fired, natural
gas, or liquid petroleum gas-fired heater that is not exempt from division (a)
above, unless it is marked conspicuously by the manufacturer on the container
with the phrase “Not Approved For Home Use.”
   (j)   No person shall use a cabinet-type, liquid petroleum gas-fired heater
having a fuel source within the heater, inside any building, except as
permitted by the State Fire Marshal in the State Fire Code adopted by him or
her under Ohio R.C. 3737.82.
(ORC 3701.82)
   (k)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(ORC 3701.99(B))  (Ord. 83-O-680, passed 6-21-1983)
§ 660.02  SPREADING CONTAGION.
   (a)   No person, knowing or having reasonable cause to believe that he or
she is suffering from a dangerous, contagious disease, shall knowingly fail to
take reasonable measures to prevent exposing himself or herself to other
persons, except when seeking medical aid.
   (b)   No person, having charge or care of a person whom he or she knows or
has reasonable cause to believe is suffering from a dangerous, contagious
disease, shall recklessly fail to take reasonable measures to protect others
from exposure to the contagion, and to inform health authorities of the
existence of the contagion.
   (c)   No person, having charge of a public conveyance or place of public
accommodation, amusement, resort, or trade, and knowing or having reasonable
cause to believe that persons using such conveyance or place have been or are
being exposed to a dangerous, contagious disease, shall negligently fail to
take reasonable measures to protect the public from exposure to the contagion,
and to inform health authorities of the existence of the contagion.
(ORC 3701.81)
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the second
degree.
(ORC 3701.99(C))
§ 660.03  LITTERING.
   (a)   No person, regardless of intent, shall deposit litter or cause litter
to be deposited on any public property, on private property not owned by him or
her, or in or on waters of the state, unless one of the following applies:
      (1)   The person is directed to do so by a public official as part of a
litter collection drive.
      (2)   Except as provided in division (b) of this section, the person
deposits the litter in a litter receptacle in a manner that prevents its being
carried away by the elements.
      (3)   The person is issued a permit or license covering the litter
pursuant to Ohio R.C. Chapter 3734 or 6111.
   (b)   No person, without privilege to do so, shall knowingly deposit litter,
or cause it to be deposited, in a litter receptacle located on any public
property or on any private property not owned by him or her, unless one of the
following applies:
      (1)   The litter was generated or located on the property on which the
litter receptacle is located.
      (2)   The person is directed to do so by a public official as part of a
litter collection drive.
      (3)   The person is directed to do so by a person whom he or she
reasonably believes to have the privilege to use the litter receptacle.
      (4)   The litter consists of any of the following:
         A.   The contents of a litter bag or container of a type and size
customarily carried and used in a motor vehicle.
         B.   The contents of an ash tray of a type customarily installed or
carried and used in a motor vehicle.
         C.   Beverage containers and food sacks, wrappings, and containers of
a type and in an amount that reasonably may be expected to be generated during
routine commuting or business or recreational travel by a motor vehicle.
         D.   Beverage containers, food sacks, wrappings, containers, and other
materials of a type and in an amount that reasonably may be expected to be
generated during a routine day by a person and deposited in a litter receptacle
by a casual passerby.
   (c)   (1)   As used in division (b)(1) of this section, “public property”
includes any private property open to the public for the conduct of business,
the provision of a service, or upon the payment of a fee but does not include
any private property to which the public otherwise does not have a right of
access.
      (2)   As used in division (b)(4) of this section, “casual passerby” means
a person who does not have depositing litter in a litter receptacle as his or
her primary reason for traveling to or by the property on which the litter
receptacle is located.
   (d)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   “Deposit” means to throw, drop, discard, or place.
      (2)   “Litter” means garbage, trash, waste, rubbish, ashes, cans,
bottles, wire, paper, cartons, boxes, automobile parts, furniture, glass, or
anything else of an unsightly or unsanitary nature.
      (3)   “Litter receptacle” means a dumpster, trash can, trash bin, garbage
can, or similar container in which litter is deposited for removal.
   (e)   This section may be enforced by any sheriff, deputy sheriff, police
officer of a municipal corporation, police constable or officer of a township,
or township or joint police district, wildlife officer designated under R.C. §
1531.13, natural resources officer appointed under R.C. § 1501.24, forest-fire
investigator appointed under R.C. § 1503.09, conservancy district police
officer, inspector of nuisances of a county, or any other law enforcement
officer within the law enforcement officer’s jurisdiction.
(ORC 3767.32)
   (f)   Whoever violates any provision of this section shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.  The sentencing court may, in addition to or
in lieu of the penalty provided in this division, require a person who violates
this section to remove litter from any public or private property or in or on
waters of the state.
(ORC 3767.99(C))
§ 660.04  NOXIOUS ODORS; FILTHY ACCUMULATIONS; POLLUTING AND DIVERTING
WATERCOURSES.
   (a)   No person shall erect, continue to use, or maintain a building,
structure, or place for the exercise of a trade, employment, or business or for
keeping or feeding an animal which, by occasioning noxious exhalations or
noisome or offensive smells, becomes injurious to the health, comfort, or
property of individuals or of the public.
   (b)   No person shall cause or allow offal, filth, or noisome substances to
be collected or remain in any place to the damage or prejudice of others or of
the public.
   (c)   No person shall unlawfully obstruct or impede the passage of a
navigable river, harbor, or collection of water, or corrupt or render
unwholesome or impure a watercourse, stream of water, or unlawfully divert such
watercourse from its natural course or state to the injury or prejudice of
others.
   (d)   Persons who are engaged in agriculture-related activities, as
“agriculture” is defined in Ohio R.C. 519.01, and who are conducting those
activities outside the municipality, in accordance with generally accepted
agricultural practices, and in such a manner so as not to have a substantial,
adverse effect on the public health, safety, or welfare, are exempt from
divisions (a) and (b) above and from any ordinances, resolutions, rules, or
other enactments of the municipality that prohibit excessive noise.
(ORC 3767.13)
   (e)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third
degree.
(ORC 3767.99(C))
§ 660.05  DUTY TO KEEP SIDEWALKS IN REPAIR AND CLEAN.
   (a)   No owner or occupant of abutting premises shall fail to keep the
sidewalks, ramps, curbs or gutters, as well as premises access steps,
staircases, stoops, platforms and other such passageways within or upon the
city’s sidewalk or street right-of-way in repair and free from snow, ice or any
nuisance.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor and
shall be subject to the penalty provided in §
698.02.
(Ord. 04-O-2126, passed 4-6-2004; Ord. 08-O-2490, passed 11-4-2008)
§ 660.06  ABANDONED REFRIGERATORS AND AIRTIGHT CONTAINERS.
   (a)   No person shall abandon, discard, or knowingly permit to remain on
premises under the person's control, in a place accessible to children, any
abandoned or discarded icebox, refrigerator, or other airtight or semi-airtight
container which has a capacity of one and one-half cubic feet or more and an
opening of 50 square inches or more and which has a door or lid equipped with a
hinge, latch, or other fastening device capable of securing such door or lid,
without rendering the equipment harmless to human life by removing such hinges,
latches or other hardware which may cause a person to be confined therein. 
This section shall not apply to an icebox, refrigerator or other airtight or
semi-airtight container located in that part of a building occupied by a
dealer, warehouse or repairer.
(ORC 3767.29)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.
(ORC 3767.99(B))
§ 660.07  STORAGE OF JUNK VEHICLES.
   (a)   (1)   For purposes of this section, “junk motor vehicle” means any
motor vehicle which is three years old or older; extensively damaged, such
damage including but not limited to any of the following: missing wheels,
tires, motor, or transmission; apparently inoperable; and  having a fair market
value of one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) or less, that is left
uncovered in the open on private property for more than 72 hours with the
permission of the person having the right to possession of the property, except
if the person is operating a junk yard or scrap metal processing facility
licensed under the authority of Ohio R.C. 4737.05 through 4737.12, or otherwise
regulated under authority of a political subdivision; or if the property on
which the motor vehicle is left is not subject to licensure or regulation by
any governmental authority, unless the person having the right to the
possession of the property can establish that the motor vehicle is part of a
bona fide commercial operation; or if the motor vehicle is a collector’s
vehicle.
      (2)   The municipality shall not prevent a person from storing or
keeping, or restrict him or her in the method of storing or keeping, any
collector’s vehicle on private property with the permission of the person
having the right to the possession of the property, except that the
municipality may require a person having such permission to conceal, by means
of buildings, fences, vegetation, terrain, or other suitable obstruction, any
unlicensed collector’s vehicle stored in the open.
      (3)   The Police Chief, the Council, or the zoning authority may send
notice, by certified mail with return receipt requested, to the person having
the right to the possession of the property on which a junk motor vehicle is
left, that within ten days of receipt of the notice, the junk motor vehicle
either shall be covered by being housed in a garage or other suitable
structure, or shall be removed from the property.
      (4)   No person shall willfully leave a junk motor vehicle uncovered in
the open for more than ten days after receipt of a notice as provided in this
section.  The fact that a junk motor vehicle is so left is prima facie evidence
of willful failure to comply with the notice, and each subsequent period of 30
days that a junk motor vehicle continues to be so left constitutes a separate
offense.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4513.65)
§ 660.08  OPEN BURNING.
   (a)   Prohibited; exceptions.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, no person shall cause
or permit the open burning of combustible materials, including, without
limitation, rubbish, refuse of any kind, grass, leaves, wood, paper, waste,
industrial matter and materials of any kind resulting from construction,
alteration or demolition of any structure or equipment.
      (2)   The following shall not be considered open burning within the
meaning of this section:
            A.   Burning of waste material generated on the premises within a
permanent, properly ventilated incinerator within an enclosed building, when
such incinerator is designed and operated so as to minimize smoke and odors.
            B.   Campfires using dry wood, coal or charcoal as fuel, provided
such campfire is in compliance with all other regulations.
            C.   Fires in outdoor fireplaces or grills solely for the purpose
of cooking food, provided, however, that no such cooking fire shall be used as
an incinerator or be permitted to become a nuisance or a source of annoyance or
discomfort to any other person by reason of emission of smoke, fumes, fly ash,
dust or soot.
            D.   Small open flames for heating tar, welding equipment, cutting
torches and highway safety flares.
   (b)   Containers for burning; debris.  No person shall keep or maintain any
container, pit or other device primarily designed for open burning, or keep or
maintain any accumulation of rubbish, ashes or other debris resulting from any
open burning.
   (c)   Permits.
      (1)   A.   Upon application to the Manager for an open burning permit, an
owner of the property or the general contractor for construction thereon may be
issued a permit to burn natural wood, lumber, paper, cardboard and wooden boxes
at the construction site.
         B.   All such open burning shall be supervised by an individual
designated by the Manager on a date and at a time designated by such
individual.  Copies are to be given to the Police and Fire Departments.
      (2)   For purposes of this section, natural wood means all trees,
including a tree stump and limbs, as well as herbaceous material which is
cleared from a construction site and the roads or other means of access to such
site.
      (3)   A property owner or the general contractor shall submit a fee of
ten dollars ($10.00) with such application for a permit for open burning on the
construction site of a one, two or three-family dwelling, and the fee for a
permit for all other construction sites shall be twenty dollars ($20.00).
      (4)   When an air pollution alert, warning or emergency is declared by
the Ohio Environmental Protection Agency or any other authority authorized to
declare an air pollution alert, and notice of such alert, warning or emergency
has been appropriately conveyed to an open burning permit holder, no open
burning shall occur pursuant to such permit until such air pollution warning or
emergency has subsided and the property owner or the general contractor has
been notified accordingly.
      (5)   The Manager may reject any such application or revoke any such
permit when it becomes reasonably necessary, in the opinion of the Manager, to
do so in order to protect the health and safety of individuals or the public.
      (6)   An open burning permit issued hereunder may be revoked by the
Manager for a violation of any provision contained herein or any other such
provision or rule hereinafter adopted by the municipality for the purpose of
protecting the public health and safety.
      (7)   The Manager shall report in writing to the Director of
Environmental Protection of the State of Ohio the number of permits issued,
renewed and revoked for the preceding calendar year, the first such report
being due on January 31, 1992.
   (d)   Penalty.  Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section,
excluding division (c)(7) hereof, shall be guilty of a minor misdemeanor and
shall be subject to the penalty provided in §
698.02.
(Ord. 91-O-1228, passed 4-2-1991)
§ 660.09  BARRICADES AND WARNING LIGHTS.
   (a)   No person shall abandon or knowingly permit to remain on public or
private property, any excavation, well, cesspool or structure which is in the
process of construction, reconstruction, repair or alteration unless the same
is adequately protected by suitable barricades and guarded by warning devices
or lights at night so that the condition will not reasonably prove dangerous to
life or limb.
   (b)   No person shall destroy, remove, damage or extinguish any barricade or
warning light that is placed for the protection of the public so as to prevent
injury to life or limb.
   (c)   Any owner or agent in control of a premises upon which a basement,
cellar, well or cistern has been abandoned due to demolition, failure to build
or any other reason shall cause the same to be filled to the ground surface
with rock, gravel, earth or other suitable material.
   (d)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.  A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day
during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
§ 660.10  SIDEWALK OBSTRUCTIONS; DAMAGE OR INJURY.
   (a)   No person shall place or knowingly drop upon any part of a sidewalk or
playground any tacks, bottles, wire, glass, nails or other articles which may
damage property of another or injure any person or animal traveling along or
upon such sidewalk or playground.
   (b)   No person shall walk on, or allow any animal upon, or injure or deface
in any way, any soft or newly laid sidewalk pavement.
   (c)   No person shall place, deposit or maintain any merchandise, goods,
material or equipment upon any sidewalk so as to obstruct pedestrian traffic
thereon except for such reasonable time as may be actually necessary for the
delivery or pickup of such articles. In no case shall the obstruction remain on
such sidewalk for more than one hour. Provided, that tables and chairs to be
used by patrons of a food service establishment may be placed upon the sidewalk
abutting such establishment with the written permission of the Planning
Commission and subject to such limitations or conditions as the Planning
Commission may impose upon the owner or operator of such establishment, in
which case such tables and chairs shall not be deemed obstructions to
pedestrian traffic.
   (d)   No person shall unload upon, or transport any heavy merchandise,
goods, material or equipment over or across any sidewalk or curb without first
placing some sufficient protection over the pavement to protect against damage
or injury.
   (e)   No person shall allow any cellar or trap door, coal chute or elevator
or lift opening in any sidewalk to remain open without providing suitable
safeguards to protect and warn pedestrian traffic of the dangerous conditions.
   (f)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during
or on which a violation occurs or continues.
(Ord. 03-O-2046, passed 7-25-2003)
§ 660.11  NOTICE TO FILL LOTS, REMOVE PUTRID SUBSTANCES.
   (a)   No person shall fail to comply with the following requirements within
the lawful time after service or publication of the notice or resolution is
made as required by law:  to fill or drain any lot or land or remove all putrid
substances therefrom, or remove all obstructions from culverts, covered drains
or natural watercourses as provided in Ohio R.C. 715.47.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. A
separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a
violation occurs or continues.
§ 660.12  FENCES.
   (a)   No person shall erect or maintain any fence charged with electrical
current.
   (b)   No person shall erect or maintain a barbed wire fence which abuts or
is adjacent to any public street or sidewalk. This division (b) does not
prevent the placement and use of not more than two strands of barbed wire on
top of a fence other than a barbed wire fence, provided such strands are not
less than 48 inches from the ground.
   (c)   Barbed wire partition fences may be erected and maintained as provided
in Ohio R.C. 971.03.
   (d)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during
or on which a violation occurs or continues.
§ 660.13  SMOKING IN PLACES OF PUBLIC ASSEMBLY.
   (a)   As used in this section, “place of public assembly” means:
      (1)   Enclosed theaters, except the lobby; opera houses; auditoriums;
classrooms; elevators; rooms in which persons are confined as a matter of
health care, including but not limited to a hospital room and a room in a
residential care facility serving as the residence of a person living in such
residential care facility.
      (2)   All buildings and other enclosed structures owned by the state, its
agencies, or political subdivisions, including but not limited to hospitals and
state institutions for the mentally ill and persons with intellectual
disabilities; university and college buildings, except rooms within those
buildings used primarily as the residences of students or other persons
affiliated with the university or college; office buildings; libraries;
museums; and vehicles used in public transportation.  That portion of a
building or other enclosed structure that is owned by the state, a state
agency, or a political subdivision, and that is used primarily as a food
service establishment, is not a place of public assembly.
      (3)   Each portion of a building or enclosed structure that is not
included in division (a)(1) or (a)(2) of this section is a place of public
assembly if it has a seating capacity of 50 or more persons and is available to
the public.  Restaurants, food service establishments, dining rooms, cafes,
cafeterias, or other rooms used primarily for the service of food, as well as
bowling alleys and places licensed by the Ohio Division of Liquor Control to
sell intoxicating beverages for consumption on the premises, are not places of
public assembly.
   (b)   For the purpose of separating persons who smoke from persons who do
not smoke for the comfort and health of persons not smoking, in every place of
public assembly there shall be an area where smoking is not permitted, which
shall be designated a no smoking area, provided that not more than one-half of
the rooms in any health care facility in which persons are confined as a matter
of health care may be designated as smoking areas in their entirety.  The
designation shall be made before the place of public assembly is made available
to the public. In places included in division (a)(1) of this section, the local
fire authority having jurisdiction shall designate the no smoking area.  In
places included in division (a)(2) of this section that are owned by the state
or its agencies, the Ohio Director of Administrative Services shall designate
the area, and if the place is owned by a political subdivision, its legislative
authority shall designate an officer who shall designate the area.  In places
included in division (a)(3) of this section, the person having control of the
operations of the place of public assembly shall designate the no smoking
area.  In places included in division (a)(2) of this section which are also
included in division (a)(1) of this section, the officer who has authority to
designate the area in places in division (a)(2) of this section shall designate
the no smoking area.  A no smoking area may include the entire place of public
assembly.  Designations shall be made by the placement of signs that are
clearly visible and that state “no smoking.”  No person shall remove signs from
areas designated as no smoking areas.
   (c)   This section does not affect or modify the prohibition contained in
Ohio R.C. 3313.751(B).
   (d)   No person shall smoke in any area designated as a no smoking area in
accordance with division (b) of this section.
   (e)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 3791.031)
§ 660.14  SMOKING IN MUNICIPAL BUILDINGS OR VEHICLES.
   (a)   For the purpose of this section, “smoking material” means any
cigarette, cigar, pipe, weed, plant or other smoking equipment in any form, and
“public place” means that portion of any enclosed or indoor area owned or
leased by the municipality.
   (b)   (1)   Possession of lighted smoking material in all public places
owned or leased by the municipality is prohibited.
      (2)   Possession of lighted smoking material in all vehicles owned or
leased by the municipality is prohibited.
      (3)   The Director of Public Safety shall erect or post signs that state
“No Smoking” at all entranceways to all public places and at any other
locations throughout the public places as is necessary.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor and
shall be subject to the penalty provided in §
698.02.
(Ord. 97-O-1628, passed 10-21-1997)
§ 660.15  WATER ON SIDEWALKS.
   (a)   No person shall allow, suffer or permit water from any spouting,
conduit, hydrant, drain or pipe to flow or empty upon the sidewalk abutting on
real estate owned or occupied by him or her.
   (b)   The person owning or occupying real estate abutting on any sidewalk
over or upon which water would flow from any accumulation upon such real estate
shall construct underground watertight drains or conduits for the discharge of
such water, such underground drain or conduit to be constructed so that the
water from such real estate will be conveyed underneath the abutting sidewalk
into the gutters and ditches in front of such real estate.
(Ord. passed 3-17-1904)
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor and
shall be subject to the penalty provided in §
698.02.
(1974 Code, § 521.10(c))
§ 660.16  TREES, AWNINGS, SIGNS, OVERHANGING PUBLIC WAYS.
   (a)   No owner of any tree, awning, awning frame, sign or any other
obstruction shall permit the boughs or limbs of such tree to overhang any
sidewalk within nine feet therefrom, measuring perpendicularly from the grade
line, or permit the awning, awning frame, sign or other obstruction to overhang
any sidewalk within eight feet therefrom, measuring perpendicularly from the
grade line.
   (b)   No owner of any tree shall permit the boughs or limbs of such tree to
overhang any street within fifteen feet therefrom, measuring perpendicularly
from the grade line.
   (c)   All trees, the boughs or lines of which overhang any sidewalk or
street within the distances mentioned in divisions (a) and (b) hereof, shall be
trimmed at least once each year, such trimming to be done in the month of
September.  Nothing in this division shall be construed to prevent the owner of
trees referred to in divisions (a) and (b) hereof to trim the same at any time,
but if not done at least once each year, in September, such trimming shall be
done as set forth in division (d) hereof.
   (d)    If the owner of a tree fails to trim the same after ten days written
notice by the Superintendent of Public Service, then such trimming shall be
done by the Superintendent and the cost assessed against the owner of such
tree.  This remedy shall be in addition to the penalty provided in §
698.02.
(Ord. passed 8-8-2004)
   (e)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor and
shall be subject to the penalty provided in §
698.02.
(1974 Code, § 521.11(e))
§ 660.17  WEEDS.
   (a)   No person owning or having charge of land within the municipality
shall fail to keep such property free and clear from all noxious weeds and rank
vegetation that are a detriment to the health and welfare of the inhabitants of
the municipality nor fail to cut all such weeds and vegetation on the lot owned
or controlled by him or her when such weeds or vegetation reach a height of 12
inches.
   (b)   In addition to any other consequence or penalty provided by these
Codified Ordinances for a violation of division (a) hereof, the municipality
may, after ten days notice to the person owning or having charge of the subject
land within the municipality and the subsequent failure of such person to
comply with such notice, cut or otherwise remove such weeds and vegetation. 
The cost of such cutting or removal shall become the personal obligation of the
property owner.  Such cost shall be the total cost to the municipality of such
cutting or removal, including the cost of notification, subject to a minimum
service charge of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) for each such cutting or
removal.  The cost of such cutting or removal may be certified by the Manager
to the appropriate County Auditor to be assessed against the subject real
estate and thereby collected as other real estate taxes, or may be collected by
any duly appointed collection agent or other agent acting on the municipality’s
behalf as an outstanding debt owed to the municipality.
   (c)   The ten days notice required by division (b) hereof shall be given
personally, by way of certified U.S. mail, return receipt requested, or by way
of regular U.S. mail, to the owner or agent in charge of the subject real
estate.  However, where such service of notice is not reasonably practicable,
service of notice may be by publication once in a newspaper of general
circulation in the municipality.  Such notice shall specify the subject real
estate, the period of time in which such cutting or removal shall take place
and the consequences of the failure to take such action within such time
period.
   (d)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor and shall be subject to the penalty provided in Section
698.02. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on
which a violation or noncompliance occurs or continues from and after the ten
days notice set forth in this section.
(Ord. 88-O-1039, passed 6-21-1988; Ord. 16-O-2873, passed 7-19-2016)
§ 660.18  ILLUMINATION OF ADJOINING PROPERTY.
   (a)   No person shall cause or allow any electrical lighting device or other
source of illumination to be of such size, intensity, height or location upon
any property zoned R-1, R-2 or R-3 Residential, so as to shine on or illuminate
any adjoining property zoned R-1, R-2 or R-3 Residential in an unreasonable
manner.
   (b)   Upon the filing of a written complaint by any interested person
requesting an inspection of any such light, the Manager or someone appointed by
him or her shall make such  inspection and may order the removal, relocation,
extinguishment or shielding of such light within a specified period of time,
not to exceed thirty days, by letter directed to the person causing or allowing
such light.
   (c)   Whoever fails to remove, relocate, extinguish or shield any such light
in accordance with the order of the Manager as specified in division (b)
hereof, is guilty of a minor misdemeanor, and shall be subject to the penalty
provided in §
698.02.
(Ord. 73-O-35, passed 6-19-1973)
§ 660.19  RECOVERY OF EXPENSES INCURRED IN RESPONDING TO HAZARDOUS MATERIAL
EMERGENCIES.
   (a)   Authority.  This section is enacted under the authority of Ohio R.C.
3745.13 - Costs of dealing with unauthorized spill, releases or discharge.
   (b)   Purpose.  In order to protect the city from incurring extraordinary
expenses from the utilization of the Fire Department's resources and other
municipal governed agencies to respond to an incident involving hazardous
materials, the city authorizes the imposition of charges to cover reasonable
and actual costs incurred by it in responding to calls for assistance in
connection with a hazardous materials release.
   (c)   Definitions.  The following terms or phrases shall be defined to mean:
      (1)   CLEANUP.  The management, control, containment, recovery, removal
or neutralization of any released hazardous material for the purpose of
promoting or protecting public health or safety.
      (2)   EMERGENCY RESPONSE.  Any response by the Fire Department, Police
Department, Street/Road Department, Water/Sewage Department or other local
governmental agency, or other entity operating at the request of the Fire
Department to any call for assistance from any person, property owner,
governmental agency, emergency service provider, or other entity.
      (3)   FIRE CHIEF'S AUTHORITY.  The chief operational officer of the Fire
Department or in his absence the senior fire officer in charge at the scene of
a hazardous materials incident per the authority of Ohio R.C. 3737.80 - Chief
of fire department responsible for primary coordination in emergency situation.
      (4)   HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE OR MATERIALS.  Includes but is not limited to,
a chemical that is combustible liquid, flammable gas, an explosive, a flammable
and organic peroxide, an oxidizer, a pyrophoric, an unstable reactive or water
reactive substance, petroleum and/or petroleum by-products, a flammable solid,
a poisonous or infectious material, a radioactive material, a corrosive, or any
other material that may be defined as hazardous by the U.S. Department of
Transportation in Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations or by any
hazardous materials laws of the State of Ohio.
      (5)   RELEASE.  The accidental or intentional, sudden or gradual
spilling, leaking, dumping, or disposing into the environment (including the
abandonment or discarding of barrels, containers and other receptacles
containing any hazardous material or substance or waste or pollutant or
contaminant) whether such release occurs from a fixed facility or while the
materials are being transported.
      (6)   RESPONSIBLE PARTY.  Any individual, firm, facility, corporation,
association, partnership, commercial entity, consortium, joint venture,
government entity, motor carrier, railroad, aircraft, or other transportation
conveyance material, either actual or threatened, or as an owner, tenant,
occupant, or a party in control of property onto which or from which a
hazardous material is released or the owner, possessor or party in control of
property onto which or from which a hazardous material is released or the
owner, possessor or party in control of the hazardous substance immediately
prior to said release.
   (d)   Duty to report.  Any person who causes or has knowledge of any
discharge or release of hazardous materials from their safe container, in any
manner which poses an actual or potential threat to people, animals, wildlife,
vegetation, property, or the environment, shall immediately report the incident
to the Fire Department.
   (e)   Cleanup.  The user or transporter of a hazardous material which is
intentionally or accidentally discharged or released within the city shall, in
addition to reporting the accident as required in division (d) of this section,
shall take immediate action to cause the discharge or release to be cleaned up
in an environmentally safe and scientifically sound manner, and to restore the
incident site and surrounding environment to the best of it's original state.
The responsible party of an intentionally or accidentally discharged or
released hazardous materials incident within the city, shall take full
financial responsibility for all costs associated with the clean up of this
incident.
   (f)   Cost recovery of expenses.
      (1)   Those persons or entities whose actions cause or create, in whole
or in part, a hazardous materials emergency within the boundaries of the city
are financially liable to the city for all costs and expenses incurred in or
arising from response to such hazardous materials emergency by the city and any
other political subdivision, agency, or cooperative entity.  The city shall
have all rights under the law to recover all such costs and expenses, including
reasonable attorneys fees, litigation expenses and court costs incurred in,
related to or arising out of, all cost recovery efforts and enforcement of the
terms of this section.
      (2)   In the event that personnel and equipment from other emergency
responders, political subdivisions, government entities, specialized agencies
or cooperative entities that are requested to respond to assist with the
hazardous materials emergency, then the city shall make every effort to
document their operational expenses and include them on the city cost recovery
billing to the responsible party.
      (3)   All costs and expenses incurred by the emergency response to the
hazardous materials incident are to be billed at the current rate established
and approved by resolution of the Columbiana County Fire Chiefs Association in
co-operation with the Columbiana County Emergency Management Association and
the Columbiana County Local Emergency Planning Committee who serve as the
hazardous materials billing agency for Columbiana County. By option of the fire
department whose jurisdiction the hazardous materials incident has occurred,
the Columbiana County Hazardous Materials billing agency may be utilized.
Submission of all cost recovery expenses must be submitted within 14 days of
the incident.
      (4)   Upon recovery of costs and expenses from the responsible party, the
city or billing agency is authorized to reimburse such other emergency
responder, political subdivisions, government entities, specialized agencies or
cooperative entities for their actual costs incurred in responding to the
hazardous materials emergency.
   (g)   Action to recover costs.  In the event the responsible party fails or
refuses to pay any or all of the costs and expenses determined by the city
related to or arising out of the response to the hazardous materials emergency
within 30 days after the assessment or after the governing body decision on an
appeal, the city may initiate a legal action to recover such costs, including
reasonable attorney's fees and costs. Nothing herein shall be construed to
limit any other rights or actions, legal or otherwise, to which the city may
otherwise be entitled due to a hazardous materials emergency.
(Res. 09-R-387, passed 4-7-2009)
CHAPTER 666:  SEX RELATED OFFENSES
Section
666.01   Definitions.
666.02   Unlawful sexual conduct with a minor.
666.03   Sexual imposition.
666.04   Public indecency.
666.05   Voyeurism.
666.06   Polygraph examinations for victims; restrictions on use.
666.07   Procuring.
666.08   Soliciting.
666.085   Loitering to engage in solicitation.
666.09   Prostitution.
666.10   Rules of evidence.
666.11   Disseminating matter harmful to juveniles.
666.12   Displaying matter harmful to juveniles.
666.13   Deception to obtain matter harmful to juveniles.
666.14   Presumptions; notice.
666.15   Declaratory judgment.
666.16   Injunction; abatement of nuisance.
666.17   Unlawful operation of viewing booths depicting sexual conduct.
666.18   Juveniles on the premises of adult entertainment establishments
prohibited.
666.19   Sexually oriented businesses; illegal operation and activity.
666.20   Unlawful advertising of massage.
666.21   Nonconsensual dissemination of private sexual images.
666.99   Sentencing for sexually oriented offenses; sexual predators;
registration.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Power to restrain houses of ill fame - see Ohio R.C. 715.52
   Examination and treatment for venereal disease; HIV tests - see Ohio R.C.
2907.27
   Cost incurred in medical examination or test - see Ohio R.C. 2907.28
   Registration of sex offenders in cities and counties - see Ohio R.C. 2950.01
et seq.
   Definitions generally - see GEN. OFF.
606.01
   Criminal child enticement - see GEN. OFF.
636.09
   Spreading contagion - see GEN. OFF.
660.02
§ 666.01  DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this chapter:
   (a)   “Harmful to juveniles.”  That quality of any material or performance
describing or representing nudity, sexual conduct, sexual excitement, or sado-
masochistic abuse in any form to which all of the following apply:
      (1)   The material or performance, when considered as a whole, appeals to
the prurient interest of juveniles in sex.
      (2)   The material or performance is patently offensive to prevailing
standards in the adult community as a whole with respect to what is suitable
for juveniles.
      (3)   The material or performance, when considered as a whole, lacks
serious literary, artistic, political, and scientific value for juveniles.
   (b)   “Juvenile.”  Any unmarried person under 18 years of age.
   (c)   “Material.”  Any book, magazine, newspaper, pamphlet, poster, print,
picture, figure, image, description, motion picture film, video cassette, laser
disc, phonograph record, cassette tape, compact disc, or other tangible thing
capable of arousing interest through sight, sound, or touch and includes an
image or text appearing on a computer monitor, television screen, liquid
crystal display, or similar display device or an image or text recorded on a
computer hard disk, computer floppy disk, compact disk, magnetic tape, or
similar data storage device.
   (d)   “Mental health client or patient.” Has the same meaning as in Ohio
R.C. 2305.51.
   (e)   “Mental health professional.” Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C.
2305.115.
   (f)   “Minor.”  A person under the age of 18.
   (g)   “Nudity.”  The showing, representation, or depiction of human male or
female genitals, pubic area, or buttocks with less than a full, opaque
covering, or of a female breast with less than a full, opaque covering of any
portion thereof below the top of the nipple, or of covered male genitals in a
discernibly turgid state.
   (h)   “Obscene.”  When considered as a whole, and judged with reference to
ordinary adults or, if it is designed for sexual deviates or other specially
susceptible group, judged with reference to that group, any material or
performance is “obscene” if any of the following apply:
      (1)   Its dominant appeal is to prurient interest.
      (2)   Its dominant tendency is to arouse lust by displaying or depicting
sexual activity, masturbation, sexual excitement, or nudity in a way that tends
to represent human beings as mere objects of sexual appetite.
      (3)   Its dominant tendency is to arouse lust by displaying or depicting
bestiality or extreme or bizarre violence, cruelty, or brutality.
      (4)   Its dominant tendency is to appeal to scatological interest by
displaying or depicting human bodily functions of elimination in a way that
inspires disgust or revulsion in persons with ordinary sensibilities, without
serving any genuine scientific, educational, sociological, moral, or artistic
purpose.
      (5)   It contains a series of displays or descriptions of sexual
activity, masturbation, sexual excitement, nudity, bestiality, extreme or
bizarre violence, cruelty, or brutality, or human bodily functions of
elimination, the cumulative effect of which is a dominant tendency to appeal to
prurient or scatological interest, when the appeal to such an interest is
primarily for its own sake or for commercial exploitation, rather than
primarily for a genuine scientific, educational, sociological, moral, or
artistic purpose.
   (i)   “Performance.”  Any motion picture, preview, trailer, play, show,
skit, dance, or other exhibition performed before an audience.
   (j)   “Prostitute.”  A male or female who promiscuously engages in sexual
activity for hire, regardless of whether the hire is paid to the prostitute or
to another.
   (k)   “Sado-masochistic abuse.” Flagellation or torture by or upon a person
or the condition of being fettered, bound, or otherwise physically restrained.
   (l)   “Sexual activity.”  Sexual conduct or sexual contact, or both.
   (m)   “Sexual conduct.”  Vaginal intercourse between a male and female; anal
intercourse, fellatio, and cunnilingus between persons regardless of sex; and,
without privilege to do so, the insertion, however slight, of any part of the
body or any instrument, apparatus, or other object into the vaginal or anal
opening of another.  Penetration, however slight, is sufficient to complete
vaginal or anal intercourse.
   (n)   “Sexual contact.”  Any touching of an erogenous zone of another,
including without limitation the thigh, genitals, buttock, pubic region, or, if
the person is a female, a breast, for the purpose of sexually arousing or
gratifying either person.
   (o)   “Sexual excitement.”  The condition of human male or female genitals
when in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal.
   (p)   “Spouse.”  A person married to an offender at the time of an alleged
offense, except that such person shall not be considered the spouse when any of
the following apply:
      (1)   When the parties have entered into a written separation agreement
pursuant to Ohio R.C. 3103.06.
      (2)   When an action is pending between the parties for annulment,
divorce, dissolution of marriage, or legal separation.
      (3)   In the case of an action for legal separation, after the effective
date of the judgment for legal separation.
(ORC 2907.01)
§ 666.02  UNLAWFUL SEXUAL CONDUCT WITH A MINOR.
   (a)   No person who is 18 years of age or older shall engage in sexual
conduct with another who is not the spouse of the offender, when the offender
knows the other person is 13 years of age or older but less than 16 years of
age, or the offender is reckless in that regard.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of unlawful sexual conduct
with a minor.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (b)(2), unlawful sexual
conduct with a minor is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in division (b)(3) of this section, if
the offender is less than four years older than the other person, unlawful
sexual conduct with a minor is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (3)   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty
to a violation of Ohio R.C. 2907.02, 2907.03 or 2907.04, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, or a violation of former Ohio R.C. 2907.12, or
any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, unlawful sexual conduct with
a minor is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(ORC 2907.04)
§ 666.03  SEXUAL IMPOSITION.
   (a)   No person shall have sexual contact with another, not the spouse of
the offender; cause another, not the spouse of the offender, to have sexual
contact with the offender; or cause two or more other persons to have sexual
contact when any of the following applies:
      (1)   The offender knows that the sexual contact is offensive to the
other person, or one of the other persons, or is reckless in that regard.
      (2)   The offender knows that the other person’s, or one of the other
person’s ability to appraise the nature of or control the offender’s or
touching person’s conduct is substantially impaired.
      (3)   The offender knows that the other person, or one of the other
persons, submits because of being unaware of the sexual contact.
      (4)   The other person, or one of the other persons, is 13 years of age
or older but less than 16 years of age, whether or not the offender knows the
age of the person, and the offender is at least 18 years of age and four or
more years older than the other person.
      (5)   The offender is a mental health professional, the other person or
one of the other persons is a mental health client or patient of the offender,
and the offender induces the other person who is the client or patient to
submit by falsely representing to the other person who is the client or patient
that the sexual contact is necessary for mental health treatment purposes.
   (b)   No person shall be convicted of a violation of this section solely
upon the victim’s testimony unsupported by other evidence.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of sexual imposition, a
misdemeanor of the third degree. If the offender previously has been convicted
of or pleaded guilty to a violation of this section, Ohio R.C. 2907.02,
2907.03, 2907.04, 2907.05, 2907.06, former Ohio R.C. 2907.12, or a
substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, a violation of this
section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to three or more violations of this
section, Ohio R.C. 2907.02, 2907.03, 2907.04, 2907.05, 2907.06, former Ohio
R.C. 2907.12, or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance,
or of any combination of those sections, a violation of this section is a
misdemeanor of the first degree and, notwithstanding the range of jail terms
prescribed in Ohio R.C. 2929.24, the court may impose on the offender a
definite jail term of not more than one year.
(ORC 2907.06)
Statutory reference:
   Gross sexual imposition, felony, see Ohio R.C. 2907.05
   Notice to licensing board or agency upon indictment, conviction or guilty
plea of mental health professional, see Ohio R.C. 2907.17 and 2907.18
§ 666.04  PUBLIC INDECENCY.
   (a)   No person shall recklessly do any of the following, under
circumstances in which the person’s conduct is likely to be viewed by and
affront others who are in the person’s physical proximity and who are not
members of the person’s household:
      (1)   Expose the person’s private parts.
      (2)   Engage in sexual conduct or masturbation.
      (3)   Engage in conduct that to an ordinary observer would appear to be
sexual conduct or masturbation.
   (b)   No person shall knowingly do any of the following, under circumstances
in which the person’s conduct is likely to be viewed by and affront another
person who is in the person’s physical proximity, who is a minor, and who is
not the spouse of the offender:
      (1)   Engage in masturbation.
      (2)   Engage in sexual conduct.
      (3)   Engage in conduct that to an ordinary observer would appear to be
sexual conduct or masturbation.
      (4)   Expose the person’s private parts with the purpose of personal
sexual arousal or gratification or to lure the minor into sexual activity.
   (c)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of public indecency and
shall be punished as provided in divisions (c)(2), (c)(3), (c)(4), and (c)(5)
of this section.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (c)(2), a violation
of division (a)(1) of this section is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
violation of this section or a substantially equivalent State law or municipal
ordinance, a violation of division (a)(1) of this section is a misdemeanor of
the third degree or, if any person who was likely to view and be affronted by
the offender’s conduct was a minor, a misdemeanor of the second degree. If the
offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two violations
of this section or a substantially equivalent State law municipal ordinance, a
violation of division (a)(1) of this section is a misdemeanor of the second
degree or, if any person who was likely to view and be affronted by the
offender’s conduct was a minor, a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the
offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to three or more
violations of this section or a substantially equivalent State law or municipal
ordinance, a violation of division (a)(1) of this section is a misdemeanor of
the first degree or, if any person who was likely to view and be affronted by
the offender’s conduct was a minor, a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
State law.
      (3)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (c)(3), a violation
of division (a)(2) or (a)(3) of this section is a misdemeanor of the third
degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to
one violation of this section or a substantially equivalent State law or
municipal ordinance, a violation of division (a)(2) or (a)(3) of this section
is a misdemeanor of the second degree or, if any person who was likely to view
and be affronted by the offender’s conduct was a minor, a misdemeanor of the
first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to two or more violations of this section or a substantially equivalent
State law municipal ordinance, a violation of division (a)(2) or (a)(3) of this
section is a misdemeanor of the first degree or, if any person who was likely
to view and be affronted by the offender’s conduct was a minor, a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate State law.
      (4)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (c)(4), a violation
of division (b)(1), (b)(2), or (b)(3) of this section is a misdemeanor of the
second degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one violation of this section or a substantially equivalent State law
or municipal ordinance, a violation of division (b)(1), (b)(2), or (b)(3) of
this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously
has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations of this
section or a substantially equivalent State law municipal ordinance, a
violation of division (b)(1), (b)(2), or (b)(3) of this section is a felony to
be prosecuted under appropriate State law.
      (5)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (c)(5), a violation
of division (b)(4) of this section  is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to any
violation of this section or a substantially equivalent State law municipal
ordinance, a violation of division (b)(4) of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate State law.
(ORC 2907.09)
   (d)   (1)   If either of the following applies, the court may determine at
the time of sentencing whether to classify the offender as a tier I sex
offender/child-victim offender for a violation of division (b)(4) of this
section:
         A.   The offender is less than ten years older than the other person.
         B.   The offender is ten or more years older than the other person and
the offender has not previously been convicted of or pleaded guilty to any
violation of this section or any substantially equivalent state law or
municipal ordinance.
      (2)   If the offender is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of
division (b)(4) of this section, is ten or more years older than the other
person, and previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to any violation
of this section or any substantially equivalent state law or municipal
ordinance, the court shall issue an order at the time of sentencing that
classifies the offender as a tier I sex offender/child-victim offender subject
to registration under Ohio R.C. 2950.04, 2950.041, 2950.05, and 2950.06.
(ORC 2907.09)
   (e)   A mother is entitled to breast-feed her baby in any location of a
place of public accommodation, as defined in Ohio R.C. 4112.01, wherein the
mother otherwise is permitted.
(ORC 3781.55)
Statutory reference:
   Bail considerations for persons charged, see Ohio R.C. 2907.41
§ 666.05  VOYEURISM.
   (a)   No person, for the purpose of sexually arousing or gratifying himself
or herself, shall commit trespass or otherwise surreptitiously invade the
privacy of another, to spy or eavesdrop upon another.
   (b)   No person, for the purpose of sexually arousing or gratifying himself
or herself, shall commit trespass or otherwise surreptitiously invade the
privacy of another to videotape, film, photograph, or otherwise record the
other person in a state of nudity.
   (c)   No person, for the purpose of sexually arousing or gratifying himself
or herself, shall commit trespass or otherwise surreptitiously invade the
privacy of another to videotape, film, photograph, otherwise record, or spy or
eavesdrop upon the other person in a state of nudity if the other person is a
minor.
   (d)   No person shall secretly or surreptitiously videotape, film,
photograph, or otherwise record another person under or through the clothing
being worn by that person for the purpose of viewing the body of, or the
undergarments worn by, that other person.
   (e)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of voyeurism.
      (1)   A violation of division (a) of this section is a misdemeanor of the
third degree.
      (2)   A violation of division (b) of this section is a misdemeanor of the
second degree.
      (3)   A violation of division (d) of this section is a misdemeanor of the
first degree.
      (4)   A violation of division (c) of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(ORC 2907.08)
§ 666.06  POLYGRAPH EXAMINATIONS FOR VICTIMS: RESTRICTIONS ON USE.
   (a)   (1)   A peace officer, prosecutor, or other public official shall not
ask or require a victim of an alleged sex offense to submit to a polygraph
examination as a condition for proceeding with the investigation of the alleged
sex offense.
      (2)   The refusal of the victim of an alleged sex offense to submit to a
polygraph examination shall not prevent the investigation of the alleged sex
offense, the filing of criminal charges with respect to the alleged sex
offense, or the prosecution of the alleged perpetrator of the alleged sex
offense.
   (b)   As used in this section:
      (1)   “Peace officer” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2921.51.
      (2)   “Polygraph examination” means any mechanical or electrical
instrument or device of any type used or allegedly used to examine, test, or
question an individual for the purpose of determining the individual’s
truthfulness.
      (3)   “Prosecution” means the prosecution of criminal charges in a
criminal prosecution or the prosecution of a delinquent child complaint in a
delinquency proceeding.
      (4)   “Prosecutor, has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2935.01.
      (5)   “Public official” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 117.01.
      (6)   “Sex offense” means a violation of any provision of Sections133.02
to 133.05 or Ohio R.C. 2907.02 to 2907.09.
(ORC 2907.10)
§ 666.07  PROCURING.
   (a)   No person, knowingly and for gain, shall do either of the following:
      (1)   Entice or solicit another to patronize a prostitute or brothel;
      (2)   Procure a prostitute for another to patronize, or take or direct
another at the other's request to any place for the purpose of patronizing a
prostitute.
   (b)   No person, having authority or responsibility over the use of
premises, shall knowingly permit the premises to be used for the purpose of
engaging in sexual activity for hire.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of procuring. Except as
otherwise provided in this division, procuring is a misdemeanor of the first
degree. If the prostitute who is procured, patronized, or otherwise involved in
a violation of division (a)(2) of this section is under 18 years of age at the
time of the violation, regardless of whether the offender who violates division
(a)(2) of this section knows the prostitute’s age, or if a prostitute who
engages in sexual activity for hire in premises used in violation of division
(b) of this section is under 18 years of age at the time of the violation,
regardless of whether the offender who violates division (b) of this section
knows the prostitute’s age, procuring is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
(ORC 2907.23)
§ 666.08  SOLICITING.
   (a)   (1)   No person shall solicit another who is 18 years of age or older
to engage with the other person in sexual activity for hire.
      (2)   No person shall solicit another to engage with such other person in
sexual activity for hire if the other person is 16 or 17 years of age and the
offender knows that the other person is 16 or 17 years of age or is reckless in
that regard.
      (3)   No person shall solicit another to engage with such other person in
sexual activity for hire if either of the following applies:
         A.   The other person is less than 16 years of age, whether or not the
offender knows the age of the other person.
         B.   The other person is a person with a developmental disability and
the offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe the other person is a
person with a developmental disability.
   (b)   (1)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of
soliciting. A violation of division (a)(1) of this section is a misdemeanor of
the third degree. A violation of division (a)(2) or (a)(3) of this section is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   If a person is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of
division (a) of this section or an attempt to commit a violation of division
(a) of this section and if the person, in committing or attempting to commit
the violation, was in, was on, or used a motor vehicle, the court, in addition
to or independent of all other penalties imposed for the violation, may impose
upon the offender a class six suspension of the person’s driver’s license,
commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction permit, probationary
license, or nonresident operating privilege from the range specified in Ohio
R.C. 4510.02(A)(6).  In lieu of imposing upon the offender the class six
suspension, the court instead may require the offender to perform community
service for a number of hours determined by the court.
   (c)   As used in division (a) of this section:
      (1)   “Person with a developmental disability.” Has the same meaning as
in R.C. § 2905.32.
      (2)   “Sexual activity for hire.” Means an implicit or explicit agreement
to provide sexual activity in exchange for anything of value paid to the person
engaging in such sexual activity, to any person trafficking that person, or to
any person associated with either such person.
(ORC 2907.24(A), (C)(1), (D), (E))
Statutory reference:
   Offenders with knowledge that they test HIV positive, felony, see Ohio R.C.
2907.24(B)
   Testing offenders for venereal disease and AIDS, see Ohio R.C. 2907.27
§ 666.085  LOITERING TO ENGAGE IN SOLICITATION.
   (a)   No person, with purpose to solicit another to engage in sexual
activity for hire and while in or near a public place, shall do any of the
following:
      (1)   Beckon to, stop or attempt to stop another;
      (2)   Engage or attempt to engage another in conversation;
      (3)   Stop or attempt to stop the operator of a vehicle or approach a
stationary vehicle;
      (4)   If the offender is the operator of or a passenger in a vehicle,
stop, attempt to stop, beckon to, attempt to beckon to, or entice another to
approach or enter the vehicle of which the offender is the operator or in which
the offender is the passenger;
      (5)   Interfere with the free passage of another.
   (b)   As used in division (a) of this section:
      (1)   “Public place” means any of the following:
         A.   A street, road, highway, thoroughfare, bikeway, walkway,
sidewalk, bridge, alley, alleyway, plaza, park, driveway, parking lot or
transportation facility.
         B.   A doorway or entrance way to a building that fronts on a place
described in division (1)A. of this definition.
         C.   A place not described in division (1)A. or (1)B. of this
definition that is open to the public.
      (2)   “Vehicle” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 4501.01.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of loitering to engage in
solicitation, a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(ORC 2907.241)
Statutory reference:
   Offenders with knowledge that they test HIV positive, felony, see Ohio R.C.
2907.241(B)
   Testing offenders for venereal disease and AIDS, see Ohio R.C. 2907.27
§ 666.09  PROSTITUTION.
   (a)   No person shall engage in sexual activity for hire.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of prostitution, a misdemeanor
of the third degree.
(ORC 2907.25)
Statutory reference:
   Offenders with knowledge that they test HIV positive, felony, see Ohio R.C.
2907.25(B)
   Testing offenders for venereal disease and AIDS, see Ohio R.C. 2907.27
§ 666.10  RULES OF EVIDENCE.
   (a)   In any case in which it is necessary to prove that a place is a
brothel, evidence as to the reputation of such place and as to the reputation
of the persons who inhabit or frequent it is admissible on the question of
whether such place is or is not a brothel.
   (b)   In any case in which it is necessary to prove that a person is a
prostitute, evidence as to the reputation of such person is admissible on the
question of whether such person is or is not a prostitute.
   (c)   In any prosecution for a violation of §§
666.07 to
666.09, proof of a prior conviction of the accused of any such offense or
substantially equivalent offense is admissible in support of the charge.
   (d)   The prohibition contained in Ohio R.C. 2317.02(D) against testimony by
a husband or wife concerning communications between them does not apply, and
the accused’s spouse may testify concerning any such communication in any of
the following cases:
      (1)   When the husband or wife is charged with a violation of §
666.07 and the spouse testifying was the prostitute involved in the offense or
the person who used the offender’s premises to engage in sexual activity for
hire;
      (2)   When the husband or wife is charged with a violation of §§
666.08 or
666.09.
(ORC 2907.26)
§ 666.11  DISSEMINATING MATTER HARMFUL TO JUVENILES.
   (a)   No person, with knowledge of its character or content, shall
recklessly do any of following:
      (1)   Directly sell, deliver, furnish, disseminate, provide, exhibit,
rent, or present to a juvenile any material or performance that is obscene or
harmful to juveniles;
      (2)   Offer or agree to sell, deliver, furnish, disseminate, provide,
exhibit, rent, or present to a juvenile, a group of juveniles, a law
enforcement officer posing as a juvenile, or a group of law enforcement
officers posing as juveniles any material or performance that is obscene or
harmful to juveniles;
      (3)   While in the physical proximity of the juvenile or law enforcement
officer posing as a juvenile, allow any juvenile or law enforcement officer
posing as a juvenile to review or peruse any material or view any live
performance that is harmful to juveniles.
   (b)   The following are affirmative defenses to a charge under this section
that involves material or a performance that is harmful to juveniles but not
obscene:
      (1)   The defendant is the parent, guardian, or spouse of the juvenile
involved.
      (2)   The juvenile involved, at the time of the conduct in question, was
accompanied by his or her parent or guardian who, with knowledge of its
character, consented to the material or performance being furnished or
presented to the juvenile.
      (3)   The juvenile exhibited to the defendant or his or her agent or
employee a draft card, driver’s license, birth record, marriage license, or
other official or apparently official document purporting to show that the
juvenile was 18 years of age or over or married, and the person to whom the
document was exhibited did not otherwise have reasonable cause to believe that
the juvenile was under the age of 18 and unmarried.
   (c)   (1)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section,
involving material or a performance that is obscene or harmful to juveniles,
that the material or performance was furnished or presented for a bona fide
medical, scientific, educational, governmental, judicial, or other proper
purpose, by a physician, psychologist, sociologist, scientist, teacher,
librarian, clergy, prosecutor, judge, or other proper person.
      (2)   Except as provided in division (b)(3) of this section, mistake of
age is not a defense to a charge under this section.
   (d)   (1)   A person directly sells, delivers, furnishes, disseminates,
provides, exhibits, rents, or presents or directly offers or agrees to sell,
deliver, furnish, disseminate, provide, exhibit, rent, or present material or a
performance to a juvenile, a group of juveniles, a law enforcement officer
posing as a juvenile, or a group of law enforcement officers posing as
juveniles in violation of this section by means of an electronic method of
remotely transmitting information if the person knows or has reason to believe
that the person receiving the information is a juvenile or the group of persons
receiving the information are juveniles.
      (2)   A person remotely transmitting information by means of a method of
mass distribution does not directly sell, deliver, furnish, disseminate,
provide, exhibit, rent, or present or directly offer or agree to sell, deliver,
furnish, disseminate, provide, exhibit, rent, or present the material or
performance in question to a juvenile, a group of juveniles, a law enforcement
officer posing as a juvenile, or a group of law enforcement officers posing as
juveniles in violation of this section if either of the following applies:
         A.   The person has inadequate information to know or have reason to
believe that a particular recipient of the information or offer is a juvenile.
         B.   The method of mass distribution does not provide the person the
ability to prevent a particular recipient from receiving the information.
   (e)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of disseminating matter
harmful to juveniles.  If the material or performance involved is harmful to
juveniles except as otherwise provided in this division, a violation of this
section is a misdemeanor of the first degree.  If the material or performance
involved is obscene, violation of this section is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.
(ORC 2907.31)
§ 666.12  DISPLAYING MATTER HARMFUL TO JUVENILES.
   (a)   No person who has custody, control, or supervision of a commercial
establishment, with knowledge of the character or content of the material
involved, shall display at the establishment any material that is harmful to
juveniles and that is open to view by juveniles as part of the invited general
public.
   (b)   It is not a violation of division (a) of this section if the material
in question is displayed by placing it behind “blinder racks” or similar
devices that cover at least the lower two-thirds of the material, if the
material in question is wrapped or placed behind the counter, or if the
material in question otherwise is covered or located so that the portion that
is harmful to juveniles is not open to the view of juveniles.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of displaying matter harmful
to juveniles, a misdemeanor of the first degree.  Each day during which the
offender is in violation of this section constitutes a separate offense.
(ORC 2907.311)
§ 666.13  DECEPTION TO OBTAIN MATTER HARMFUL TO JUVENILES.
   (a)   No person, for the purpose of enabling a juvenile to obtain any
material or gain admission to any performance which is harmful to juveniles,
shall do either of the following:
      (1)   Falsely represent that he or she is the parent, guardian, or spouse
of the juvenile.
      (2)   Furnish the juvenile with any identification or document purporting
to show that the juvenile is 18 years of age or over or married.
   (b)   No juvenile, for the purpose of obtaining any material or gaining
admission to any performance which is harmful to juveniles, shall do either of
the following:
      (1)   Falsely represent that he or she is 18 years of age or over or
married.
      (2)   Exhibit any identification or document purporting to show that he
or she is 18 years of age or over or married.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of deception to obtain matter
harmful to juveniles, a misdemeanor of the second degree.  A juvenile who
violates division (b) of this section shall be adjudged an unruly child, with
the disposition of the case as may be appropriate under Ohio R.C. Chapter 2151.
(ORC 2907.33)
§ 666.14  PRESUMPTIONS; NOTICE.
   (a)   An owner or manager, or agent or employee of an owner or manager, of a
bookstore, newsstand, theater, or other commercial establishment engaged in
selling material or exhibiting performances, who, in the course of business
does any of the acts prohibited by §
666.11 is presumed to have knowledge of the character of the material or
performance involved if the owner, manager, or agent or employee of the owner
or manager has actual notice of the nature of such material or performance,
whether or not the owner, manager, or agent or employee of the owner or manager
has precise knowledge of its contents.
   (b)   Without limitation on the manner in which such notice may be given,
actual notice of the character of material or a performance may be given in
writing by the chief legal officer of the municipality.  Such notice,
regardless of the manner in which it is given, shall identify the sender,
identify the material or performance involved, state whether it is obscene or
harmful to juveniles, and bear the date of such notice.
   (c)   Section
666.11 does not apply to a motion picture operator or projectionist acting
within the scope of employment as an employee of the owner or manager of the
theater or other place for the showing of motion pictures to the general
public, and having no managerial responsibility or financial interest in the
operator’s or projectionist’s place of employment, other than wages.
   (d)   (1)   The provisions of §§
666.11,
666.12 and
666.15(a) do not apply to a person solely because the person provided access or
connection to or from an electronic method of remotely transferring information
not under that person’s control, including having provided capabilities that
are incidental to providing access or connection to or from the electronic
method of remotely transferring the information, and that do not include the
creation of the content of the material that is the subject of the access or
connection.
      (2)   Division (d)(1) of this section does not apply to a person who
conspires with an entity actively involved in the creation or knowing
distribution of material in violation of §§
666.11,
666.12 or
666.15 or who knowingly advertises the availability of material of that nature.
      (3)   Division (d)(1) of this section does not apply to a person who
provides access or connection to an electronic method of remotely transferring
information that is engaged in the violation of §§
666.11,
666.12 or
666.15 and that contain content that person has selected and introduced into
the electronic method of remotely transferring information or content over
which that person exercises editorial control.
   (e)   An employer is not guilty of a violation of §§
666.11,
666.12 or
666.15 based on the actions of an employee or agent of the employer unless the
employee’s or agent’s conduct is within the scope of the employee’s or agent’s
employment or agency, and the employer does either of the following:
      (1)   With knowledge of the employee’s or agent’s conduct, the employer
authorizes or ratifies the conduct.
      (2)   The employer recklessly disregards the employee’s or agent’s
conduct.
   (f)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under §§
666.11 or
666.12 as the section applies to an image transmitted through the internet or
other electronic method of remotely transmitting information that the person
charged with violating the section has taken, in good faith, reasonable,
effective, and appropriate actions under the circumstances to restrict or
prevent access by juveniles to material that is harmful to juveniles, including
any method that is feasible under available technology.
(ORC 2907.35)
§ 666.15  DECLARATORY JUDGMENT.
   (a)   Without limitation on the persons otherwise entitled to bring an
action for a declaratory judgment pursuant to Ohio R.C. Chapter 2721, involving
the same issue, the following persons have standing to bring a declaratory
judgment action to determine whether particular materials or performances are
obscene or harmful to juveniles:
      (1)   The chief legal officer of the municipality if and when there is
reasonable cause to believe that Ohio R.C. 2907.31 or Ohio R.C. 2907.32, or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, is being or is about to be
violated;
      (2)   Any person who, pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2907.35(B) or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, has received notice in writing from the chief
legal officer stating that particular materials or performances are obscene or
harmful to juveniles.
   (b)   Any party to an action for a declaratory judgment pursuant to division
(a) of this section is entitled, upon the party’s request, to trial on the
merits within five days after joinder of the issues, and the court shall render
judgment within five days after trial is concluded.
   (c)   An action for a declaratory judgement pursuant to division (a) of this
section shall not be brought during the pendency of any civil action or
criminal prosecution when the character of the particular materials or
performances involved is at issue in the pending case, and either of the
following applies:
      (1)   Either of the parties to the action for a declaratory judgment is a
party to the pending case;
      (2)   A judgment in the pending case will necessarily constitute res
judicata as to the character of the materials or performances involved.
   (d)   A civil action or criminal prosecution in which the character of
particular materials or performances is at issue, brought during the pendency
of an action for a declaratory judgment involving the same issue, shall be
stayed during the pendency of the action for a declaratory judgment.
   (e)   The fact that a violation of Ohio R.C. 2907.31 or Ohio R.C. 2907.32,
or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, occurs prior to a judicial
determination of the character of the material or performance involved in the
violation does not relieve the offender of criminal liability for the
violation, even though prosecution may be stayed pending the judicial
determination.
(ORC 2907.36)
§ 666.16  INJUNCTION; ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE.
   (a)   Where it appears that Ohio R.C. 2907.31 or Ohio R.C. 2907.32, or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, is being or is about to be
violated, the chief legal officer of the municipality may bring an action to
enjoin the violation.  The defendant, upon his or her request, is entitled to
trial on the merits within five days after the joinder of the issues, and the
court shall render judgment within five days after the trial is concluded.
   (b)   Premises used or occupied for repeated violations of Ohio R.C. 2907.31
or Ohio R.C. 2907.32, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance,
constitute a nuisance subject to abatement pursuant to Ohio R.C. Chapter 3767.
(ORC 2907.37)
§ 666.17  UNLAWFUL OPERATION OF VIEWING BOOTHS DEPICTING SEXUAL CONDUCT.
   (a)   As used in this section:
      (1)   “Commercial establishment” means an entity that is open to the
public and to which either of the following applies:
         A.   It has a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade
of the sale, rental, or viewing of visual materials or performances depicting
sexual conduct.
         B.   It has as a principal business purpose the sale, rental, or
viewing of visual materials or performances depicting sexual conduct.
      (2)   “Visual materials or performances” means films, videos, CD-ROM
discs, streaming video, or other motion pictures.
   (b)   No person who has custody, control, or supervision of a commercial
establishment, with knowledge of the character of the visual material or
performance involved, shall knowingly permit the use of, or offer the use of,
viewing booths, stalls, or partitioned portions of a room located in the
commercial establishment for the purpose of viewing visual materials or
performances depicting sexual conduct unless both of the following apply:
      (1)   The inside of each booth, stall, or partitioned room is visible
from, and at least one side of each booth, stall, or partitioned room is open
to, a continuous and contiguous main aisle or hallway that is open to the
public areas of the commercial establishment and is not obscured by any
curtain, door, or other covering or enclosure.
      (2)   No booth, stall, or partitioned room is designed, constructed,
pandered, or allowed to be used for the purpose of encouraging or facilitating
nudity or sexual activity on the part of or between patrons or members of the
public, and no booth, stall, or partitioned room has any aperture, hole, or
opening for the purpose of encouraging or facilitating nudity or sexual
activity.
   (c)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section that
either of the following applies to the involved visual materials or
performances:
      (1)   The visual materials or performances depicting sexual conduct are
disseminated or presented for a bona fide medical, scientific, educational,
religious, governmental, judicial, or other proper purpose and by or to a
physician, psychologist, sociologist, scientist, teacher, person pursuing bona
fide studies or research, librarian, member of the clergy, prosecutor, judge,
or other person having a proper interest in the visual materials or
performances.
      (2)   The visual materials or performances depicting sexual conduct,
taken as a whole, would be found by a reasonable person to have serious
literary, artistic, political, or scientific value or are presented or
disseminated in good faith for a serious literary, artistic, political, or
scientific purpose and are not pandered for their prurient appeal.
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of permitting unlawful
operation of viewing booths depicting sexual conduct, a misdemeanor of the
first degree.
(ORC 2907.38)
§ 666.18  JUVENILES ON THE PREMISES OF ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS
PROHIBITED.
   (a)   As used in this section:
      (1)   “Adult arcade” means any place to which the public is permitted or
invited in which coin-operated, slug-operated, or electronically, electrically,
or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, or
other image-producing devices are regularly maintained to show images to five
or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and in which the images so
displayed are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis upon matter
exhibiting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas.
      (2)   “Adult bookstore,” “adult novelty store,” or “adult video store.”
         A.   Means a commercial establishment that, for any form of
consideration, has as a significant or substantial portion of its stock-in-
trade in, derives a significant or substantial portion of its revenues from,
devotes a significant or substantial portion of its interior business or
advertising to, or maintains a substantial section of its sales or display
space for the sale or rental of any of the following:
            1.   Books, magazines, periodicals, or other printed matter, or
photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, compact discs, slides, or
other visual representations, that are characterized by their emphasis upon the
exhibition or description of specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas;
            2.   Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia that are designed for
use or marketed primarily for stimulation of human genital organs or for
sadomasochistic use or abuse of self or others.
         B.   Includes a commercial establishment as defined in Ohio R.C.
2907.38. An establishment may have other principal business purposes that do
not involve the offering for sale, rental, or viewing of materials exhibiting
or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas and
still be categorized as an adult bookstore, adult novelty store, or adult video
store. The existence of other principal business purposes does not exempt an
establishment from being categorized as an adult bookstore, adult novelty
store, or adult video store so long as one of its principal business purposes
is offering for sale or rental, for some form of consideration, such materials
that exhibit or describe specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas.
      (3)   “Adult cabaret” means a nightclub, bar, juice bar, restaurant,
bottle club, or similar commercial establishment, whether or not alcoholic
beverages are served, that regularly features any of the following:
         A.   Persons who appear in a state of nudity or seminudity;
         B.   Live performances that are characterized by the exposure of
specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities;
         C.   Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other
photographic reproductions that are distinguished or characterized by their
emphasis upon the exhibition or description of specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas.
      (4)   “Adult entertainment” means the sale, rental, or exhibition, for
any form of consideration, of books, films, video cassettes, magazines,
periodicals, or live performances that are characterized by an emphasis on the
exposure or display of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activity.
      (5)   “Adult entertainment establishment” means an adult arcade, adult
bookstore, adult novelty store, adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motion
picture theater, adult theater, nude or seminude model studio, or sexual
encounter establishment. An establishment in which a medical practitioner,
psychologist, psychiatrist, or similar professional person licensed by the
state engages in medically approved and recognized therapy, including, but not
limited to, massage therapy, as regulated pursuant to Ohio R.C. 4731.15, is not
an “adult entertainment establishment.”
      (6)   “Adult motion picture theater” means a commercial establishment
where films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or similar photographic
reproductions that are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis upon
the exhibition or description of specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas are regularly shown for any form of consideration.
      (7)   “Adult theater” means a theater, concert hall, auditorium, or
similar commercial establishment that, for any form of consideration, regularly
features persons who appear in a state of nudity or seminudity or live
performances that are characterized by their emphasis upon the exposure of
specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities.
      (8)   “Distinguished or characterized by their emphasis upon” means the
dominant or principal character and theme of the object described by this
phrase. For instance, when the phrase refers to films “that are distinguished
or characterized by their emphasis upon the exhibition or description of
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas,” the films so
described are those whose dominant or principal character and theme are the
exhibition or description of specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas.
      (9)   “Nude or seminude model studio” means any place where a person, who
regularly appears in a state of nudity or seminudity, is provided for money or
any other form of consideration to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted,
sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by other persons. A modeling
class or studio is not a nude or seminude model studio and is not subject to
this chapter if it is operated in any of the following ways:
         A.   By a college or university supported entirely or partly by
taxation;
         B.   By a private college or university that maintains and operates
educational programs, the credits for which are transferable to a college or
university supported entirely or partly by taxation;
         C.   In a structure that has no sign visible from the exterior of the
structure and no other advertising indicating that a person appearing in a
state of nudity or seminudity is available for viewing, if in order to
participate in a class in the structure, a student must enroll at least three
days in advance of the class and if not more than one nude or seminude model is
on the premises at any one time.
      (10)   “Nudity,” “nude,” or “state of nudity” means the showing of the
human male or female genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, anal cleft, or cleavage
with less than a fully opaque covering; or the showing of the female breasts
with less than a fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple.
      (11)   “Regularly features” or “regularly shown” means a consistent or
substantial course of conduct, such that the films or performances exhibited
constitute a substantial portion of the films or performances offered as a part
of the ongoing business of the adult entertainment establishment.
      (12)   “Seminude” or “state of seminudity” means a state of dress in
which opaque clothing covers not more than the genitals, pubic region, and
nipple of the female breast, as well as portions of the body covered by
supporting straps or devices.
      (13)   “Sexual encounter establishment.”
         A.   Means a business or commercial establishment that, as one of its
principal business purposes, offers for any form of consideration a place where
either of the following occur:
            1.   Two or more persons may congregate, associate, or consort for
the purpose of engaging in specified sexual activities.
            2.   Two or more persons appear nude or seminude for the purpose of
displaying their nude or seminude bodies for their receipt of consideration or
compensation in any type or form.
         B.   An establishment where a medical practitioner, psychologist,
psychiatrist, or similar professional person licensed by the state engages in
medically approved and recognized therapy, including, but not limited to,
massage therapy, as regulated pursuant to Ohio R.C. 4731.15, is not a “sexual
encounter establishment.”
      (14)   “Specified anatomical areas” means the cleft of the buttocks,
anus, male or female genitals, or the female breast.
      (15)   “Specified sexual activity” means any of the following:
         A.   Sex acts, normal or perverted, or actual or simulated, including
intercourse, oral copulation, masturbation, or sodomy;
         B.   Excretory functions as a part of or in connection with any of the
activities described in division A. of this definition.
   (b)   No person knowingly shall allow an individual, including, but not
limited to, a patron, customer, or employee, who is under 18 years of age on
the premises of an adult entertainment establishment.
   (c)   No individual who is under 18 years of age knowingly shall show or
give false information concerning the individual’s name or age, or other false
identification, for the purpose of gaining entrance to an adult entertainment
establishment.
   (d)   A person shall not be found guilty of a violation of division (b) of
this section if the person raises as an affirmative defense and if the jury or,
in a nonjury trial, the court finds the person has established by a
preponderance of the evidence, all of the following:
      (1)   The individual gaining entrance to the adult entertainment
establishment exhibited to an operator, employee, agent, or independent
contractor of the adult entertainment establishment a driver’s or commercial
driver’s license or an identification card issued under Ohio R.C. 4507.50 and
4507.52 showing that the individual was then at least 18 years of age.
      (2)   The operator, employee, agent, or independent contractor made a
bona fide effort to ascertain the true age of the individual gaining entrance
to the adult entertainment establishment by checking the identification
presented, at the time of entrance, to ascertain that the description on the
identification compared with the appearance of the individual and that the
identification had not been altered in any way.
      (3)   The operator, employee, agent, or independent contractor had reason
to believe that the individual gaining entrance to the adult entertainment
establishment was at least 18 years of age.
   (e)   In any criminal action in which the affirmative defense described in
division (d) of this section is raised, the Registrar of Motor Vehicles or the
Deputy Registrar who issued a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or an
identification card under Ohio R.C. 4507.50 and 4507.52 shall be permitted to
submit certified copies of the records, in the Registrar’s or Deputy
Registrar’s possession, of the issuance of the license or identification card
in question, in lieu of the testimony of the personnel of the Bureau of Motor
Vehicles in the action.
   (f)   (1)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of
permitting a juvenile on the premises of an adult entertainment establishment,
a misdemeanor of the first degree. Each day a person violates this division
constitutes a separate offense.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (c) of this section is guilty of use by a
juvenile of false information to enter an adult entertainment establishment, a
delinquent act that would be a misdemeanor of the fourth degree if committed by
an adult.
(ORC 2907.39)
§ 666.19  SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES; ILLEGAL OPERATION AND ACTIVITY.
   (a)   As used in this section:
      (1)   “Adult bookstore” or “adult video store” means a commercial
establishment that has as a significant or substantial portion of its stock in
trade or inventory in, derives a significant or substantial portion of its
revenues from, devotes a significant or substantial portion of its interior
business or advertising to, or maintains a substantial section of its sales or
display space for the sale or rental, for any form of consideration, of books,
magazines, periodicals, or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion
pictures, video cassettes, compact discs, slides, or other visual
representations, that are characterized by their emphasis upon the exhibition
or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
      (2)   “Adult cabaret” Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2907.39.
      (3)   “Adult motion picture theater” means a commercial establishment
where films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or similar photographic
reproductions that are characterized by their emphasis upon the display of
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas are regularly shown
to more than five individuals for any form of consideration.
      (4)   “Characterized by” means describing the essential character or
quality of an item.
      (5)   “Employee” means any individual who performs any service on the
premises of a sexually oriented business on a full-time, part-time, or contract
basis, regardless of whether the individual is denominated an employee,
independent contractor, agent, or otherwise, but does not include an individual
exclusively on the premises for repair or maintenance of the premises or for
the delivery of goods to the premises.
      (6)   “Nudity,” “nude,” or “state of nudity” has the same meaning as in
Ohio R.C. 2907.39.
      (7)   “Operator” means any individual on the premises of a sexually
oriented business who causes the business to function or who puts or keeps in
operation the business or who is authorized to manage the business or exercise
overall operational control of the business premises.
      (8)   “Patron” means any individual on the premises of a sexually
oriented business except for any of the following:
         A.   An operator or an employee of the sexually oriented business;
         B.   An individual who is on the premises exclusively for repair or
maintenance of the premises or for the delivery of goods to the premises;
         C.   A public employee or a volunteer firefighter emergency medical
services worker acting within the scope of the public employee’s or volunteer’s
duties as a public employee or volunteer.
      (9)   “Premises” means the real property on which the sexually oriented
business is located and all appurtenances to the real property, including, but
not limited, to the sexually oriented business, the grounds, private walkways,
and parking lots or parking garages adjacent to the real property under the
ownership, control, or supervision of the owner or operator of the sexually
oriented business.
      (10)   “Regularly” means consistently or repeatedly.
      (11)   “Seminude” or “state of seminudity” has the same meaning as in
Ohio R.C. 2907.39.
      (12)   “Sexual device” means any three-dimensional object designed and
marketed for stimulation of the male or female human genitals or anus or female
breasts or for sadomasochistic use or abuse of oneself or others, including,
but not limited to, dildos, vibrators, penis pumps, and physical
representations of the human genital organs, but not including devices
primarily intended for protection against sexually transmitted diseases or for
preventing pregnancy.
      (13)   “Sexual device shop” means a commercial establishment that
regularly features sexual devices, but not including any pharmacy, drug store,
medical clinic, or establishment primarily dedicated to providing medical or
healthcare products or services, and not including any commercial establishment
that does not restrict access to its premises by reason of age.
      (14)   “Sexual encounter center” means a business or commercial
enterprise that, as one of its principal business purposes, purports to offer
for any form of consideration physical contact in the form of wrestling or
tumbling between individuals of the opposite sex when one or more of the
individuals is nude or seminude.
      (15)   “Sexually oriented business” means an adult bookstore, adult video
store, adult cabaret, adult motion picture theater, sexual device shop, or
sexual encounter center, but does not include a business solely by reason of
its showing, selling, or renting materials that may depict sex.
      (16)   “Specified anatomical areas” includes human genitals, pubic
region, and buttocks and the human female breast below a point immediately
above the top of the areola.
      (17)   “Specified sexual activity” means sexual intercourse, oral
copulation, masturbation, or sodomy, or excretory functions as a part of or in
connection with any of these activities.
   (b)   No sexually oriented business shall be or remain open for business
between 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. on any day, except that a sexually
oriented business that holds a liquor permit pursuant to Ohio R.C. Chapter 4303
may remain open until the hour specified in that permit if it does not conduct,
offer, or allow sexually oriented entertainment activity in which the
performers appear nude.
   (c)   (1)   No patron who is not a member of the employee’s immediate family
shall knowingly touch any employee while that employee is nude or seminude or
touch the clothing of any employee while that employee is nude or seminude.
      (2)   No employee who regularly appears nude or seminude on the premises
of a sexually oriented business, while on the premises of that sexually
oriented business and while nude or seminude, shall knowingly touch a patron
who is not a member of the employee’s immediate family or another employee who
is not a member of the employee’s immediate family or the clothing of a patron
who is not a member of the employee’s immediate family or another employee who
is not a member of the employee’s immediate family or allow a patron who is not
a member of the employee’s immediate family or another employee who is not a
member of the employee’s immediate family to touch the employee or the clothing
of the employee.
   (d)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of illegally
operating a sexually oriented business, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
   (e)   Whoever violates division (c) of this section is guilty of illegal
sexually oriented activity in a sexually oriented business. If the offender
touches a specified anatomical area of the patron or employee, or the clothing
covering a specified anatomical area, a violation of division (c) of this
section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender does not touch a
specified anatomical area of the patron or employee, or the clothing covering a
specified anatomical area, a violation of division (c) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(ORC 2907.40)
Statutory reference:
   State indemnification for certain municipal liability stemming from local
adult business regulations, see Ohio R.C. 715.55
§ 666.20  UNLAWFUL ADVERTISING OF MASSAGE.
   (a)   No person, by means of a statement, solicitation, or offer in a print
or electronic publication, sign, placard, storefront display, or other medium,
shall advertise massage, relaxation massage, any other massage technique or
method, or any related service, with the suggestion or promise of sexual
activity.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of unlawful advertising of
massage, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
   (c)   Nothing in this section prevents the municipality from enacting any
regulation of the advertising of massage further than and in addition to the
provisions of divisions (a) and (b) of this section.
   (d)   As used in this section, “sexual activity” has the same meaning as in
R.C. § 2907.01.
(R.C. § 2927.17)
§ 666.21  NONCONSENSUAL DISSEMINATION OF PRIVATE SEXUAL IMAGES.
   (a)   As used in this section:
      (1)   “Cable service provider.” Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C.
1332.01.
      (2)   “Direct-to-home satellite service.” Has the meaning defined in 47
U.S.C. § 303, as amended.
      (3)   “Disseminate.” Means to post, distribute, or publish on a computer
device, computer network, web site, or other electronic device or medium of
communication.
      (4)   “Image.” Means a photograph, film, videotape, digital recording, or
other depiction or portrayal of a person.
      (5)   “Interactive computer service.” Has the meaning defined in the
“Telecommunications Act of 1996”, 47 U.S.C. § 230, as amended.
      (6)   “Internet provider.” Means a provider of internet service,
including all of the following:
         A.   Broadband service, however defined or classified by the Federal
Communications Commission;
         B.   Information service or telecommunications service, both as
defined in the “Telecommunications Act of 1996”, 47 U.S.C. § 153, as amended;
         C.   Internet protocol-enabled services, as defined in Ohio R.C.
4927.01.
      (7)   “Mobile service.” Has the meaning defined in 47 U.S.C. § 153, as
amended.
      (8)   “Sexual act.” Means any of the following:
         A.   Sexual activity;
         B.   Masturbation;
         C.   An act involving a bodily substance that is performed for the
purpose of sexual arousal or gratification;
         D.   Sado-masochistic abuse.
      (9)   “Telecommunications carrier.” Has the meaning defined in 47 U.S.C.
§ 153, as amended.
      (10)   “Video service provider.” Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C.
1332.21.
   (b)   No person shall knowingly disseminate an image of another person if
all of the following apply:
      (1)   The person in the image is 18 years of age or older.
      (2)   The person in the image can be identified from the image itself or
from information displayed in connection with the image and the offender
supplied the identifying information.
      (3)   The person in the image is in a state of nudity or is engaged in a
sexual act.
      (4)   The image is disseminated without consent from the person in the
image.
      (5)   The image is disseminated with intent to harm the person in the
image.
   (c)   This section does not prohibit the dissemination of an image if any of
the following apply:
      (1)   The image is disseminated for the purpose of a criminal
investigation that is otherwise lawful.
      (2)   The image is disseminated for the purpose of, or in connection
with, the reporting of unlawful conduct.
      (3)   The image is part of a news report or commentary or an artistic or
expressive work, such as a performance, work of art, literary work, theatrical
work, musical work, motion picture, film, or audiovisual work.
      (4)   The image is disseminated by a law enforcement officer, or a
corrections officer or guard in a detention facility, acting within the scope
of the person’s official duties.
      (5)   The image is disseminated for another lawful public purpose.
      (6)   The person in the image is knowingly and willingly in a state of
nudity or engaged in a sexual act and is knowingly and willingly in a location
in which the person does not have a reasonable expectation of privacy.
      (7)   The image is disseminated for the purpose of medical treatment or
examination.
   (d)   The following entities are not liable for a violation of this section
solely as a result of an image or other information provided by another person:
      (1)   A provider of interactive computer service;
      (2)   A mobile service;
      (3)   A telecommunications carrier;
      (4)   An internet provider;
      (5)   A cable service provider;
      (6)   A direct-to-home satellite service;
      (7)   A video service provider.
   (e)   Any conduct that is a violation of this section and any other section
of this Code or the Ohio Revised Code may be prosecuted under this section, the
other section, or both sections.
   (f)   (1)   A.   Except as otherwise provided in division (f)(1)B., (f)
(1)C., or (f)(1)D. of this section, whoever violates this section is guilty of
nonconsensual dissemination of private sexual images, a misdemeanor of the
third degree.
         B.   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of this section or any substantially equivalent state or
local law, nonconsensual dissemination of private sexual images is a
misdemeanor of the second degree.
         C.   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to two or more violations of this section or any substantially
equivalent state or local law, nonconsensual dissemination of private sexual
images is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
         D.   If the offender is under 18 years of age and the person in the
image is not more than five years older than the offender, the offender shall
not be prosecuted under this section.
      (2)   In addition to any other penalty or disposition authorized or
required by law, the court may order any person who is convicted of a violation
of this section or who is adjudicated delinquent by reason of a violation of
this section to criminally forfeit all of the following property to the state
under Ohio R.C. Chapter 2981:
         A.   Any profits or proceeds and any property the person has acquired
or maintained in violation of this section that the sentencing court determines
to have been acquired or maintained as a result of the violation;
         B.   Any interest in, securities of, claim against, or property or
contractual right of any kind affording a source of influence over any
enterprise that the person has established, operated, controlled, or conducted
in violation of this section that the sentencing court determines to have been
acquired or maintained as a result of the violation.
   (g)   A victim of a violation of this section may commence a civil cause of
action against the offender, as described in Ohio R.C. 2307.66.
(ORC 2917.211)
§ 666.99  SENTENCING FOR SEXUALLY ORIENTED OFFENSES; SEXUAL PREDATORS;
REGISTRATION.
   (a)   If an offender is being sentenced for a sexually oriented offense or
child-victim oriented offense that is a misdemeanor committed on or after
January 1, 1997, and the offender is a tier III sex offender/child-victim
offender relative to the offense or the offense is any offense listed in Ohio
R.C. 2901.07(D)(1) to (D)(3), the judge shall include in the offender’s
sentence a statement that the offender is a tier III sex offender/child-victim
offender, shall comply with the requirements of Ohio R.C. 2950.03, and shall
require the offender to submit to a DNA specimen collection procedure pursuant
to Ohio R.C. 2901.07.
   (b)   If an offender is being sentenced for a sexually oriented offense or a
child-victim oriented offense that is a misdemeanor committed on or after
January 1, 1997, the judge shall include in the sentence a summary of the
offender’s duties imposed under Ohio R.C. 2950.04, 2950.041, 2950.05, and
2950.06, and the duration of the duties. The judge shall inform the offender,
at the time of sentencing, of those duties and of their duration. If required
under Ohio R.C. 2950.03(A)(2), the judge shall perform the duties specified in
that section or, if required under Ohio R.C. 2950.03(A)(6), the judge shall
perform the duties specified in that division.
(ORC 2929.23)
CHAPTER 672:  THEFT AND FRAUD
Section
672.01   Theft.
672.02   Receiving stolen property.
672.03   Determining property value in theft offense.
672.04   Degree of offense when certain property involved.
672.045   Evidence of theft of rented property.
672.05   Tampering with coin machines.
672.06   Prosecutions for theft of utilities.
672.07   Misconduct involving a public transportation system.
672.08   Unauthorized use of a vehicle; vehicle trespass.
672.09   Passing bad checks.
672.10   Misuse of credit cards.
672.11   Recording credit card, telephone or Social Security numbers.
672.12   Forging or selling forged identification cards.
672.13   Making or using slugs.
672.14   Prima facie evidence of purpose to defraud.
672.15   Tampering with records.
672.16   Securing writings by deception.
672.17   Personating an officer.
672.18   Defrauding creditors.
672.19   Criminal simulation.
672.20   Insurance fraud.
672.21   Workers’ compensation fraud.
672.22   Medicaid fraud.
672.23   Diminishing or interfering with forfeitable property.
672.24   Motion picture piracy.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Disposition of unclaimed or forfeited property held by Police Department -
see GEN. OFF.
608.16
   Detention of shoplifters and those committing motion picture piracy;
protection of institutional property - see GEN. OFF.
608.17
   Failure to perform viability testing - see GEN. OFF.
636.08
   Definitions relating to theft and fraud - see GEN. OFF.
642.01
   Possession of municipal property - see GEN. OFF.
642.02
   Unauthorized use of property - see GEN. OFF.
642.03
   Possessing criminal tools - see GEN. OFF.
678.12
§ 672.01  THEFT.
   (a)   No person, with purpose to deprive the owner of property or services,
shall knowingly obtain or exert control over either the property or services in
any of the following ways:
      (1)   Without the consent of the owner or person authorized to give
consent;
      (2)   Beyond the scope of the express or implied consent of the owner or
person authorized to give consent;
      (3)   By deception;
      (4)   By threat;
      (5)   By intimidation.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of theft.  Except as otherwise
provided in this division, a violation of this section is petty theft, a
misdemeanor of the first degree.  If any of the following criteria are met,
then a violation of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law:
      (1)   If the value of the property or services is one thousand dollars
($1,000) or more;
      (2)   If the property stolen is any of the property listed in Ohio R.C.
2913.71;
      (3)   If the victim of the offense is an elderly person, disabled adult,
active duty service member, or spouse of an active duty service member;
      (4)   If the property stolen is a firearm or dangerous ordnance;
      (5)   If the property stolen is a motor vehicle;
      (6)   If the property stolen is any dangerous drug, or if the offender
previously has been convicted of a felony drug abuse offense;
      (7)   If the property stolen is a police dog or horse or an assistance
dog and the offender knows or should know that the property stolen is a police
dog or horse or an assistance dog;
      (8)   If the property stolen is anhydrous ammonia; or
      (9)   If the property stolen is a special purchase article as defined in
Ohio R.C. 4737.04 or is a bulk merchandise container as defined in Ohio R.C.
4737.012.
   (c)   In addition to the penalties described in division (b) of this
section, if the offender committed the violation by causing a motor vehicle to
leave the premises of an establishment at which gasoline is offered for retail
sale without the offender making full payment for gasoline that was dispensed
into the fuel tank of the motor vehicle or into another container, the court
may do one of the following:
      (1)   Unless division (c)(2) of this section applies, suspend for not
more than six months the offender’s driver’s license, probationary driver’s
license, commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction permit, or
nonresident operating privilege;
      (2)   If the offender’s driver’s license, probationary driver’s license,
commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction permit, or nonresident
operating privilege has previously been suspended pursuant to division (c)(1)
of this section, or any other substantially equivalent state or local law,
impose a class seven suspension of the offender’s license, permit, or privilege
from the range specified in Ohio R.C. 4510.02(A)(7), provided that the
suspension shall be at least six months;
      (3)   The court, in lieu of suspending the offender’s driver’s or
commercial driver’s license, probationary driver’s license, temporary
instruction permit, or nonresident operating privilege pursuant to division (c)
(1) or (c)(2) of this section, instead may require the offender to perform
community service for a number of hours determined by the court.
   (d)   In addition to the penalties described in division (b) of this
section, if the offender committed the violation by stealing rented property or
rental services, the court may order that the offender make restitution
pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2929.18 or Ohio R.C. 2929.28. Restitution may include,
but is not limited to, the cost of repairing or replacing the stolen property,
or the cost of repairing the stolen property and any loss of revenue resulting
from deprivation of the property due to theft of rental services that is less
than or equal to the actual value of the property at the time it was rented.
Evidence of intent to commit theft of rented property or rental services shall
be determined pursuant to the provisions of Ohio R.C. 2913.72.
   (e)   The sentencing court that suspends an offender’s license, permit, or
nonresident operating privilege under division (c) of this section may grant
the offender limited driving privileges during the period of the suspension in
accordance with Ohio R.C. Chapter 4510.
(ORC 2913.02)
Statutory reference:
   Felony theft provisions, see Ohio R.C. 2913.02(B)
§ 672.02  RECEIVING STOLEN PROPERTY.
   (a)   No person shall receive, retain, or dispose of property of another
knowing or having reasonable cause to believe that the property has been
obtained through commission of a theft offense.
   (b)   It is not a defense to a charge of receiving stolen property in
violation of this section that the property was obtained by means other than
through the commission of a theft offense if the property was explicitly
represented to the accused person as being obtained through the commission of a
theft offense.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of receiving stolen property. 
Except as otherwise provided in this division, receiving stolen property is a
misdemeanor of the first degree.  If any of the following criteria are met,
then a violation of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law:
      (1)   The value of the property involved is one thousand dollars ($1,000)
or more;
      (2)   The property involved is any of the property listed in Ohio R.C.
2913.71;
      (3)   The property involved is a firearm or dangerous ordnance, as
defined in Ohio R.C. 2923.11;
      (4)   The property involved is a motor vehicle as defined in Ohio R.C.
4501.01;
      (5)   The property involved is any dangerous drug, as defined in Ohio
R.C. 4729.01; or
      (6)   The property involved in violation of this section is a special
purchase article as defined in Ohio R.C. 4737.04 or a bulk merchandise
container as defined in Ohio R.C. 4737.012.
(ORC 2913.51)
§ 672.03  DETERMINING PROPERTY VALUE IN THEFT OFFENSE.
   (a)   If more than one item of property or services is involved in a theft
offense or in a violation of Ohio R.C. 1716.14(A) involving a victim who is an
elderly person or disabled adult, or any substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, the value of the property or services involved for the purpose of
determining the value as required by Ohio R.C. 2913.61(A) is the aggregate
value of all property or services involved in the offense.
   (b)   (1)   When a series of offenses under Ohio R.C. 2913.02, or a series
of violations of, attempts to commit a violation of, conspiracies to violate,
or complicity in violations of Ohio R.C. 1716.14(A), Ohio R.C. 2913.02,
2913.03, or 2913.04, Ohio R.C. 2913.21(B)(1) or (B)(2), or Ohio R.C. 2913.31 or
2913.43 involving a victim who is an elderly person or disabled adult, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance to any of these offenses, is
committed by the offender in the offender’s same employment, capacity, or
relationship to another, all of those offenses shall be tried as a single
offense.  When a series of offenses under R.C. § 2913.02, or a series of
violations of, attempts to commit a violation of, conspiracies to violate, or
complicity in violations of R.C. § 2913.02 or 2913.43 involving a victim who is
an active duty service member or spouse of an active duty service member, or
any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance to any of these offenses, is
committed by the offender in the offender’s same employment, capacity, or
relationship to another, all of those offenses shall be tried as a single
offense. The value of the property or services involved in the series of
offenses for the purpose of determining the value as required by Ohio R.C.
2913.61(A) is the aggregate value of all property and services involved in all
offenses in the series.
      (2)   If an offender commits a series of offenses under Ohio R.C. 2913.02
that involves a common course of conduct to defraud multiple victims, all of
the offenses may be tried as a single offense.  If an offender is being tried
for the commission of a series of violations of, attempts to commit a violation
of, conspiracies to violate, or complicity in violations of Ohio R.C. 1716.14
(A), Ohio R.C. 2913.02, 2913.03, or 2913.04, Ohio R.C. 2913.21(B)(1) or (B)(2),
or Ohio R.C. 2913.31 or 2913.43, whether committed against one victim or more
than one victim, involving a victim who is an elderly person or disabled adult,
or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance to any of these offenses, 
pursuant to a scheme or course of conduct, all of those offenses may be tried
as a single offense. If an offender is being tried for the commission of a
series of violations of, attempts to commit a violation of, conspiracies to
violate, or complicity in violations of R.C. § 2913.02 or 2913.43, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance to any of these offenses, whether
committed against one victim or more than one victim, involving a victim who is
an active duty service member or spouse of an active duty service member
pursuant to a scheme or course of conduct, all of those offenses may be tried
as a single offense. If the offenses are tried as a single offense, the value
of the property or services involved for the purpose of determining the value
as required by Ohio R.C. 2913.61(A) is the aggregate value of all property and
services involved in all of the offenses in the course of conduct.
      (3)   When a series of two or more offenses under Ohio R.C. 2913.40,
2913.48, or 2921.41 is committed by the offender in the offender’s same
employment, capacity, or relationship to another, all of those offenses may be
tried as a single offense.  If the offenses are tried as a single offense, the
value of the property or services involved for the purpose of determining the
value as required by Ohio R.C. 2913.61(A) is the aggregate value of all
property and services involved in all of the offenses in the series of two or
more offenses.
      (4)   In prosecuting a single offense under division (b)(1), (b)(2) or
(b)(3) of this section, it is not necessary to separately allege and prove each
offense in the series.  Rather, it is sufficient to allege and prove that the
offender, within a given span of time, committed one or more theft offenses or
violations of Ohio R.C. 2913.40, 2913.48, or 2921.41 in the offender’s same
employment, capacity, or relationship to another as described in division (b)
(1) or (b)(3) of this section, or committed one or more theft offenses that
involve a common course of conduct to defraud multiple victims or a scheme or
course of conduct as described in division (b)(2) of this section.  While it is
not necessary to separately allege and prove each offense in the series in
order to prosecute a single offense under division (b)(1), (b)(2), or (b)(3) of
this section, it remains necessary in prosecuting them as a single offense to
prove the aggregate value of the property or services in order to meet the
requisite statutory offense level sought by the prosecution.
   (c)   The following criteria shall be used in determining the value of
property or services involved in a theft offense:
      (1)   The value of an heirloom, memento, collector’s item, antique,
museum piece, manuscript, document, record, or other thing that has intrinsic
worth to its owner and that either is irreplaceable or is replaceable only on
the expenditure of substantial time, effort, or money, is the amount which
would compensate the owner for its loss.
      (2)   The value of personal effects and household goods, and of
materials, supplies, equipment, and fixtures used in the profession, business,
trade, occupation, or avocation of its owner, which property is not covered
under division (c)(1) of this section, and which retains substantial utility
for its purpose regardless of its age or condition, is the cost of replacing
such property with new property of like kind and quality.
      (3)   The value of any real or personal property that is not covered
under division (c)(1) or (2) of this section, and the value of services, is the
fair market value of the property or services.  As used in this section, “fair
market value” is the money consideration which a buyer would give and a seller
would accept for property or services, assuming that the buyer is willing to
buy and the seller is willing to sell, that both are fully informed as to all
facts material to the transaction, and that neither is under any compulsion to
act.
   (d)   Without limitation on the evidence which may be used to establish the
value of property or services involved in a theft offense:
      (1)   When the property involved is personal property held for sale at
wholesale or retail, the price at which the property was held for sale is prima
facie evidence of its value.
      (2)   When the property involved is a security or commodity traded on an
exchange, the closing price or, if there is no closing price, the asked price,
given in the latest marked quotation prior to the offense, is prima facie
evidence of the value of the security or commodity.
      (3)   When the property involved is livestock, poultry, or raw
agricultural products for which a local market price is available, the latest
local market price prior to the offense is prima facie evidence of the value of
the livestock, poultry, or products.
      (4)   When the property involved is a negotiable instrument, the face
value is prima facie evidence of the value of the instrument.
      (5)   When the property involved is a warehouse receipt, bill of lading,
pawn ticket, claim check, or other instrument entitling the holder or bearer to
receive property, the face value or, if there is no face value, the value of
the property covered by the instrument less any payment necessary to receive
the property, is prima facie evidence of the value of the instrument.
      (6)   When the property involved is a ticket of admission, ticket for
transportation, coupon, token, or other instrument entitling the holder or
bearer to receive property or services, the face value or, if there is no face
value, the value of the property or services which may be received by the
instrument is prima facie evidence of the value of the instrument.
      (7)   When the services involved are gas, electricity, water, telephone,
transportation, shipping, or other services for which the rate is established
by law, the duly established rate is prima facie evidence of the value of the
services.
      (8)   When the services involved are services for which the rate is not
established by law, and the offender has been notified prior to the offense of
the rate for the services, either in writing, or orally, or by posting in a
manner reasonably calculated to come to the attention of potential offenders,
the rate contained in the notice is prima facie evidence of the value of the
services.
(ORC 2913.61(B) - (E))
§ 672.04  DEGREE OF OFFENSE WHEN CERTAIN PROPERTY INVOLVED.
   Regardless of the value of the property involved, and regardless of whether
the offender previously has been convicted of a theft offense, a violation of
§§
672.01 or
672.02 is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law if the property
involved is any of the following:
   (a)   A credit card;
   (b)   A printed form for a check or other negotiable instrument, that on its
face identifies the drawer or maker for whose use it is designed or identifies
the account on which it is to be drawn, and that has not been executed by the
drawer or maker or on which the amount is blank;
   (c)   A motor vehicle identification license plate as prescribed by Ohio
R.C. 4503.22, a temporary license placard or windshield sticker as prescribed
by Ohio R.C. 4503.182, or any comparable license plate, placard, or sticker as
prescribed by the applicable law of another state or the United States;
   (d)   A blank form for a certificate of title or a manufacturer’s or
importer’s certificate to a motor vehicle, as prescribed by Ohio R.C. 4505.07;
   (e)   A blank form for any license listed in Ohio R.C. 4507.01.
(ORC 2913.71)
§ 672.045  EVIDENCE OF THEFT OF RENTED PROPERTY.
   (a)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   “Renter.”  A person who owns rented property.
      (2)   “Rentee.”  A person who pays consideration to a renter for the use
of rented property.
   (b)   Each of the following shall be considered evidence of intent to commit
theft of rented property or rental services:
      (1)   At the time of entering into the rental contract, the rentee
presented the renter with identification that was materially false, fictitious,
or not current with respect to name, address, place of employment, or other
relevant information.
      (2)   After receiving a notice demanding the return of the rented
property as provided in division (c) of this section, the rentee neither
returned the rented property nor made arrangements acceptable with the renter
to return the rented property.
   (c)   To establish that a rentee has an intent to commit theft of rented
property or rental services under division (b)(2) above, a renter may issue a
notice to a rentee demanding the return of the rented property.  The renter
shall mail the notice by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the
rentee at the address the rentee gave when the rental contract was executed, or
to the rentee at the last address the rentee or the rentee’s agent furnished in
writing to the renter.
   (d)   A demand for the return of the rented property is not a prerequisite
for the prosecution of a rentee for theft of rented property or rental
services.  The evidence specified in division (b) above does not constitute the
only evidence that may be considered as evidence of intent to commit theft of
rented property or rental services.
(ORC 2913.72)
§ 672.05  TAMPERING WITH COIN MACHINES.
   (a)   No person, with purpose to commit theft or to defraud, shall knowingly
enter, force an entrance into, tamper with, or insert any part of an instrument
into any coin machine.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of tampering with coin
machines, a misdemeanor of the first degree.  If the offender previously has
been convicted of a violation of this section or of any theft offense as
defined in Ohio R.C. 2913.01, tampering with coin machines is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(ORC 2911.32)
§ 672.06  PROSECUTIONS FOR THEFT OF UTILITIES.
   (a)   In a prosecution for a theft offense, as defined in Ohio R.C. 2913.01,
that involves alleged tampering with a gas, electric, steam or water meter,
conduit or attachment of a utility that has been disconnected by the utility,
proof that a meter, conduit or attachment of a utility has been tampered with
is prima facie evidence that the person who is obligated to pay for the service
rendered through the meter, conduit or attachment, and who is in possession or
control of the meter, conduit or attachment at the time the tampering occurred
has caused the tampering with intent to commit a theft offense.
   (b)   In a prosecution for a theft offense, as defined in Ohio R.C. 2913.01,
that involves the alleged reconnection of a gas, electric, steam or water
meter, conduit or attachment of a utility that has been disconnected by the
utility, proof that a meter, conduit or attachment disconnected by a utility
has been reconnected without the consent of the utility is prima facie evidence
that the person in possession or control of the meter, conduit or attachment at
the time of the reconnection has reconnected the meter, conduit or attachment
with intent to commit a theft offense.
   (c)   As used in this section:
      (1)   “Utility” means any electric light company, gas company, natural
gas company, pipe-line company, water-works company or heating or cooling
company, as defined in Ohio R.C. 4905.03(C), (D), (E), (F), (G), or (H), its
lessees, trustees or receivers, or any similar utility owned or operated by a
political subdivision.
      (2)   “Tamper” means to interfere with, damage or bypass a utility meter,
conduit or attachment with the intent to impede the correct registration of a
meter or the proper functions of a conduit or attachment so as to reduce the
amount of utility service that is registered on the meter.
(ORC 4933.18)
   (d)   Each electric light company, gas company, natural gas company,
pipeline company, waterworks company or heating or cooling company, as defined
by Ohio R.C. 4905.03(C), (D), (E), (F), (G), or (H), or its lessees, trustees
or receivers, and each similar utility owned or operated by a political
subdivision, shall notify its customers, on an annual basis, that tampering
with or bypassing a meter constitutes a theft offense that could result in the
imposition of criminal sanctions.
(ORC 4933.19)
§ 672.07  MISCONDUCT INVOLVING A PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM.
   (a)   As used in this section, “public transportation system” means a county
transit system operated in accordance with Ohio R.C. 306.01 to 306.13, a
regional transit authority operated in accordance with Ohio R.C. 306.30 to
306.71, or a regional transit commission operated in accordance with Ohio R.C.
306.80 to 306.90.
   (b)   No person shall evade the payment of the known fares of a public
transportation system.
   (c)   No person shall alter any transfer, pass, ticket or token of a public
transportation system with the purpose of evading the payment of fares or of
defrauding the system.
   (d)   No person shall do any of the following while in any facility or on
any vehicle of a public transportation system:
      (1)   Play sound equipment without the proper use of a private earphone;
      (2)   Smoke, eat or drink in any area where the activity is clearly
marked as being prohibited; or
      (3)   Expectorate upon a person, facility or vehicle.
   (e)   No person shall write, deface, draw or otherwise mark on any facility
or vehicle of a public transportation system.
   (f)   No person shall fail to comply with a lawful order of a public
transportation system police officer, and no person shall resist, obstruct or
abuse a public transportation police officer in the performance of the
officer’s duties.
   (g)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section is guilty of
misconduct involving a public transportation system.
      (1)   A violation of division (b), (c), or (f) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
      (2)   A violation of division (d) of this section is a minor misdemeanor
on a first offense. If a person previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of any division of this section or of a municipal
ordinance that is substantially equivalent to any division of this section, a
violation of division (d) of this section is a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.
      (3)   A violation of division (e) of this section is a misdemeanor of the
third degree.
   (h)   Notwithstanding any other provision of law, 75% of each fine paid to
satisfy a sentence imposed for a violation of any of the provisions of this
section shall be deposited into the treasury of the county and 25% shall be
deposited with the county transit board, regional transit authority or regional
transit commission that operates the public transportation system involved in
the violation, unless the Board of County Commissioners operates the public
transportation system, in which case 100% of each fine shall be deposited into
the treasury of the county.
(ORC 2917.41)
§ 672.08  UNAUTHORIZED USE OF A VEHICLE; VEHICLE TRESPASS.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly use or operate an aircraft, motor vehicle,
motorcycle, motorboat, or other motor-propelled vehicle without the consent of
the owner or person authorized to give consent.
   (b)   No person shall knowingly use or operate an aircraft, motor vehicle,
motorboat, or other motor-propelled vehicle without the consent of the owner or
person authorized to give consent, and either remove it from this state, or
keep possession of it for more than 48 hours.
   (c)   The following are affirmative defenses to a charge under this section:
      (1)   At the time of the alleged offense, the actor, though mistaken,
reasonably believed that he or she was authorized to use or operate the
property.
      (2)   At the time of the alleged offense, the actor reasonably believed
that the owner or person empowered to give consent would authorize the actor to
use or operate the property.
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of unauthorized use of a
vehicle.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (d)(1), a violation
of division (a) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree.  If the
victim of the offense is an elderly person or disabled adult and if the victim
incurs a loss as a result of the violation, a violation of division (a) of this
section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   A violation of division (b) of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(ORC 2913.03)
Statutory reference:
   Theft offense involving motor vehicle, offender to pay towing and storage
fees, see Ohio R.C. 2913.82
§ 672.09  PASSING BAD CHECKS.
   (a)   As used in this section:
      (1)   “Check” includes any form of debit from a demand deposit account,
including but not limited to any of the following:
         A.   A check, bill of exchange, draft, order of withdrawal, or similar
negotiable or non-negotiable instrument;
         B.   An electronic check, electronic transaction, debit card
transaction, check card transaction, substitute check, web check, or any form
of automated clearing house transaction.
      (2)   “Issue a check” means causing any form of debit from a demand
deposit account.
   (b)   No person, with purpose to defraud, shall issue or transfer or cause
to be issued or transferred a check or other negotiable instrument, knowing
that it will be dishonored or knowing that a person has ordered or will order
stop payment on the check or other negotiable instrument.
   (c)   For purposes of this section, a person who issues or transfers a check
or other negotiable instrument is presumed to know that it will be dishonored
if either of the following occurs:
      (1)   The drawer has no account with the drawee at the time of issue or
the stated date, whichever is later.
      (2)   The check or other negotiable instrument was properly refused
payment for insufficient funds upon presentment within 30 days after issue or
the stated date, whichever is later, and the liability of the drawer, indorser,
or any party who may be liable thereon is not discharged by payment or
satisfaction within ten days after receiving notice of dishonor.
   (d)   For purposes of this section, a person who issues or transfers a
check, bill of exchange, or other draft is presumed to have the purpose to
defraud if the drawer fails to comply with Ohio R.C. 1349.16 by doing any of
the following when opening a checking account intended for personal, family, or
household purposes at a financial institution:
      (1)   Falsely stating that he or she has not been issued a valid driver’s
or commercial driver’s license or identification card issued under Ohio R.C.
4507.50;
      (2)   Furnishing the license or card, or another identification document
that contains false information;
      (3)   Making a false statement with respect to the drawer’s current
address or any additional relevant information reasonably required by the
financial institution.
   (e)   In determining the value of the payment for purposes of division (f)
of this section, the court may aggregate all checks and other negotiable
instruments that the offender issued or transferred or caused to be issued or
transferred in violation of division (b) of this section within a period of 180
consecutive days.
   (f)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of passing bad checks.  Except
as otherwise provided in this division, passing bad checks is a misdemeanor of
the first degree.  If the check or checks or other negotiable instrument or
instruments are issued or transferred to a single vendor or single other person
for the payment of one thousand dollars ($1,000) or more, or if the check or
checks or other negotiable instrument or instruments are issued or transferred
to multiple vendors or persons for the payment of one thousand five hundred
dollars ($1,500) or more, passing bad checks is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
(ORC 2913.11)
§ 672.10  MISUSE OF CREDIT CARDS.
   (a)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Practice deception for the purpose of procuring the issuance of a
credit card, when a credit card is issued in actual reliance thereon;
      (2)   Knowingly buy or sell a credit card from or to a person other than
the issuer;
      (3)   As an officer, employee, or appointee of a political subdivision or
as a public servant as defined under Ohio R.C. 2921.01, knowingly misuse a
credit card account held by a political subdivision.
   (b)   No person, with purpose to defraud, shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Obtain control over a credit card as security for a debt;
      (2)   Obtain property or services by the use of a credit card, in one or
more transactions, knowing or having reasonable cause to believe that the card
has expired or been revoked, or was obtained, is retained, or is being used in
violation of law;
      (3)   Furnish property or services upon presentation of a credit card,
knowing that the card is being used in violation of law;
      (4)   Represent or cause to be represented to the issuer of a credit card
that property or services have been furnished, knowing that the representation
is false.
   (c)   No person, with purpose to violate this section, shall receive,
possess, control, or dispose of a credit card.
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of misuse of credit cards.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (d)(3) of this section, a
violation of division (a), (b)(1), or (c) of this section is a misdemeanor of
the first degree.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this division or division (d)(3) of
this section, a violation of division (b)(2), (3), or (4) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the first degree.  If the cumulative retail value of the
property and services involved in one or more violations of division (b)(2),
(3), or (4) of this section which violations involve one or more credit card
accounts and occur within a period of 90 consecutive days commencing on the
date of the first violation, is one thousand dollars ($1,000) or more, misuse
of credit cards is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (3)   If the victim of the offense is an elderly person or disabled
adult, and if the offense involves a violation of division (b)(1) or (b)(2) of
this section, misuse of credit cards is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
(ORC 2913.21)
§ 672.11  RECORDING CREDIT CARD, TELEPHONE OR SOCIAL SECURITY NUMBERS.
   (a)   No person shall record or cause to be recorded either of the
following:
      (1)   A credit card account number of the other party to a transaction,
when a check, bill of exchange or other draft is presented for payment; or
      (2)   The telephone number or Social Security account number of the other
party to a transaction, when payment is made by credit card charge agreement,
check, bill of exchange or other draft.
   (b)   Division (a) of this section does not apply to a transaction, if all
of the following conditions are met:
      (1)   The credit card account number, Social Security account number or
telephone number is recorded for a legitimate business purpose, including
collection purposes.
      (2)   The other party to the transaction consents to the recording of the
credit card account number, Social Security account number or telephone number.
      (3)   The credit card account number, Social Security account number or
telephone number that is recorded during the course of the transaction is not
disclosed to any third party for any purposes other than collection purposes
and is not used to market goods or services unrelated to the goods or services
purchased in the transaction.
   (c)   Nothing in this section prohibits the recording of the number of a
credit card account when given in lieu of a deposit to secure payment in the
event of default, loss, damage or other occurrence, or requires a person to
accept a check presented for payment, if the other party to the transaction
refuses to consent to the recording of the number of the party’s Social
Security account or license to operate a motor vehicle.
(ORC 1349.17)
   (d)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 1349.99)
§ 672.12  FORGING OR SELLING FORGED IDENTIFICATION CARDS.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly do either of the following:
      (1)   Forge an identification card.
      (2)   Sell or otherwise distribute a card that purports to be an
identification card, knowing it was forged.
   (b)   As used in this section, “identification card” means a card that
includes personal information or characteristics of an individual, a purpose of
which is to establish the identity of the bearer described on the card, whether
the words “identity,” “identification,” “identification card,” or other similar
words appear on the card.
   (c)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of forging
identification cards or selling or distributing forged identification cards. 
Except as otherwise provided in this division, forging identification cards or
selling or distributing forged identification cards is a misdemeanor of the
first degree.  If the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of
division (a) of this section or a substantially equivalent state law or
municipal ordinance, forging identification cards or selling or distributing
forged identification cards is a misdemeanor of the first degree and, in
addition, the court shall impose upon the offender a fine not less than two
hundred fifty dollars ($250.00).
      (2)   If the victim of a violation of this section is an elderly person,
Ohio R.C. 2913.31(C)(2)(b) applies and the offense shall be prosecuted under
Ohio R.C. 2913.31.
(ORC 2913.31(B), (C)(2))
Statutory reference:
   Forgery, felony provisions, see Ohio R.C. 2913.31(A), (C)(1)
   Forgery of originating address or other routing information in connection
with the transmission of an electronic mail advertisement, felony provisions,
see Ohio R.C. 2307.64
§ 672.13  MAKING OR USING SLUGS.
   (a)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Insert or deposit a slug in a coin machine, with purpose to
defraud;
      (2)   Make, possess, or dispose of a slug, with purpose of enabling
another to defraud by inserting or depositing it in a coin machine.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of making or using slugs, a
misdemeanor of the second degree.
(ORC 2913.33)
§ 672.14  PRIMA FACIE EVIDENCE OF PURPOSE TO DEFRAUD.
   In a prosecution of a person for a theft offense that alleges that the
person, with purpose to defraud or knowing that he or she was facilitating a
fraud, hired or rented an aircraft, motor vehicle, motorcycle, motorboat,
sailboat, camper, trailer, horse, buggy, or other property or equipment, kept
or operated any of the same that has been hired or rented, or engaged
accommodations at a hotel, motel, inn, campground, or other hostelry, it is
prima facie evidence of purpose to defraud if the person did any of the
following:
   (a)   Used deception to induce the rental agency to furnish the person with
the aircraft, motor vehicle, motorcycle, motorboat, sailboat, camper, trailer,
horse, buggy, or other property or equipment, or used deception to induce the
hostelry to furnish the person with accommodations;
   (b)   Hired or rented any aircraft, motor vehicle, motorcycle, motorboat,
sailboat, camper, trailer, horse, buggy, or other property or equipment, or
engaged accommodations, knowing that he or she is without sufficient means to
pay the hire or rental;
   (c)   Absconded without paying the hire or rental;
   (d)   Knowingly failed to pay the hire or rental as required by the contract
of hire or rental, without reasonable excuse for the failure;
   (e)   Knowingly failed to return hired or rented property as required by the
contract of hire or rental, without reasonable excuse for the failure.
(ORC 2913.41)
§ 672.15  TAMPERING WITH RECORDS.
   (a)   No person, knowing that he or she has no privilege to do so, and with
purpose to defraud or knowing that he or she is facilitating a fraud, shall do
any of the following:
      (1)   Falsify, destroy, remove, conceal, alter, deface, or mutilate any
writing, computer software, data, or record;
      (2)   Utter any writing or record, knowing it to have been tampered with
as provided in division (a)(1) of this section.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of tampering with records.
      (1)   Except as provided in division (b)(3) of this section, if the
offense does not involve data or computer software, tampering with records is
whichever of the following is applicable:
         A.   If division (b)(1)B. of this section does not apply, it is a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
         B.   If the writing or record is a will unrevoked at the time of the
offense, it is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   Except as provided in division (b)(3) of this section, if the
offense involves a violation of division (a) of this section involving data or
computer software, tampering with records is whichever of the following is
applicable:
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in division (b)(2)B. of this
section, it is a misdemeanor of the first degree;
         B.   If the value of the data or computer software involved in the
offense or the loss to the victim is one thousand dollars ($1,000) or more or
if the offense is committed for the purpose of devising or executing a scheme
to defraud or to obtain property or services and the value of the property or
services or the loss to the victim is seven thousand five hundred dollars
($7,500) or more, it is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (3)   If the writing, data, computer software, or record is kept by or
belongs to a local, state, or federal governmental entity, it is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(ORC 2913.42)
§ 672.16  SECURING WRITINGS BY DECEPTION.
   (a)   No person, by deception, shall cause another to execute any writing
that disposes of or encumbers property, or by which a pecuniary obligation is
incurred.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of securing writings by
deception.  Except as otherwise provided in this division, securing writings by
deception is a misdemeanor of the first degree.  If the value of the property
or the obligation involved is one thousand dollars ($1,000) or more, securing
writings by deception is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate to state
law.  If the victim of the offense is an elderly person, disabled adult, active
duty service member, or spouse of an active duty service member, securing
writings by deception is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(ORC 2913.43)
§ 672.17  PERSONATING AN OFFICER.
   (a)   No person, with purpose to defraud or knowing that he or she is
facilitating a fraud, or with purpose to induce another to purchase property or
services, shall personate a law enforcement officer, or an inspector,
investigator, or agent of any governmental agency.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of personating an officer, a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(ORC 2913.44)
§ 672.18  DEFRAUDING CREDITORS.
   (a)   No person, with purpose to defraud one or more of his or her
creditors, shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Remove, conceal, destroy, encumber, convey, or otherwise deal with
any of his or her property;
      (2)   Misrepresent or refuse to disclose to a fiduciary appointed to
administer or manage his or her affairs or estate, the existence, amount, or
location of any of his or her property, or any other information regarding the
property which he or she is legally required to furnish to the fiduciary.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of defrauding creditors. 
Except as otherwise provided in this division, defrauding creditors is a
misdemeanor of the first degree.  If the value of the property involved is one
thousand dollars ($1,000) or more, defrauding creditors is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(ORC 2913.45)
§ 672.19  CRIMINAL SIMULATION.
   (a)   No person, with purpose to defraud, or knowing that the person is
facilitating a fraud, shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Make or alter any object so that it appears to have value because
of antiquity, rarity, curiosity, source, or authorship, which it does not in
fact possess.
      (2)   Practice deception in making, retouching, editing, or reproducing
any photograph, movie film, video tape, phonograph record, or recording tape.
      (3)   Falsely or fraudulently make, simulate, forge, alter, or
counterfeit any wrapper, label, stamp, cork or cap prescribed by the Liquor
Control Commission under Ohio R.C. Chapters 4301 and 4303, falsely or
fraudulently cause to be made, simulated, forged, altered, or counterfeited any
wrapper, label, stamp, cork or cap prescribed by the Liquor Control Commission
under Ohio R.C. Chapters 4301 and 4303, or use more than once any wrapper,
label, stamp, cork or cap prescribed by the Liquor Control Commission under
Ohio R.C. Chapters 4301 and 4303.
      (4)   Offer, or possess with the purpose to offer, any object that the
person knows to have been simulated as provided in divisions (a)(1), (2) or (3)
of this section.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of criminal simulation. 
Except as otherwise provided in this division, criminal simulation is a
misdemeanor of the first degree.  If the loss to the victim is one thousand
dollars ($1,000) or more, criminal simulation is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.
(ORC 2913.32)
§ 672.20  INSURANCE FRAUD.
   (a)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   “Data” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2913.01 and
additionally includes any other representation of information, knowledge,
facts, concepts, or instructions that are being or have been prepared in a
formalized manner.
      (2)   “Deceptive” means that a statement, in whole or in part, would
cause another to be deceived because it contains a misleading representation,
withholds information, prevents the acquisition of information, or by any other
conduct, act, or omission creates, confirms, or perpetuates a false impression,
including, but not limited to, a false impression as to law, value, state of
mind, or other objective or subjective fact.
      (3)   “Insurer” means any person that is authorized to engage in the
business of insurance in this state under Ohio R.C. Title 39, the Ohio Fair
Plan Underwriting Association created under Ohio R.C. 3929.43, any health
insuring corporation, and any legal entity that is self-insured and provides
benefits to its employees or members.
      (4)   “Policy” means a policy, certificate, contract, or plan that is
issued by an insurer.
      (5)   “Statement” includes but is not limited to any notice, letter, or
memorandum; proof of loss; bill of lading; receipt for payment; invoice,
account, or other financial statement; estimate of property damage; bill for
services; diagnosis or prognosis; prescription; hospital, medical, or dental
chart or other record; x-ray, photograph, videotape, or movie film; test
result; other evidence of loss, injury, or expense; computer-generated
document; and data in any form.
   (b)   No person, with purpose to defraud or knowing that the person is
facilitating a fraud, shall do either of the following:
      (1)   Present to, or cause to be presented to, an insurer any written or
oral statement that is part of, or in support of, an application for insurance,
a claim for payment pursuant to a policy, or a claim for any other benefit
pursuant to a policy, knowing that the statement, or any part of the statement,
is false or deceptive;
      (2)   Assist, aid, abet, solicit, procure, or conspire with another to
prepare or make any written or oral statement that is intended to be presented
to an insurer as part of, or in support of, an application for insurance, a
claim for payment pursuant to a policy, or a claim for any other benefit
pursuant to a policy, knowing that the statement, or any part of the statement,
is false or deceptive.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of insurance fraud.  Except as
otherwise provided in this division, insurance fraud is a misdemeanor of the
first degree. If the amount of the claim that is false or deceptive is one
thousand dollars ($1,000) or more, insurance fraud is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.
   (d)   This section shall not be construed to abrogate, waive, or modify Ohio
R.C. 2317.02(A).
(ORC 2913.47)
§ 672.21  WORKERS’ COMPENSATION FRAUD.
   (a)   No person, with purpose to defraud or knowing that the person is
facilitating a fraud shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Receive workers’ compensation benefits to which the person is not
entitled;
      (2)   Make or present or cause to be made or presented a false or
misleading statement with the purpose to secure payment for goods or services
rendered under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4121, 4123, 4127, or 4131 or to secure
workers’ compensation benefits;
      (3)   Alter, falsify, destroy, conceal, or remove any record or document
that is necessary to fully establish the validity of any claim filed with, or
necessary to establish the nature and validity of all goods and services for
which reimbursement or payment was received or is requested from the Bureau of
Workers’ Compensation, or a self-insuring employer under Ohio R.C. Chapter
4121, 4123, 4127, or 4131;
      (4)   Enter into an agreement or conspiracy to defraud the Bureau of
Workers’ Compensation or a self-insuring employer by making or presenting or
causing to be made or presented a false claim for workers’ compensation
benefits;
      (5)   Make or present or cause to be made or presented a false statement
concerning manual codes, classification or employees, payroll, paid
compensation, or number of personnel, when information of that nature is
necessary to determine the actual workers’ compensation premium or assessment
owed to the Bureau by an employer;
      (6)   Alter, forge, or create a workers’ compensation certificate or
falsely show current or correct workers’ compensation coverage;
      (7)   Fail to secure or maintain workers’ compensation coverage as
required by Ohio R.C. Chapter 4123 with the intent to defraud the Bureau of
Workers’ Compensation.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of workers’ compensation
fraud.  Except as otherwise provided in this division, workers’ compensation
fraud is a misdemeanor of the first degree.  If the value of premiums and
assessments unpaid pursuant to actions described in divisions (a)(5), (a)(6),
or (a)(7) of this section, or goods, services, property, or money stolen is one
thousand dollars ($1,000) or more, workers’ compensation fraud is a felony to
be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (c)   Upon application of the governmental body that conducted the
investigation and prosecution of a violation of this section, the court shall
order the person who is convicted of the violation to pay the governmental body
its costs of investigating and prosecuting the case.  These costs are in
addition to any other costs or penalty provided under federal, state or local
law.
   (d)   The remedies and penalties provided in this section are not exclusive
remedies and penalties and do not preclude the use of any other criminal or
civil remedy or penalty for any act that is in violation of this section.
   (e)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   “Claim” means any attempt to cause the Bureau of Workers’
Compensation, an independent third party with whom the administrator or an
employer contracts under Ohio R.C. 4121.44, or a self-insuring employer to make
payment or reimbursement for workers’ compensation benefits.
      (2)   “Employer,” “employee,” and “self-insuring employer” have the same
meanings as in Ohio R.C. 4123.01.
      (3)   “Employment” means participating in any trade, occupation,
business, service, or profession for substantial gainful remuneration.
      (4)   “False” means wholly or partially untrue or deceptive.
      (5)   “Goods” includes but is not limited to medical supplies,
appliances, rehabilitative equipment, and any other apparatus or furnishing
provided or used in the care, treatment, or rehabilitation of a claimant for
workers’ compensation benefits.
      (6)   “Records” means any medical, professional, financial, or business
record relating to the treatment or care of any person, to goods or services
provided to any person, or to rates paid for goods or services provided to any
person, or any record that the administrator of workers’ compensation requires
pursuant to rule.
      (7)   “Remuneration” includes but is not limited to wages, commissions,
rebates, and any other reward or consideration.
      (8)   “Services” includes but is not limited to any service provided by
any health care provider to a claimant for workers’ compensation benefits and
any and all services provided by the Bureau as part of workers’ compensation
insurance coverage.
      (9)   “Statement” includes but is not limited to any oral, written,
electronic, electronic impulse, or magnetic communication notice, letter,
memorandum, receipt for payment, invoice, account, financial statement, or bill
for services; a diagnosis, prognosis, prescription, hospital, medical, or
dental chart or other record; and a computer generated document.
      (10)   “Workers’ compensation benefits” means any compensation or
benefits payable under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4121, 4123, 4127, or 4131.
(ORC 2913.48)
§ 672.22  MEDICAID FRAUD.
   (a)   As used in this section:
      (1)   “Provider” means any person who has signed a provider agreement
with the Department of Medicaid to provide goods or services pursuant to the
Medicaid program or any person who has signed an agreement with a party to such
a provider agreement under which the person agrees to provide goods or services
that are reimbursable under the Medicaid program.
      (2)   “Provider agreement” has the same meaning as in R.C. § 5164.01.
      (3)   “Recipient” means any individual who receives goods or services
from a provider under the Medicaid program.
      (4)   “Records” means any medical, professional, financial or business
records relating to the treatment or care of any recipient, to goods or
services provided to any recipient, or to rates paid for goods or services
provided to any recipient, and any records that are required by the rules of
the Medicaid Director to be kept for the medical assistance program.
      (5)   “Statement or representation” means any oral, written, electronic,
electronic impulse or magnetic communication that is used to identify an item
of goods or a service for which reimbursement may be made under the Medicaid
program or that states income and expense and is or may be used to determine a
rate of reimbursement under the Medicaid program.
   (b)   No person shall knowingly make or cause to be made a false or
misleading statement or representation for use in obtaining reimbursement from
the Medicaid program.
   (c)   No person, with purpose to commit fraud or knowing that the person is
facilitating a fraud, shall do either of the following:
      (1)   Contrary to the terms of the person’s provider agreement, charge,
solicit, accept or receive for goods or services that the person provides under
the Medicaid program any property, money or other consideration in addition to
the amount of reimbursement under the Medicaid program and the person’s
provider agreement for the goods or services and any cost-sharing expenses
authorized by R.C. § 5162.20 or rules adopted by the Medicaid Director
regarding the Medicaid program.
      (2)   Solicit, offer or receive any remuneration, other than any cost-
sharing expenses authorized by R.C. § 5162.20 or rules adopted by the Medicaid
Director regarding the Medicaid program, in cash or in kind, including but not
limited to a kickback or rebate, in connection with the furnishing of goods or
services for which whole or partial reimbursement is or may be made under the
Medicaid program.
   (d)   No person, having submitted a claim for or provided goods or services
under the Medicaid program, shall do either of the following for a period of at
least six years after a reimbursement pursuant to that claim, or a
reimbursement for those goods or services, is received under the Medicaid
program:
      (1)   Knowingly alter, falsify, destroy, conceal or remove any records
that are necessary to fully disclose the nature of all goods or services for
which the claim was submitted, or for which reimbursement was received, by the
person; or
      (2)   Knowingly alter, falsify, destroy, conceal or remove any records
that are necessary to disclose fully all income and expenditures upon which
rates of reimbursements were based for the person.
   (e)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of Medicaid fraud.  Except as
otherwise provided in this division, Medicaid fraud is a misdemeanor of the
first degree.  If the value of the property, services or funds obtained in
violation of this section is one thousand dollars ($1,000) or more, Medicaid
fraud is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (f)   Upon application of the governmental agency, office or other entity
that conducted the investigation and prosecution in a case under this section,
the court shall order any person who is convicted of a violation of this
section for receiving any reimbursement for furnishing goods or services under
the Medicaid program to which the person is not entitled to pay to the
applicant its cost of investigating and prosecuting the case.  The costs of
investigation and prosecution that a defendant is ordered to pay pursuant to
this division shall be in addition to any other penalties for the receipt of
that reimbursement that are provided in this section, Ohio R.C. 2913.40 or
5164.35, or any other provision of law.
   (g)   The provisions of this section are not intended to be exclusive
remedies and do not preclude the use of any other criminal or civil remedy for
any act that is in violation of this section.
(ORC 2913.40)
   (h)   Medicaid eligibility fraud.
      (1)   No person shall knowingly do any of the following in an application
for enrollment in the Medicaid program or in a document that requires a
disclosure of assets for the purpose of determining eligibility for the
Medicaid program:
         A.   Make or cause to be made a false or misleading statement;
         B.   Conceal an interest in property;
         C.   1.   Except as provided in division (h)(1)C.2. of this section,
fail to disclose a transfer of property that occurred during the period
beginning 36 months before submission of the application or document and ending
on the date the application or document was submitted;
            2.   Fail to disclose a transfer of property that occurred during
the period beginning 60 months before submission of the application or document
and ending on the date the application or document was submitted and that was
made to an irrevocable trust a portion of which is not distributable to the
applicant for or recipient of Medicaid or to a revocable trust.
      (2)   A.   Whoever violates this division (h) is guilty of Medicaid
eligibility fraud. Except as otherwise provided in this division, a violation
of this division (h) is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the value of the
Medicaid services paid as a result of the violation is one thousand dollars
($1,000) or more, a violation of this division (h) is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.
         B.   In addition to imposing a sentence under division (h)(2)A. of
this section, the court shall order that a person who is guilty of Medicaid
eligibility fraud make restitution in the full amount of any Medicaid services
paid on behalf of an applicant for or recipient of Medicaid for which the
applicant or recipient was not eligible, plus interest at the rate applicable
to judgments on unreimbursed amounts from the date on which the Medicaid
services were paid to the date on which restitution is made.
         C.   The remedies and penalties provided in this division (h) are not
exclusive and do not preclude the use of any other criminal or civil remedy for
any act that is in violation of this division (h).
      (3)   This division (h) does not apply to a person who fully disclosed in
an application for Medicaid or in a document that requires a disclosure of
assets for the purpose of determining eligibility for Medicaid all of the
interests in property of the applicant for or recipient of Medicaid, all
transfers of property by the applicant for or recipient of Medicaid, and the
circumstances of all those transfers.
      (4)   Any amounts of Medicaid services recovered as restitution under
this division (h) and any interest on those amounts shall be credited to the
general revenue fund, and any applicable federal share shall be returned to the
appropriate agency or department of the United States.
      (5)   For the purpose of this division (h), the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
         A.   “Medicaid services” has the same meaning as in R.C. § 5164.01.
         B.   “Property” means any real or personal property or other asset in
which a person has any legal title or interest.
(ORC 2913.401)
§ 672.23  DIMINISHING OR INTERFERING WITH FORFEITABLE PROPERTY.
   (a)   No person shall destroy, damage, remove, or transfer property that is
subject to forfeiture or otherwise take any action in regard to property that
is subject to forfeiture with purpose to do any of the following:
      (1)   Prevent or impair the state’s or political subdivision’s lawful
authority to take the property into its custody or control under Ohio R.C.
Chapter 2981 or to continue holding the property under its lawful custody or
control;
      (2)   Impair or defeat the court’s continuing jurisdiction over the
person and property;
      (3)   Devalue property that the person knows, or has reasonable cause to
believe, is subject to forfeiture proceedings under Ohio R.C. Chapter 2981.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of interference with or
diminishing forfeitable property. Except as otherwise provided in this division
(b), interference with or diminishing forfeitable property is a misdemeanor of
the first degree. If the value of the property is one thousand dollars ($1,000)
or more, interference with or diminishing forfeitable property is a felony to
be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(ORC 2981.07)
§ 672.24  MOTION PICTURE PIRACY.
   (a)   As used in this section:
      (1)   “Audiovisual recording function” means the capability of a device
to record or transmit a motion picture or any part of a motion picture by means
of any technology existing on, or developed after, March 9, 2004.
      (2)   “Facility” means a movie theater.
   (b)   No person, without the written consent of the owner or lessee of the
facility and of the licensor of the motion picture, shall knowingly operate an
audiovisual recording function of a device in a facility in which the motion
picture is being shown.
   (c)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of motion
picture piracy, a misdemeanor of the first degree on the first offense and a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law on each subsequent offense.
   (d)   This section does not prohibit or restrict a lawfully authorized
investigative, law enforcement, protective, or intelligence gathering employee
or agent of the government of this state or a political subdivision of this
state, or of the federal government, when acting in an official capacity, from
operating an audiovisual recording function of a device in any facility in
which a motion picture is being shown.
   (e)   Division (b) of this section does not limit or affect the application
of any other prohibition in this code or the Ohio Revised Code. Any act that is
a violation of both division (b) of this section and another provision of this
code or the Ohio Revised Code may be prosecuted under this section, under the
other provision of this code or the Ohio Revised Code, or under both this
section and the other provision of this code or the Ohio Revised Code.
(ORC 2913.07)
CHAPTER 678:  WEAPONS AND EXPLOSIVES
Section
678.01   Definitions.
678.02   Carrying concealed weapons.
678.025   Possession of deadly weapon while under detention.
678.03   Using weapons while intoxicated.
678.04   Improperly handling firearms in a motor vehicle.
678.05   License or permit to possess dangerous ordnance.
678.06   Failure to secure dangerous ordnance.
678.07   Unlawful transactions in weapons.
678.08   Underage purchase of a firearm or handgun.
678.09   Pointing and discharging firearms and other weapons.
678.095   Discharge of a firearm on or near prohibited premises.
678.10   Fireworks.
678.11   Endangering aircraft and airport operations.
678.12   Possessing criminal tools.
678.13   Possession of an object indistinguishable from a firearm in a school
safety zone.
678.14   Concealed handgun licenses: possession of a revoked or suspended
license; additional restrictions; posting of signs prohibiting possession.
678.15   Defaced firearms.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   See section histories for similar state law
   Prohibiting sales of firearms and explosives in riot areas - see Ohio R.C.
3761.16
   Vehicles transporting explosives - see TRAF.
440.04
   Definitions generally - see GEN. OFF.
606.01
   Reporting gunshot wounds - see GEN. OFF.
608.04(b)
   Posting firearm warning signs - see GEN. OFF.
612.06
   Hunting prohibited - see GEN. OFF.
618.12
   Arson - see GEN. OFF.
642.06
§ 678.01  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   (a)   “Active duty” has the same meaning as defined in 10 U.S.C. § 101.
   (b)   “Alien registration number.” The number issued by the United States
Citizenship and Immigration Services Agency that is located on the alien’s
permanent resident card and may also be commonly referred to as the “USCIS
number” or the “alien number”.
   (c)   “Automatic firearm.” Any firearm designed or specially adapted to fire
a succession of cartridges with a single function of the trigger.
   (d)   “Ballistic knife.”  A knife with a detachable blade that is propelled
by a spring- operated mechanism.
   (e)   “Concealed handgun license” or “license to carry a concealed handgun.”
      (1)   Means, subject to division (2) of this definition, a license or
temporary emergency license to carry a concealed handgun issued under Ohio R.C.
2923.125 or Ohio R.C. 2923.1213 or a license to carry a concealed handgun
issued by another state with which the Attorney General has entered into a
reciprocity agreement under Ohio R.C. 109.69.
      (2)   A reference in any provision of this Code to a concealed handgun
license issued under Ohio R.C. 2923.125 or a license to carry a concealed
handgun issued under Ohio R.C. 2923.125 means only a license of the type that
is specified in that section. A reference in any provision of this Code to a
concealed handgun license issued under Ohio R.C. 2923.1213, a license to carry
a concealed handgun issued under Ohio R.C. 2923.1213, or a license to carry a
concealed handgun on a temporary emergency basis means only a license of the
type that is specified in Ohio R.C. 2923.1213. A reference in any provision of
this Code to a concealed handgun license issued by another state or a license
to carry a concealed handgun issued by another state means only a license
issued by another state with which the Attorney General has entered into a
reciprocity agreement under Ohio R.C. 109.69.
   (f)   “Dangerous ordnance.”
      (1)   Any of the following, except as provided in division (2) of this
definition:
         A.   Any automatic or sawed-off firearm, zip-gun, or ballistic knife.
         B.   Any explosive device or incendiary device.
         C.   Nitroglycerin, nitrocellulose, nitrostarch, PETN, cyclonite, TNT,
picric acid, and other high explosives; amatol, tritonal, tetrytol, pentolite,
pecretol, cyclotol, and other high explosive compositions; plastic explosives;
dynamite, blasting gelatin, gelatin dynamite, sensitized ammonium nitrate,
liquid-oxygen blasting explosives, blasting powder, and other blasting agents;
and any other explosive substance having sufficient brisance or power to be
particularly suitable for use as a military explosive, or for use in mining,
quarrying, excavating, or demolitions.
         D.   Any firearm, rocket launcher, mortar, artillery piece, grenade,
mine, bomb, torpedo, or similar weapon, designed and manufactured for military
purposes, and the ammunition for that weapon.
         E.   Any firearm muffler or suppressor.
         F.   Any combination of parts that is intended by the owner for use in
converting any firearm or other device into a dangerous ordnance.
         G.   Any firearm with an overall length of at least 26 inches that is
approved for sale by the Federal Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and
Explosives under the “Gun Control Act of 1968”, 82 Stat. 1213, 18 U.S.C. § 921
(a)(3), but that is found by the Bureau not to be regulated under the “National
Firearms Act”, 68A Stat. 725 (1934), 26 U.S.C. § 5845(a).
      (2)   “Dangerous ordnance” does not include any of the following:
         A.   Any firearm, including a military weapon and the ammunition for
that weapon, and regardless of its actual age, that employs a percussion cap or
other obsolete ignition system, or that is designed and safe for use only with
black powder.
         B.   Any pistol, rifle, or shotgun, designed or suitable for sporting
purposes, including a military weapon as issued or as modified, and the
ammunition for that weapon, unless the firearm is an automatic or sawed-off
firearm.
         C.   Any cannon or other artillery piece that, regardless of its
actual age, is of a type in accepted use prior to 1887, has no mechanical,
hydraulic, pneumatic, or other system for absorbing recoil and returning the
tube into battery without displacing the carriage, and is designed and safe for
use only with black powder.
         D.   Black powder, priming quills, and percussion caps possessed and
lawfully used to fire a cannon of a type defined in division (2)C. of this
definition during displays, celebrations, organized matches or shoots, and
target practice, and smokeless and black powder, primers, and percussion caps
possessed and lawfully used as a propellant or ignition device in small-arms or
small-arms ammunition.
         E.   Dangerous ordnance that is inoperable or inert and cannot readily
be rendered operable or activated, and that is kept as a trophy, souvenir,
curio, or museum piece.
         F.   Any device that is expressly excepted from the definition of a
destructive device pursuant to the Gun Control Act of 1968, 18 U.S.C. 921(a)
(4), as amended, and regulations issued under that Act.
   (g)   “Deadly weapon.”  Any instrument, device, or thing capable of
inflicting death, and designed or specially adapted for use as a weapon, or
possessed, carried, or used as a weapon.
   (h)   “Explosive.”  Any chemical compound, mixture, or device, the primary
or common purpose of which is to function by explosion.  “Explosive” includes
all materials that have been classified as division 1.1, division 1.2, division
1.3, or division 1.4 explosives by the United States Department of
Transportation in its regulations and includes, but is not limited to,
dynamite, black powder, pellet powders, initiating explosives, blasting caps,
electric blasting caps, safety fuses, fuse igniters, squibs, cordeau detonant
fuses, instantaneous fuses, and igniter cords and igniters.  “Explosives” does
not include “fireworks,” as defined in Ohio R.C. 3743.01, or any substance or
material otherwise meeting the definition of explosive set forth in this
section that is manufactured, sold, possessed, transported, stored, or used in
any activity described in Ohio R.C. 3743.80, provided the activity is conducted
in accordance with all applicable laws, rules, and regulations, including, but
not limited to, the provisions of Ohio R.C. 3743.80 and the rules of the Fire
Marshal adopted pursuant to Ohio R.C. 3737.82.
   (i)   “Explosive device.”  Any device designed or specially adapted to cause
physical harm to persons or property by means of an explosion, and consisting
of an explosive substance or agency and a means to detonate it.  “Explosive
device” includes without limitation any bomb, any explosive demolition device,
any blasting cap or detonator containing an explosive charge, and any pressure
vessel that has been knowingly tampered with or arranged so as to explode.
   (j)   “Firearm.”
      (1)   Any deadly weapon capable of expelling or propelling one or more
projectiles by the action of an explosive or combustible propellant.  “Firearm”
includes an unloaded firearm, and any firearm that is inoperable but that can
readily be rendered operable.
      (2)   When determining whether a firearm is capable of expelling or
propelling one or more projectiles by the action of an explosive or combustible
propellant, the trier of fact may rely upon circumstantial evidence, including,
but not limited to, the representations and actions of the individual
exercising control over the firearm.
   (k)   “Handgun.”  Means any of the following:
      (1)   Any firearm that has a short stock and is designed to be held and
fired by the use of a single hand;
      (2)   Any combination of parts from which a firearm of a type described
in division (1) of this definition can be assembled.
   (l)   “Incendiary device.”  Any firebomb, and any device designed or
specially adapted to cause physical harm to persons or property by means of
fire, and consisting of an incendiary substance or agent and a means to ignite
it.
   (m)   “Misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for a term exceeding one
year.” The phrase does not include any of the following:
      (1)   Any federal or state offense pertaining to antitrust violations,
unfair trade practices, restraints of trade, or other similar offenses relating
to the regulation of business practices;
      (2)   Any misdemeanor offense punishable by a term of imprisonment of two
years or less.
   (n)   “Sawed-off firearm.”  A shotgun with a barrel less than 18 inches
long, or a rifle with a barrel less than 16 inches long, or a shotgun or rifle
less than 26 inches long overall. “Sawed-off firearm” does not include any
firearm with an overall length of at least 26 inches that is approved for sale
by the Federal Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and Explosives under the
“Gun Control Act of 1968”, 82 Stat. 1213, 18 U.S.C. § 921(a)(3), but that is
found by the Bureau not to be regulated under the “National Firearms Act”, 68A
Stat. 725 (1934), 26 U.S.C. § 5845(a).
   (o)   “Semi-automatic firearm.”  Any firearm designed or specially adapted
to fire a single cartridge and automatically chamber a succeeding cartridge
ready to fire, with a single function of the trigger.
   (p)   “Valid concealed handgun license” or “valid license to carry a
concealed handgun.” A concealed handgun license that is currently valid, that
is not under a suspension under Ohio R.C. 2923.128(A)(1), under Ohio R.C.
2923.1213, or under a suspension provision of the state other than this state
in which the license was issued, and that has not been revoked under Ohio R.C.
2923.128(B)(1), under Ohio R.C. 2923.1213, or under a revocation provision of
the state other than this state in which the license was issued.
   (q)   “Zip-gun.”  Any of the following:
      (1)   Any firearm of crude and extemporized manufacture.
      (2)   Any device, including without limitation a starter’s pistol, not
designed as a firearm, but that is specially adapted for use as a firearm.
      (3)   Any industrial tool, signaling device, or safety device, not
designed as a firearm, but that as designed is capable of use as such, when
possessed, carried, or used as a firearm.
(ORC 2923.11)
§ 678.02  CARRYING CONCEALED WEAPONS.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly carry or have, concealed on the person’s
person or concealed ready at hand, any of the following:
      (1)   A deadly weapon other than a handgun;
      (2)   A handgun other than a dangerous ordnance;
      (3)   A dangerous ordnance.
   (b)   No person who has been issued a concealed handgun license shall do any
of the following:
      (1)   If the person is stopped for a law enforcement purpose, and is
carrying a concealed handgun, fail to promptly inform any law enforcement
officer who approaches the person after the person has been stopped that the
person has been issued a concealed handgun license and that the person then is
carrying a concealed handgun;
      (2)   If the person is stopped for a law enforcement purpose and is
carrying a concealed handgun, knowingly fail to keep the person’s hands in
plain sight at any time after any law enforcement officer begins approaching
the person while stopped and before the law enforcement officer leaves, unless
the failure is pursuant to and in accordance with directions given by a law
enforcement officer;
      (3)   If the person is stopped for a law enforcement purpose, if the
person is carrying a concealed handgun, and if the person is approached by any
law enforcement officer while stopped, knowingly remove or attempt to remove
the loaded handgun from the holster, pocket, or other place in which the person
is carrying it, knowingly grasp or hold the loaded handgun, or knowingly have
contact with the loaded handgun by touching it with the person’s hands or
fingers at any time after the law enforcement officer begins approaching and
before the law enforcement officer leaves, unless the person removes, attempts
to remove, grasps, holds, or has contact with the loaded handgun pursuant to
and in accordance with directions given by the law enforcement officer;
      (4)   If the person is stopped for a law enforcement purpose and is
carrying a concealed handgun, knowingly disregard or fail to comply with any
lawful order of any law enforcement officer given while the person is stopped,
including, but not limited to, a specific order to the person to keep the
person’s hands in plain sight.
   (c)   (1)   This section does not apply to any of the following:
         A.   An officer, agent, or employee of this or any other state or the
United States, or to a law enforcement officer, who is authorized to carry
concealed weapons or dangerous ordnance or is authorized to carry handguns and
is acting within the scope of the officer’s, agent’s, or employee’s duties;
         B.   Any person who is employed in this state, who is authorized to
carry concealed weapons or dangerous ordnance or is authorized to carry
handguns, and who is subject to and in compliance with the requirements of Ohio
R.C. 109.801, unless the appointing authority of the person has expressly
specified that the exemption provided in this division (c)(1)B. does not apply
to the person;
         C.   A person's transportation or storage of a firearm, other than a
firearm described in Ohio R.C. 2923.11(G) to (M), in a motor vehicle for any
lawful purpose if the firearm is not on the actor's person;
         D.   A person's storage or possession of a firearm, other than a
firearm described in Ohio R.C. 2923.11(G) to (M), in the actor's own home for
any lawful purpose.
      (2)   Division (a)(2) of this section does not apply to any person who,
at the time of the alleged carrying or possession of a handgun, either is
carrying a valid concealed handgun license or is an active duty member of the
armed forces of the United States and is carrying a valid military
identification card and documentation of successful completion of firearms
training that meets or exceeds the training requirements described in R.C. §
2923.125(G)(1), unless the person knowingly is in a place described in R.C. §
2923.126(B).
   (d)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (a)(1) of this
section of carrying or having control of a weapon other than a handgun and
other than a dangerous ordnance, that the actor was not otherwise prohibited by
law from having the weapon, and that any of the following applies:
      (1)   The weapon was carried or kept ready at hand by the actor for
defensive purposes, while the actor was engaged in or was going to or from the
actor’s lawful business or occupation, which business or occupation was of a
character or was necessarily carried on in a manner or at a time or place as to
render the actor particularly susceptible to criminal attack, such as would
justify a prudent person in going armed.
      (2)   The weapon was carried or kept ready at hand by the actor for
defensive purposes, while the actor was engaged in a lawful activity and had
reasonable cause to fear a criminal attack upon the actor, a member of the
actor’s family, or the actor’s home, such as would justify a prudent person in
going armed.
      (3)   The weapon was carried or kept ready at hand by the actor for any
lawful purpose and while in the actor’s own home.
   (e)   No person who is charged with a violation of this section shall be
required to obtain a concealed handgun license as a condition for the dismissal
of the charge.
   (f)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of carrying concealed
weapons. Except as otherwise provided in this division or divisions (f)(2), (f)
(6), and (f)(7) of this section, carrying concealed weapons in violation of
division (a) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. Except as
otherwise provided in this division or divisions (f)(2), (f)(6), and (f)(7) of
this section, if the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of
this section or any substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance
or of any offense of violence, if the weapon involved is a firearm that is
either loaded or for which the offender has ammunition ready at hand, or if the
weapon involved is dangerous ordnance, carrying concealed weapons in violation
of division (a) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law. Except as otherwise provided in divisions (f)(2), (f)(6), and (f)(7)
of this section, if the offense is committed aboard an aircraft, or with
purpose to carry a concealed weapon aboard an aircraft, regardless of the
weapon involved, carrying concealed weapons in violation of division (a) of
this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   Except as provided in division (f)(6) of this section, if a person
being arrested for a violation of division (a)(2) of this section promptly
produces a valid concealed handgun license, and if at the time of the violation
the person was not knowingly in a place described in Ohio R.C. 2923.126(B), the
officer shall not arrest the person for a violation of that division. If the
person is not able to promptly produce any concealed handgun license and if the
person is not in a place described in that section, the officer may arrest the
person for a violation of that division, and the offender shall be punished as
follows:
         A.   The offender shall be guilty of a minor misdemeanor if both of
the following apply:
            1.   Within 10 days after the arrest, the offender presents a
concealed handgun license, which license was valid at the time of the arrest to
the law enforcement agency that employs the arresting officer.
            2.   At the time of the arrest, the offender was not knowingly in a
place described in Ohio R.C. 2923.126(B).
         B.   The offender shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined
five hundred dollars ($500.00) if all of the following apply:
            1.   The offender previously had been issued a concealed handgun
license, and that license expired within the two years immediately preceding
the arrest.
            2.   Within 45 days after the arrest, the offender presents a
concealed handgun license to the law enforcement agency that employed the
arresting officer, and the offender waives in writing the offender’s right to a
speedy trial on the charge of the violation that is provided in Ohio R.C.
2945.71.
            3.   At the time of the commission of the offense, the offender was
not knowingly in a place described in Ohio R.C. 2923.126(B).
         C.   If divisions (f)(2)A. and (f)(2)B. and (f)(6) of this section do
not apply, the offender shall be punished under division (f)(1) or (f)(7) of
this section.
      (3)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, carrying concealed
weapons in violation of division (b)(1) of this section is a misdemeanor of the
first degree, and, in addition to any other penalty or sanction imposed for a
violation of division (b)(1) of this section, the offender’s concealed handgun
license shall be suspended pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2923.128(A)(2).  If, at the
time of the stop of the offender for a law enforcement purpose that was the
basis of the violation, any law enforcement officer involved with the stop had
actual knowledge that the offender has been issued a concealed handgun license,
carrying concealed weapons in violation of division (b)(1) of this section is a
minor misdemeanor, and the offender's concealed handgun license shall not be
suspended pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2923.128(A)(2).
      (4)   Carrying concealed weapons in violation of division (b)(2) or (b)
(4) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree or, if the offender
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of division
(b)(2) or (b)(4) of this section or any substantially equivalent state law or
municipal ordinance, a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. In
addition to any other penalty or sanction imposed for a misdemeanor violation
of division (b)(2) or (b)(4) of this section, the offender’s concealed handgun
license shall be suspended pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2923.128(A)(2).
      (5)   Carrying concealed weapons in violation of division (b)(3) of this
section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (6)   If a person being arrested for a violation of division (a)(2) of
this section is an active duty m ember of the armed forces of the United States
and is carrying a valid military identification card and documentation of
successful completion of firearms training that meets or exceeds the training
requirements described in R.C. § 2923.125(G)(1), and if at the time of the
violation the person was not knowingly in a place described in R.C. 2923.126
(B), the officer shall not arrest the person for a violation of that division.
If the person is not able to promptly produce a valid military identification
card and documentation of successful completion of firearms training that meets
or exceeds the training requirements described in R.C. § 2923.125(G)(1) and if
the person is not in a place described in R.C. § 2923.126(B), the officer shall
issue a citation and the offender shall be assessed a civil penalty of not more
than $500. The citation shall be automatically dismissed and the civil penalty
shall not be assessed if both of the following apply:
         A.   Within ten days after the issuance of the citation, the offender
presents a valid military identification card and documentation of successful
completion of firearms training that meets or exceeds the training requirements
described in R.C. § 2923.125(G)(1), which were both valid at the time of the
issuance of the citation to the law enforcement agency that employs the citing
officer.
         B.   At the time of the citation, the offender was not knowingly in a
place described in R.C. § 2923.126(B).
      (7)   If a person being arrested for a violation of division (a)(2) of
this section is knowingly in a place described in R.C. § 2923.126(B)(5) and is
not authorized to carry a handgun or have a handgun concealed on the person’s
person or concealed ready at hand under that division, the penalty shall be as
follows:
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in this division, if the person
produces a valid concealed handgun license within ten days after the arrest and
has not previously been convicted or pleaded guilty to a violation of division
(a)(2) of this section or any substantially equivalent state law or municipal
ordinance, the person is guilty of a minor misdemeanor;
         B.   Except as otherwise provided in this division, if the person has
previously been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of division (a)
(2) of this section or any substantially equivalent state law or municipal
ordinance, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree;
         C.   Except as otherwise provided in this division, if the person has
previously been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two violations of division
(a)(2) of this section or any substantially equivalent state law or municipal
ordinance, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree;
         D.   Except as otherwise provided in this division, if the person has
previously been convicted of or pleaded guilty to three or more violations of
division (a)(2) of this section or any substantially equivalent state law or
municipal ordinance, or convicted of or pleaded guilty to any offense of
violence, if the weapon involved is a firearm that is either loaded or for
which the offender has ammunition ready at hand, or if the weapon involved is a
dangerous ordnance, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree.
   (g)   If a law enforcement officer stops a person to question the person
regarding a possible violation of this section, for a traffic stop, or for any
other law enforcement purpose, if the person surrenders a firearm to the
officer, either voluntarily or pursuant to a request or demand of the officer,
and if the officer does not charge the person with a violation of this section
or arrest the person for any offense, the person is not otherwise prohibited by
law from possessing the firearm, and the firearm is not contraband, the officer
shall return the firearm to the person at the termination of the stop. If a
court orders a law enforcement officer to return a firearm to a person pursuant
to the requirement set forth in this division, Ohio R.C. 2923.163(B) applies.
(ORC 2923.12)
Statutory reference:
   Carrying concealed handguns, licensing through county sheriff, see Ohio R.C.
2923.124 et seq.
   Conveyance or possession of deadly weapons or dangerous ordnance on school
premises, felony offense, see Ohio R.C. 2923.122
   Conveyance, possession, or control of deadly weapon or dangerous ordinance
in a courthouse, felony offense, see Ohio R.C. 2923.123
   Possession of deadly weapon while under detention, felony offense, see Ohio
R.C. 2923.131
   Possession of firearm in liquor permit premises, felony offense, see Ohio
R.C. 2923.121
§ 678.025  POSSESSION OF DEADLY WEAPON WHILE UNDER DETENTION.
   (a)   “Detention” and “detention facility” have the same meanings as in Ohio
R.C. 2921.01.
   (b)   No person under detention at a detention facility shall possess a
deadly weapon.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of possession of a deadly
weapon while under detention.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (c)(2) of this section,
possession of a deadly weapon while under detention is a felony to be
prosecuted under state law.
      (2)   If the offender, at the time of the commission of the offense, was
under detention as an alleged or adjudicated delinquent child or unruly child
and if at the time the offender commits the act for which the offender was
under detention it would not be a felony if committed by an adult, possession
of a deadly weapon while under detention is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(ORC 2923.131)
Statutory reference:
   Possession of deadly weapon while under detention, felony offenses, see Ohio
R.C. 2923.131
§ 678.03  USING WEAPONS WHILE INTOXICATED.
   (a)   No person, while under the influence of alcohol or any drug of abuse,
shall carry or use any firearm or dangerous ordnance.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of using weapons while
intoxicated, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(ORC 2923.15)
§ 678.04  IMPROPERLY HANDLING FIREARMS IN A MOTOR VEHICLE.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly discharge a firearm while in or on a motor
vehicle.
   (b)   No person shall knowingly transport or have a loaded firearm in a
motor vehicle in such a manner that the firearm is accessible to the operator
or any passenger without leaving the vehicle.
   (c)   No person shall knowingly transport or have a firearm in a motor
vehicle, unless the person may lawfully possess that firearm under applicable
law of this state or the United States, the firearm is unloaded, and the
firearm is carried in one of the following ways:
      (1)   In a closed package, box, or case.
      (2)   In a compartment that can be reached only by leaving the vehicle.
      (3)   In plain sight and secured in a rack or holder made for the
purpose.
      (4)   If the firearm is at least 24 inches in overall length as measured
from the muzzle to the part of the stock furthest from the muzzle and if the
barrel is at least 18 inches in length, either in plain sight with the action
open or the weapon stripped, or, if the firearm is of a type on which the
action will not stay open or which cannot easily be stripped, in plain sight.
   (d)   No person shall knowingly transport or have a loaded handgun in a
motor vehicle if, at the time of that transportation or possession, any of the
following applies:
      (1)   The person is under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a
combination of them.
      (2)   The person’s whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine
contains a concentration of alcohol, a listed controlled substance, or a listed
metabolite of a controlled substance prohibited for persons operating a
vehicle, as specified in Ohio R.C. 4511.19(A), regardless of whether the person
at the time of the transportation or possession as described in this division
is the operator of or a passenger in the motor vehicle.
   (e)   No person who has been issued a concealed handgun license or who is an
active duty member of the armed forces of the United States and is carrying a
valid military identification card and documentation of successful completion
of firearms training that meets or exceeds the training requirements described
in R.C. § 2923.125(G)(1), who is the driver or an occupant of a motor vehicle
that is stopped as a result of a traffic stop or a stop for another law
enforcement purpose or is the driver or an occupant of a commercial motor
vehicle that is stopped by an employee of the motor carrier enforcement unit
for the purposes defined in Ohio R.C. 5503.34, and who is transporting or has a
loaded handgun in the motor vehicle or commercial motor vehicle in any manner,
shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Fail to promptly inform any law enforcement officer who approaches
the vehicle while stopped that the person has been issued a concealed handgun
license or is authorized to carry a concealed handgun as an active duty member
of the armed forces of the United States and that the person then possesses or
has a loaded handgun in the motor vehicle;
      (2)   Fail to promptly inform the employee of the unit who approaches the
vehicle while stopped that the person has been issued a concealed handgun
license or is authorized to carry a concealed handgun as an active duty member
of the armed forces of the United States and that the person then possesses or
has a loaded handgun in the commercial motor vehicle;
      (3)   Knowingly fail to remain in the motor vehicle while stopped, or
knowingly fail to keep the person’s hands in plain sight at any time after any
law enforcement officer begins approaching the person while stopped and before
the law enforcement officer leaves, unless the failure is pursuant to and in
accordance with directions given by a law enforcement officer;
      (4)   Knowingly have contact with the loaded handgun by touching it with
the person’s hands or fingers in the motor vehicle at any time after the law
enforcement officer begins approaching and before the law enforcement officer
leaves, unless the person has contact with the loaded handgun pursuant to and
in accordance with directions given by the law enforcement officer.
      (5)   Knowingly disregard or fail to comply with any lawful order of any
law enforcement officer given while the motor vehicle is stopped, including but
not limited to a specific order to the person to keep the person’s hands in
plain sight.
   (f)   (1)   Divisions (a), (b), (c), and (e) of this section do not apply to
any of the following:
         A.   An officer, agent, or employee of this or any other state or the
United States, or a law enforcement officer, when authorized to carry or have
loaded or accessible firearms in motor vehicles and acting within the scope of
the officer’s, agent’s, or employee’s duties;
         B.   Any person who is employed in this state, who is authorized to
carry or have loaded or accessible firearms in motor vehicles, and who is
subject to and in compliance with the requirements of Ohio R.C. 109.801, unless
the appointing authority of the person has expressly specified that the
exemption provided in this division (f)(1)B. does not apply to the person.
      (2)   Division (a) of this section does not apply to a person if all of
the following circumstances apply:
         A.   The person discharges a firearm from a motor vehicle at a coyote
or groundhog, the discharge is not during the deer gun hunting season as set by
the Chief of the Division of Wildlife of the Department of Natural Resources,
and the discharge at the coyote or groundhog, but for the operation of this
section, is lawful.
         B.   The motor vehicle from which the person discharges the firearm is
on real property that is located in an unincorporated area of a township and
that is either zoned for agriculture or is used for agriculture.
         C.   The person owns the real property described in division (f)(2)B.
of this section, is the spouse or a child of another person who owns that real
property, is a tenant of another person who owns that real property, or is the
spouse or a child of a tenant of another person who owns that real property.
         D.   The person does not discharge the firearm in any of the following
manners:
            1.   While under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or
alcohol and a drug of abuse;
            2.   In the direction of a street, highway or other public or
private property used by the public for vehicular traffic or parking;
            3.   At or into an occupied structure that is a permanent or
temporary habitation;
            4.   In the commission of any violation of law, including but not
limited to a felony that includes, as an essential element, purposely or
knowingly causing or attempting to cause the death of or physical harm to
another and that was committed by discharging a firearm from a motor vehicle.
      (3)   Division (a) of this section does not apply to a person if all of
the following apply:
         A.   The person possesses a valid all-purpose vehicle permit issued
under Ohio R.C. 1533.103 by the Chief of the Division of Wildlife.
         B.   The person discharges a firearm at a wild quadruped or game bird
as defined in Ohio R.C. 1531.01 during the open hunting season for the
applicable wild quadruped or game bird.
         C.   The person discharges a firearm from a stationary all-purpose
vehicle as defined in Ohio R.C. 1531.01 from private or publicly owned lands or
from a motor vehicle that is parked on a road that is owned or administered by
the Division of Wildlife.
         D.   The person does not discharge the firearm in any of the following
manners:
            1.   While under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or
alcohol and a drug of abuse;
            2.   In the direction of a street, a highway, or other public or
private property that is used by the public for vehicular traffic or parking;
            3.   At or into an occupied structure that is a permanent or
temporary habitation;
            4.   In the commission of any violation of law, including, but not
limited to, a felony that includes, as an essential element, purposely or
knowingly causing or attempting to cause the death of or physical harm to
another and that was committed by discharging a firearm from a motor vehicle.
      (4)   Divisions (b) and (c) of this section do not apply to a person if
all of the following circumstances apply:
         A.   At the time of the alleged violation of either of those
divisions, the person is the operator of or a passenger in a motor vehicle.
         B.   The motor vehicle is on real property that is located in an
unincorporated area of a township and that is either zoned for agriculture or
is used for agriculture.
         C.   The person owns the real property described in division (f)(4)B.
of this section, is the spouse or a child of another person who owns that real
property, is a tenant of another person who owns that real property, or is the
spouse or a child of a tenant of another person who owns that real property.
         D.   The person, prior to arriving at the real property described in
division (f)(4)B. of this section, did not transport or possess a firearm in
the motor vehicle in a manner prohibited by division (b) or (c) of this section
while the motor vehicle was being operated on a street, highway or other public
or private property used by the public for vehicular traffic or parking.
      (5)   Divisions (b) and (c) of this section do not apply to a person who
transports or possesses a handgun in a motor vehicle if, at the time of that
transportation or possession, both of the following apply:
         A.   The person transporting or possessing the handgun is either
carrying a valid concealed handgun license or is an active duty member of the
armed forces of the United States and is carrying a valid military
identification card and documentation of successful completion of firearms
training that meets or exceeds the training requirements described in R.C. §
2923.125(G)(1).
         B.   The person transporting or possessing the handgun is not
knowingly in a place described in Ohio R.C. 2923.126(B).
      (6)   Divisions (b) and (c) of this section do not apply to a person if
all of the following apply:
         A.   The person possesses a valid all-purpose vehicle permit issued
under Ohio R.C. 1533.103 by the Chief of the Division of Wildlife.
         B.   The person is on or in an all-purpose vehicle as defined in Ohio
R.C. 1531.01 or a motor vehicle during the open hunting season for a wild
quadruped or game bird.
         C.   The person is on or in an all-purpose vehicle as defined in Ohio
R.C. 1531.01 on private or publicly owned lands or on or in a motor vehicle
that is parked on a road that is owned or administered by the Division of
Wildlife.
   (g)   (1)   The affirmative defenses authorized in Ohio R.C. 2923.12(D)(1)
and (D)(2) are affirmative defenses to a charge under division (b) or (c) of
this section that involves a firearm other than a handgun.
      (2)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (b) or (c)
of this section of improperly handling firearms in a motor vehicle that the
actor transported or had the firearm in the motor vehicle for any lawful
purpose and while the motor vehicle was on the actor’s own property, provided
that this affirmative defense is not available unless the person, immediately
prior to arriving at the actor’s own property, did not transport or possess the
firearm in a motor vehicle in a manner prohibited by division (b) or (c) of
this section while the motor vehicle was being operated on a street, highway,
or other public or private property used by the public for vehicular traffic.
   (h)   (1)   No person who is charged with a violation of division (b), (c),
or (d) of this section shall be required to obtain a concealed handgun license
as a condition for the dismissal of the charge.
      (2)   A.   If a person is convicted of, was convicted of, pleads guilty
to, or has pleaded guilty to a violation of division (e) of this section as it
existed prior to September 30, 2011 and if the conduct that was the basis of
the violation no longer would be a violation of division (e) of this section on
or after September 30, 2011, the person may file an application under Ohio R.C.
2953.37 requesting the expungement of the record of conviction.
         B.   If a person is convicted of, was convicted of, pleads guilty to,
or has pleaded guilty to a violation of division (b) or (c) of this section as
the division existed prior to September 30, 2011 and if the conduct that was
the basis of the violation no longer would be a violation of division (b) or
(c) of this section on or after September 30, 2011 due to the application of
division (f)(5) of this section as it exists on and after September 30, 2011,
the person may file an application under Ohio R.C. 2953.37 requesting the
expungement of the record of conviction.
   (i)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of improperly handling
firearms in a motor vehicle. Violation of division (a) of this section is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. Violation of division (c)
of this section is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. A violation of division
(d) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law
and, if the loaded handgun is concealed on the person’s person, it is also a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. Except as otherwise
provided in this division, a violation of division (e)(1) or (e)(2) of this
section is a misdemeanor of the first degree, and, in addition to any other
penalty or sanction imposed for the violation, the offender’s concealed handgun
license shall be suspended pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2923.128(A)(2). If at the time
of the stop of the offender for a traffic stop, for another law enforcement
purpose, or for a purpose defined in Ohio R.C. 5503.34 that was the basis of
the violation any law enforcement officer involved with the stop or the
employee of the motor carrier enforcement unit who made the stop had actual
knowledge of the offender’s status as a licensee, a violation of division (e)
(1) or (e)(2) of this section is a minor misdemeanor, and the offender’s
concealed handgun license shall not be suspended pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2923.128
(A)(2).  A violation of division (e)(4) of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law. A violation of division (e)(3) or (e)
(5) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree or, if the offender
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of division
(e)(3) or (e)(5) of this section or any substantially equivalent state law or
municipal ordinance, a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. In
addition to any other penalty or sanction imposed for a misdemeanor violation
of division (e)(3) or (e)(5) of this section, the offender’s concealed handgun
license shall be suspended pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2923.128(A)(2). A violation of
division (b) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
   (j)   If a law enforcement officer stops a motor vehicle for a traffic stop
or any other purpose, if any person in the motor vehicle surrenders a firearm
to the officer, either voluntarily or pursuant to a request or demand of the
officer, and if the officer does not charge the person with a violation of this
section or arrest the person for any offense, the person is not otherwise
prohibited by law from possessing the firearm, and the firearm is not
contraband, the officer shall return the firearm to the person at the
termination of the stop.  If a court orders a law enforcement officer to return
a firearm to a person pursuant to the requirement set forth in this division,
Ohio R.C. 2923.163(B) applies.
   (k)   As used in this section:
      (1)   “Agriculture” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 519.01.
      (2)   “Commercial motor vehicle” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C.
4506.25(A).
      (3)   “Motor carrier enforcement unit” means the Motor Carrier
Enforcement Unit in the Department of Public Safety, Division of State Highway
Patrol, that is created by Ohio R.C. 5503.34.
      (4)   “Motor vehicle,” “street” and “highway” have the same meaning as in
Ohio R.C. 4511.01.
      (5)   “Occupied structure” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2909.01.
      (6)   “Tenant” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 1531.01.
      (7)   “Unloaded.”
         A.   With respect to a firearm other than a firearm described in
division D. of this definition, means that no ammunition is in the firearm in
question, no magazine or speed loader containing ammunition is inserted into
the firearm, and one of the following applies:
            1.   There is no ammunition in a magazine or speed loader that is
in the vehicle in question and that may be used with the firearm in question.
            2.   Any magazine or speed loader that contains ammunition and that
may be used with the firearm in question is stored in a compartment within the
vehicle in question that cannot be accessed without leaving the vehicle or is
stored in a container that provides complete and separate enclosure.
         B.   For the purposes of division A.2. of this definition, a
“container that provides complete and separate enclosure” includes, but is not
limited to, any of the following:
            1.   A package, box, or case with multiple compartments, as long as
the loaded magazine or speed loader and the firearm in question either are in
separate compartments within the package, box, or case, or, if they are in the
same compartment, the magazine or speed loader is contained within a separate
enclosure in that compartment that does not contain the firearm and that closes
using a snap, button, buckle, zipper, hook and loop closing mechanism, or other
fastener that must be opened to access the contents or the firearm is contained
within a separate enclosure of that nature in that compartment that does not
contain the magazine or speed loader;
            2.   A pocket or other enclosure on the person of the person in
question that closes using a snap, button, buckle, zipper, hook and loop
closing mechanism, or other fastener that must be opened to access the
contents.
         C.   For the purposes of divisions A. and B. of this definition,
ammunition held in stripper-clips or in en-bloc clips is not considered
ammunition that is loaded into a magazine or speed loader.
         D.   “Unloaded” means, with respect to a firearm employing a
percussion cap, flintlock, or other obsolete ignition system, when the weapon
is uncapped or when the priming charge is removed from the pan.
   (l)   Divisions A. and B. of the definition of “unloaded” in division (k) of
this section do not affect the authority of a person who is carrying a valid
concealed handgun license to have one or more magazines or speed loaders
containing ammunition anywhere in a vehicle, without being transported as
described in those divisions, as long as no ammunition is in a firearm, other
than a handgun, in the vehicle other than as permitted under any other
provision of this chapter. A person who is carrying a valid concealed handgun
license may have one or more magazines or speed loaders containing ammunition
anywhere in a vehicle without further restriction, as long as no ammunition is
in a firearm, other than a handgun, in the vehicle other than as permitted
under any provision of this chapter.
(ORC 2923.16)
Statutory reference:
   Return of surrendered firearms by law enforcement, see Ohio R.C. 2923.163
§ 678.05  LICENSE OR PERMIT TO POSSESS DANGEROUS ORDNANCE.
   (a)   Upon application to the Sheriff of the county or Safety Director or
Police Chief of the municipality where the applicant resides or has the
applicant’s principal place of business, and upon payment of the fee specified
in division (b) of this section, a license or temporary permit shall be issued
to qualified applicants to acquire, possess, carry or use a dangerous ordnance
for the following purposes:
      (1)   Contractors, wreckers, quarriers, mine operators and other persons
regularly employing explosives in the course of a legitimate business, with
respect to explosives and explosive devices acquired, possessed, carried or
used in the course of such business.
      (2)   Farmers, with respect to explosives and explosive devices acquired,
possessed, carried or used for agricultural purposes on lands farmed by them.
      (3)   Scientists, engineers, and instructors, with respect to a dangerous
ordnance acquired, possessed, carried or used in the course of bona fide
research or instruction.
      (4)   Financial institutions and armored car company guards, with respect
to automatic firearms lawfully acquired, possessed, carried or used by any such
person while acting within the scope of the person’s duties.
      (5)   In the discretion of the issuing authority, any responsible person,
with respect to a dangerous ordnance lawfully acquired, possessed, carried or
used for a legitimate research, scientific, educational, industrial or other
proper purpose.
   (b)   Application for a license or temporary permit under this section shall
be in writing under oath to the Sheriff of the county or Safety Director or
Police Chief of the municipality where the applicant resides or has the
applicant’s principal place of business. The application shall be accompanied
by an application fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) when the application is for a
license, and an application fee of five dollars ($5.00) when the application is
for a temporary permit.  The fees shall be paid into the general revenue fund
of the county or municipality.  The application shall contain the following
information:
      (1)   The name, age, address, occupation and business address of the
applicant, if the applicant is a natural person, or the name, address, and
principal place of business of the applicant if the applicant is a corporation.
      (2)   A description of the dangerous ordnance for which a permit is
requested.
      (3)   A description of the places where and the manner in which the
dangerous ordnance is to be kept, carried, and used.
      (4)   A statement of the purposes for which the dangerous ordnance is to
be acquired, possessed, carried or used.
      (5)   Such other information as the issuing authority may require in
giving effect to this section.
   (c)   Upon investigation, the issuing authority shall issue a license or
temporary permit only if all of the following apply:
      (1)   The applicant is not otherwise prohibited by law from acquiring,
having, carrying or using a dangerous ordnance.
      (2)   The applicant is 21 years of age or over, if the applicant is a
natural person.
      (3)   It appears that the applicant has sufficient competence to safely
acquire, possess, carry or use the dangerous ordnance, and that proper
precautions will be taken to protect the security of the dangerous ordnance and
ensure the safety of persons and property.
      (4)   It appears that the dangerous ordnance will be lawfully acquired,
possessed, carried and used by the applicant for a legitimate purpose.
   (d)   The license or temporary permit shall identify the person to whom it
is issued, identify the dangerous ordnance involved and state the purposes for
which the license or temporary permit is issued, state the expiration date, if
any, and list such restrictions on the acquisition, possession, carriage, or
use of the dangerous ordnance as the issuing authority considers advisable to
protect the security of the dangerous ordnance and ensure the safety of persons
and property.
   (e)   A temporary permit shall be issued for the casual use of explosives
and explosive devices, and other consumable dangerous ordnance, and shall
expire within 30 days of its issuance. A license shall be issued for the
regular use of consumable dangerous ordnance, or for any non- consumable
dangerous ordnance, which license need not specify an expiration date, but the
issuing authority may specify such expiration date, not earlier than one year
from the date of issuance, as it considers advisable in view of the nature of
the dangerous ordnance and the purposes for which the license is issued.
   (f)   The dangerous ordnance specified in a license or temporary permit may
be obtained by the holder anywhere in the state.  Pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2923.18
(F), the holder of a license may use such dangerous ordnance anywhere in the
state.  The holder of a temporary permit may use such dangerous ordnance only
within the territorial jurisdiction of the issuing authority.
   (g)   The issuing authority shall forward to the State Fire Marshal a copy
of each license or temporary permit issued pursuant to this section, and a copy
of each record of a transaction in a dangerous ordnance and of each report of a
lost or stolen dangerous ordnance, given to the local law enforcement authority
as required by Ohio R.C. 2923.20(A)(7) and (8) or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance.  The State Fire Marshal will keep a permanent file of all
licenses and temporary permits issued pursuant to this section, and of all
records of transactions in, and losses or thefts of a dangerous ordnance
forwarded by local law enforcement authorities pursuant to this section.
(ORC 2923.18)
§ 678.06  FAILURE TO SECURE DANGEROUS ORDNANCE.
   (a)   No person, in acquiring, possessing, carrying, or using any dangerous
ordnance, shall negligently fail to take proper precautions:
      (1)   To secure the dangerous ordnance against theft, or against its
acquisition or use by any unauthorized or incompetent person.
      (2)   To ensure the safety of persons and property.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of failure to a secure
dangerous ordnance, a misdemeanor of the second degree.
(ORC 2923.19)
§ 678.07  UNLAWFUL TRANSACTIONS IN WEAPONS.
   (a)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Recklessly sell, lend, give or furnish any firearm to any person
prohibited by Ohio R.C. 2923.13 or 2923.15, or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, from acquiring or using any firearm, or recklessly sell,
lend, give or furnish any dangerous ordnance to any person prohibited by Ohio
R.C. 2923.13, 2923.15 or 2923.17, or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, from acquiring or using any dangerous ordnance;
      (2)   Possess any firearm or dangerous ordnance with purpose to dispose
of it in violation of division (a)(1) of this section;
      (3)   Except as otherwise provided in division (b) of this section,
knowingly solicit, persuade, encourage, or entice a federally licensed firearms
dealer or private seller to transfer a firearm or ammunition to any person in a
manner prohibited by state or federal law;
      (4)   Except as otherwise provided in division (b) of this section, with
an intent to deceive, knowingly provide materially false information to a
federally licensed firearms dealer or private seller;
      (5)   Except as otherwise provided in division (b) of this section,
knowingly procure, solicit, persuade, encourage, or entice a person to act in
violation of division (a)(3) or (a)(4) of this section;
      (6)   Manufacture, possess for sale, sell, or furnish to any person other
than a law enforcement agency for authorized use in police work, any brass
knuckles, cestus, billy, blackjack, sandbag, switchblade knife, springblade
knife, gravity knife, or similar weapon;
      (7)   When transferring any dangerous ordnance to another, negligently
fail to require the transferee to exhibit such identification, license, or
permit showing the transferee to be authorized to acquire dangerous ordnance
pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2923.17, or negligently fail to take a complete record of
the transaction and forthwith forward a copy of the record to the sheriff of
the county or Safety Director or Police Chief of the municipality where the
transaction takes place;
      (8)   Knowingly fail to report to law enforcement authorities forthwith
the loss or theft of any firearm or dangerous ordnance in the person’s
possession and under his or her control.
   (b)   Divisions (a)(3), (a)(4), and (a)(5) of this section do not apply to
any of the following:
      (1)   A law enforcement officer who is acting within the scope of the
officer’s duties;
      (2)   A person who is acting in accordance with directions given by a law
enforcement officer described in division (b)(1) of this section.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of unlawful transactions in
weapons. A violation of division (a)(1), (a)(2), (a)(3), (a)(4), or (a)(5) of
this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. A
violation of division (a)(6) or (a)(7) of this section is a misdemeanor of the
second degree. A violation of division (a)(8) of this section is a misdemeanor
of the fourth degree.
   (d)   As used in this section:
      (1)   “Ammunition.” Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2305.401.
      (2)   “Federally licensed firearms dealer.” Has the same meaning as in
Ohio R.C. 5502.63.
      (3)   “Materially false information.” Means information regarding the
transfer of a firearm or ammunition that portrays an illegal transaction as
legal or a legal transaction as illegal.
      (4)   “Private seller.” Means a person who sells, offers for sale, or
transfers a firearm or ammunition and who is not a federally licensed firearms
dealer.
(ORC 2923.20)
§ 678.08  UNDERAGE PURCHASE OF A FIREARM OR HANDGUN.
   (a)   No person under 18 years of age shall purchase or attempt to purchase
a firearm.
   (b)   No person under 21 years of age shall purchase or attempt to purchase
a handgun; provided, that this division does not apply to the purchase or
attempted purchase of a handgun by a person 18 years of age or older and under
21 years of age, if either of the following applies:
      (1)   The person is a law enforcement officer and has received firearms
training approved by the Ohio Peace Officer Training Council or equivalent
firearms training.
      (2)   The person is an active or reserve member of the armed services of
the United States or the Ohio National Guard, or was honorably discharged from
military service in the active or reserve armed services of the United States
or the Ohio National Guard, and the person has received firearms training from
the armed services or the national guard or equivalent firearms training.
   (c)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of underage
purchase of a firearm, a delinquent act that would be a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law if it could be committed by an adult.  Whoever
violates division (b) of this section is guilty of underage purchase of a
handgun, a misdemeanor of the second degree.
(ORC 2923.211)
§ 678.09  POINTING AND DISCHARGING FIREARMS AND OTHER WEAPONS.
   (a)   Except as provided in divisions (c) and (d) of this section, no person
shall discharge any air gun, rifle, shotgun, revolver, pistol or other firearm,
or make use of any sling or arrow, within the corporate limits of the
municipality.
   (b)   No person shall, intentionally and without malice, point or aim a
firearm at or toward another or discharge a firearm so pointed or aimed.
   (c)   This section does not extend to cases in which firearms, slings or
arrows are used in self-defense, in the discharge of official duty or in
justifiable homicide.
   (d)   This section does not extend to cases in which BB guns, firearms
converted for use in training scenarios with simunition and other air guns, or
slings or arrows, are used in the confines of commercial  buildings, provided
such use is under supervision, which use and supervision has been approved in
writing by the Chief of Police.
   (e)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(Ord. 16-O-2854, passed 2-2-2016)
§ 678.095  DISCHARGE OF A FIREARM ON OR NEAR PROHIBITED PREMISES.
   (a)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Without permission from the proper officials and subject to
division (b)(1) of this section, discharge a firearm upon or over a cemetery or
within 100 yards of a cemetery;
      (2)   Subject to division (b)(2) of this section, discharge of a firearm
on a lawn, park, pleasure ground, orchard, or other ground appurtenant to a
schoolhouse, church, or inhabited dwelling, the property of another, or a
charitable institution;
      (3)   Discharge a firearm upon or over a public road or highway.
   (b)   (1)   Division (a)(1) of this section does not apply to a person who
while on the person’s own land, discharges a firearm.
      (2)   Division (a)(2) of this section does not apply to a person who owns
any type of property described in that division and who, while on the person’s
own enclosure, discharges a firearm.
   (c)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of discharge
of a firearm on or near prohibited premises. A violation of division (a)(1) or
(a)(2) of this section is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.  A violation of
division (a)(3) of this section  shall be punished as follows:
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (c)(2) of this section, a
violation of division (a)(3) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
      (2)   If the violation created a substantial risk of physical harm to any
person, caused serious physical harm to property, caused physical harm to any
person, or caused serious physical harm to any person, a violation of division
(a)(3) is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(ORC 2923.162)
§ 678.10  FIREWORKS.
   (a)   Definitions.  As used in this section, unless otherwise provided:
      (1)   “1.3G fireworks.”  Display fireworks consistent with regulations of
the United States Department of Transportation as expressed using the
designation “Division 1.3" in Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations.
      (2)   “1.4G fireworks.”  Consumer fireworks consistent with regulations
of the United States Department of Transportation as expressed using the
designation “Division 1.4" in Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations.
      (3)   “Beer” and “intoxicating liquor.”  Have the same meaning as in Ohio
R.C. 4301.01.
      (4)   “Booby trap.”  A small tube that has a string protruding from both
ends that has a friction-sensitive composition and that is ignited by pulling
the ends of the string.
      (5)   “Cigarette load.”  A small wooden peg that is coated with a small
quantity of explosive composition and that is ignited in a cigarette.
      (6)   “Controlled substance.”  Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C.
3719.01.
      (7)   “Discharge site.” An area immediately surrounding the mortars used
to fire aerial shells.
      (8)   “Explosive.”  Any chemical compound, mixture, or device, the
primary or common purpose of which is to function by explosion.  “Explosive”
includes all materials that have been classified as Class A, Class B, or Class
C explosives by the United States Department of Transportation in its
regulations and includes, but is not limited to, dynamite, black powder, pellet
powders, initiating explosives, blasting caps, electric blasting caps, safety
fuses, fuse igniters, squibs, cordeau detonant fuses, instantaneous fuses, and
igniter cords and igniters.  “Explosives” does not include “fireworks” as
defined below, or any explosive that is not subject to regulation under the
rules of the State Fire Marshal adopted pursuant to Ohio R.C. 3737.82.
(ORC 2923.11)
      (9)   “Fireworks.”  Any composition or device prepared for the purpose of
producing a visible or an audible effect by combustion, deflagration, or
detonation, except ordinary matches and except as provided in Ohio R.C.
3743.80.
      (10)   “Fireworks incident.”  Any action or omission that occurs at a
fireworks exhibition that results in injury or death, or a substantial risk of
injury or death, to any person, and that involves either of the following:
         A.   The handling or other use, or the results of the handling or
other use, of fireworks or associated equipment or other materials;
         B.   The failure of any person to comply with any applicable
requirement imposed by this section or Ohio R.C. Chapter 3743, or any
applicable rule adopted under this section or Ohio R.C. Chapter 3743.
      (11)   “Fireworks incident site.”  A discharge site or other location at
a fireworks exhibition where a fireworks incident occurs, a location where an
injury or death associated with a fireworks incident occurs, or a location
where evidence of a fireworks incident or an injury or death associated with a
fireworks incident is found.
      (12)   “Fireworks plant.”  All buildings and other structures in which
the manufacturing of fireworks, or the storage or sale of manufactured
fireworks by a manufacturer, takes place.
      (13)   “Highway.”  Any public street, road, alley, way, lane or other
public thoroughfare.
      (14)   “Licensed building.”  A building on the licensed premises of a
licensed manufacturer or wholesaler of fireworks that is approved for occupancy
by the building official having jurisdiction.
      (15)   “Licensed exhibitor of fireworks” or “licensed exhibitor.”  A
person licensed pursuant to Ohio R.C. 3743.50 through 3743.55.
      (16)   “Licensed manufacturer of fireworks” or “licensed manufacturer.” 
A person licensed pursuant to Ohio R.C. 3743.02 through 3743.08.
      (17)   “Licensed premises.”  The real estate upon which a licensed
manufacturer or wholesaler of fireworks conducts business.
      (18)   “Licensed wholesaler of fireworks” or “licensed wholesaler.”  A
person licensed pursuant to Ohio R.C. 3743.15 through 3743.21.
      (19)   “Manufacturing of fireworks.”  The making of fireworks from raw
materials, none of which in and of themselves constitute fireworks, or the
processing of fireworks.
      (20)   “Novelties” and “trick noisemakers.”
         A.   Devices that produce a small report intended to surprise the
user, including but not limited to booby traps, cigarette loads, party poppers,
and snappers;
         B.   Snakes or glow worms;
         C.   Smoke devices;
         D.   Trick matches.
      (21)   “Party popper.”  A small plastic or paper item that contains not
more than 16 milligrams of friction-sensitive explosive composition that is
ignited by pulling a string protruding from the item, and from which paper
streamers are expelled when the item is ignited.
      (22)   “Processing of fireworks.”  The making of fireworks from materials
all or part of which in and of themselves constitute fireworks, but does not
include the mere packaging or repackaging of fireworks.
      (23)   “Railroad.”  Any railway or railroad that carries freight or
passengers for hire, but does not include auxiliary tracks, spurs, and sidings
installed and primarily used in serving a mine, quarry or plant.
      (24)   “Retail sale” or “sell at retail.”  A sale of fireworks to a
purchaser who intends to use the fireworks and not to resell them.
      (25)   “Smoke device.”  A tube or sphere that contains pyrotechnic
composition that, upon ignition, produces white or colored smoke as the primary
effect.
      (26)   “Snake” or “glow worm.”  A device that consists of a pressed
pellet of pyrotechnic composition that produces a large snake-like ash upon
burning, which ash expands in length as the pellet burns.
      (27)   “Snapper.”  A small paper-wrapped item that contains a minute
quantity of explosive composition coated on small bits of sand and that, when
dropped, implodes.
      (28)   “Storage location.” A single parcel or contiguous parcels of real
estate approved by the Fire Marshal pursuant to Ohio R.C. 3743.04(I) or Ohio
R.C. 3743.17(G) that are separate from a licensed premises containing a retail
showroom, and which parcel or parcels a licensed manufacturer or wholesaler of
fireworks may use only for the distribution, possession, and storage of
fireworks in accordance with this chapter.
      (29)   “Trick match.”  A kitchen or book match that is coated with a
small quantity of explosive composition and that, upon ignition, produces a
small report or a shower of sparks.
      (30)   “Wholesale sale” or “sell at wholesale.”  A sale of fireworks to a
purchaser who intends to resell the fireworks so purchased.
      (31)   “Wire sparkler.”  A sparkler consisting of a wire or stick coated
with a nonexplosive pyrotechnic mixture that produces a shower of sparks upon
ignition and that contains no more than 100 grams of this mixture.
(ORC 3743.01)
   (b)   Manufacturing.
      (1)   No licensed manufacturer of fireworks shall knowingly fail to
comply with the rules adopted by the State Fire Marshal pursuant to Ohio R.C.
3743.05 or the requirements of Ohio R.C. 3743.06.
      (2)   No licensed manufacturer of fireworks shall fail to maintain
complete inventory, wholesale sale and retail records as required by Ohio R.C.
3743.07, or to permit an inspection of these records or the premises of a
fireworks plant or the wholesaler pursuant to Ohio R.C. 3743.08.
      (3)   No licensed manufacturer of fireworks shall fail to comply with an
order of the State Fire Marshal issued pursuant to Ohio R.C. 3743.08(B)(1)
within the specified period of time.
      (4)   No licensed manufacturer of fireworks shall fail to comply with an
order of the State Fire Marshal issued pursuant to Ohio R.C. 3743.08(B)(2)
until the nonconformities are eliminated, corrected or otherwise remedied or
the 72-hour period specified in those divisions has expired, whichever occurs
first.
      (5)   No person shall smoke or shall carry a pipe, cigarette, or cigar,
or a match, lighter, other flame-producing item, or open flame on, or shall
carry a concealed source of ignition into, the premises of a fireworks plant,
except as smoking is authorized in specified lunchrooms or restrooms by a
manufacturer pursuant to Ohio R.C. 3743.06(C).
      (6)   No person shall have possession or control of, or be under the
influence of, any intoxicating liquor, beer, or controlled substance while on
the premises of a fireworks plant.
(ORC 3743.60(E) - (J))
   (c)   Wholesaling.
      (1)   No licensed wholesaler of fireworks shall knowingly fail to comply
with the rules adopted by the State Fire Marshal pursuant to Ohio R.C. 3743.18
or the requirements of Ohio R.C. 3743.19.
      (2)   No licensed wholesaler of fireworks shall fail to maintain complete
inventory, wholesale sale and retail records as required by Ohio R.C. 3743.20,
or to permit an inspection of these records or the premises of a fireworks
plant or the wholesaler pursuant to Ohio R.C. 3743.21.
      (3)   No licensed wholesaler of fireworks shall fail to comply with an
order of the State Fire Marshal issued pursuant to Ohio R.C. 3743.21(B)(1)
within the specified period of time.
      (4)   No licensed wholesaler of fireworks shall fail to comply with an
order of the State Fire Marshal issued pursuant to Ohio R.C. 3743.21(B)(2)
until the nonconformities are eliminated, corrected or otherwise remedied or
the 72-hour period specified in those divisions has expired, whichever occurs
first.
      (5)   No person shall smoke or shall carry a pipe, cigarette, or cigar,
or a match, lighter, other flame-producing item, or open flame on, or shall
carry a concealed source of ignition into, the premises of a wholesaler of
fireworks, except as smoking is authorized in specified lunchrooms or restrooms
by a wholesaler pursuant to Ohio R.C. 3743.19(D).
      (6)   No person shall have possession or control of, or be under the
influence of, any intoxicating liquor, beer, or controlled substance while on
the premises of a wholesaler of fireworks.
(ORC 3743.61(E) - (J))
   (d)   Purchasing and transporting.
      (1)   No person who resides in another state and purchases fireworks in
this state shall obtain possession of the fireworks in this state unless the
person complies with Ohio R.C. 3743.44.
      (2)   No person who resides in another state and who purchases fireworks
in this state shall obtain possession of fireworks in this state other than
from a licensed manufacturer or wholesaler, or fail, when transporting 1.3G
fireworks, to transport them directly out of this state within 72 hours after
the time of their purchase.  No such person shall give or sell to any other
person in this state fireworks that the person has acquired in this state.
      (3)   No person who resides in this state and purchases fireworks in this
state shall obtain possession of the fireworks in this state unless the person
complies with Ohio R.C. 3743.45.
      (4)   No person who resides in this state and who purchases fireworks in
this state under Ohio R.C. 3743.45 shall obtain possession of the fireworks in
this state other than from a licensed manufacturer or licensed wholesaler, or
fail, when transporting the fireworks, to transport them directly out of this
state within 48 hours after the time of their purchase.  No such person shall
give or sell to any other person in this state fireworks that the person has
acquired in this state.
(ORC 3743.63)
   (e)   Prohibited activities by exhibitors.
      (1)   An exhibitor of fireworks licensed under Ohio R.C. 3743.50 through
3743.55 who wishes to conduct a public fireworks exhibition shall apply for
approval to conduct the exhibition to the Fire Chief or fire prevention officer
and to the Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer, or the
designee of the Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer,
having jurisdiction over the premises.
      (2)   The approval required by division (e)(1) of this section shall be
evidenced by the Fire Chief or fire prevention officer and by the Police Chief
or other similar chief law enforcement officer, or the designee of the Police
Chief or similar chief law enforcement officer, signing a permit for the
exhibition.  Any exhibitor of fireworks who wishes to conduct a public
fireworks exhibition may obtain a copy of the form from the State Fire Marshal
or, if available, from the Fire Chief, a fire prevention officer, the Police
Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer, or a designee of the
Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer.
      (3)   Before a permit is signed and issued to a licensed exhibitor of
fireworks, the Fire Chief or fire prevention officer, in consultation with the
Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer, or the designee of
the Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer, shall inspect
the premises on which the exhibition will take place and shall determine that,
in fact, the applicant for the permit is a licensed exhibitor of fireworks. 
Each applicant shall show his or her license as an exhibitor of fireworks to
the Fire Chief or fire prevention officer.
      (4)   The Fire Chief or fire prevention officer and the Police Chief or
other similar chief law enforcement officer, or the designee of the Police
Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer, shall give approval to
conduct a public fireworks exhibition only if satisfied, based on the
inspection, that the premises on which the exhibition will be conducted allow
the exhibitor to comply with the rules adopted by the State Fire Marshal
pursuant to Ohio R.C. 3743.53(B) and (E) and that the applicant is, in fact, a
licensed exhibitor of fireworks.  The Fire Chief or fire prevention officer, in
consultation with  the Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement
officer or with the designee of the Police Chief or other similar chief law
enforcement officer, may inspect the premises immediately prior to the
exhibition to determine if the exhibitor has complied with the rules, and may
revoke a permit for noncompliance with the rules.
      (5)   If the Council has prescribed a fee for the issuance of a permit
for a public fireworks exhibition, the Fire Chief or fire prevention officer
and Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer, or their
designee, shall not issue a permit until the exhibitor pays the requisite fee.
      (6)   Each exhibitor shall provide an indemnity bond in the amount of at
least one million dollars with surety satisfactory to the Fire Chief or fire
prevention officer and to the Police Chief or other similar chief law
enforcement officer, or the designee of the Police Chief or other similar chief
law enforcement officer, conditioned for the payment of all final judgments
that may be rendered against the exhibitor on account of injury, death, or loss
to person or property emanating from the fireworks exhibitor, or proof of
insurance coverage of at least one million dollars for liability arising from
injury, death, or loss of persons or property emanating from the fireworks
exhibition.  The Council may require the exhibitor to provide an indemnity bond
or proof of insurance coverage in amounts greater than those required by this
division.  The Fire Chief or fire prevention officer and Police Chief or other
similar chief law enforcement officer, or their designee, shall not issue a
permit until the exhibitor provides the bond or proof of the insurance coverage
required by this division or by the Council.
      (7)   Each permit for a fireworks exhibition issued by the Fire Chief or
fire prevention officer and by the Police Chief or other similar chief law
enforcement officer, or the designee of the Police Chief or other similar chief
law enforcement officer, shall contain a distinct number, designate the
municipality, and identify the certified fire safety inspector, Fire Chief, or
fire prevention officer who will be present before, during and after the
exhibition, where appropriate.  A copy of each permit issued shall be forwarded
by the Fire Chief or fire prevention officer and by the Police Chief or other
similar chief law enforcement officer, or designee of the Police Chief or other
similar chief law enforcement officer, issuing it to the State Fire Marshal.  A
permit is not transferable or assignable.
      (8)   The Fire Chief or fire prevention officer and Police Chief or other
similar chief law enforcement officer, or designee of the Police Chief or other
similar chief law enforcement officer, shall keep a record of issued permits
for fireworks exhibitions.  In this list, the Fire Chief, fire prevention
officer, Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer, or
designee of the Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer,
shall list the name of the exhibitor, his or her license number, the premises
on which the exhibition will be conducted, the date and time of the exhibition,
and the number and political subdivision designation of the permit issued to
the exhibitor for the exhibition.
      (9)   The Council shall require that a certified fire safety inspector,
Fire Chief or fire prevention officer be present before, during and after the
exhibition, and shall require the certified fire safety inspector, Fire Chief
or fire prevention officer to inspect the premises where the exhibition is to
take place and determine whether the exhibition is in compliance with this
section and Ohio R.C. Chapter 3743.
(ORC 3743.54)
      (10)   No licensed exhibitor of fireworks shall fail to comply with the
applicable requirements of the rules adopted by the State Fire Marshal pursuant
to Ohio R.C. 3743.53(B) and (E) or to comply with Ohio R.C. 3743.53(C) and (D).
      (11)   No licensed exhibitor of fireworks shall conduct a fireworks
exhibition unless a permit has been secured for the exhibition pursuant to Ohio
R.C. 3743.54 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, or if a permit
so secured is revoked by a Fire Chief or fire prevention officer, in
consultation with a Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement
officer, or with a designee of a Police Chief or other similar chief law
enforcement officer, pursuant to those sections.
      (12)   No licensed exhibitor of fireworks shall acquire fireworks for use
at a fireworks exhibition other than in accordance with Ohio R.C. 3743.54 and
3743.55, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
      (13)   No licensed exhibitor of fireworks or other person associated with
the conduct of a fireworks exhibition shall have possession or control of, or
be under the influence of, any intoxicating liquor, beer, or controlled
substance while on the premises on which the exhibition is being conducted.
      (14)   No licensed exhibitor of fireworks shall permit an employee to
assist the licensed exhibitor in conducting fireworks exhibitions unless the
employee is registered with the State Fire Marshal under Ohio R.C. 3743.56.
(ORC 3743.64)
   (f)   Possession, sale, discharge and advertising; falsification.
      (1)   No person shall possess fireworks in this municipality or shall
possess for sale or sell fireworks in this municipality, except a licensed
manufacturer of fireworks as authorized by Ohio R.C. 3743.02 through 3743.08, a
licensed wholesaler of fireworks as authorized by Ohio R.C. 3743.15 through
3743.21, a shipping permit holder as authorized by Ohio R.C. 3743.40, an out-
of-state resident as authorized by Ohio R.C. 3743.44, a resident of this state
as authorized by Ohio R.C. 3743.45, or a licensed exhibitor of fireworks as
authorized by Ohio R.C. 3743.50 through 3743.55, or as authorized by any
municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to any of these statutes,
and except as provided in Ohio R.C. 3743.80 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance.
      (2)   Except as provided in Ohio R.C. 3743.80 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, and except for licensed exhibitors of fireworks
authorized to conduct a fireworks exhibition pursuant to Ohio R.C. 3743.50
through 3743.55 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, no person
shall discharge, ignite, or explode any fireworks in this municipality.
      (3)   No person shall use in a theater or public hall what is technically
known as fireworks showers, or a mixture containing potassium chlorate and
sulphur.
      (4)   No person shall sell fireworks of any kind to a person under 18
years of age.  No person under 18 years of age shall enter a fireworks sales
showroom unless that person is accompanied by a parent, legal guardian, or
other responsible adult.  No person under 18 years of age shall touch or
possess fireworks on a licensed premises without the consent of the licensee. 
A licensee may eject any person from a licensed premises that is in any way
disruptive to the safe operation of the premises.
      (5)   Except as otherwise provided in Ohio R.C. 3743.44, no person, other
than a licensed manufacturer, licensed wholesaler, licensed exhibitor, or
shipping permit holder shall possess 1.3G fireworks in this municipality.
(ORC 3743.65(A) - (E))
   (g)   Transporting and shipping.
      (1)   No person shall transport fireworks in this municipality except in
accordance with the rules adopted by the State Fire Marshal pursuant to Ohio
R.C. 3743.58.
      (2)   As used in this division, “fireworks” includes only 1.3G and 1.4G
fireworks.  No person shall ship fireworks into this municipality by mail,
parcel post, or common carrier unless the person possesses a valid shipping
permit issued under Ohio R.C. 3743.40, and the fireworks are shipped directly
to the holder of a license issued under Ohio R.C. 3743.03, 3743.16 or 3743.51.
      (3)   No person shall ship fireworks within this municipality by mail,
parcel post, or common carrier unless the fireworks are shipped directly to the
holder of a license issued under Ohio R.C. 3743.01, 3743.16 or 3743.51.
(ORC 3743.66)
   (h)   Exceptions.  This section does not prohibit or apply to the following:
      (1)   The manufacture, sale, possession, transportation, storage, or use
in emergency situations of pyrotechnic signaling devices and distress signals
for marine, aviation, or highway use;
      (2)   The manufacture, sale, possession, transportation, storage or use
of fusees, torpedoes, or other signals necessary for the safe operation of
railroads;
      (3)   The manufacture, sale, possession, transportation, storage or use
of blank cartridges in connection with theaters or shows, or in connection with
athletics as signals for ceremonial purposes;
      (4)   The manufacture for, the transportation, storage, possession or use
by, or the sale to the armed forces of the United States and the militia of
this state of pyrotechnic devices;
      (5)   The manufacture, sale, possession, transportation, storage or use
of toy pistols, toy canes, toy guns, or other devices in which paper or plastic
caps containing 0.25 grains or less of explosive material are used, provided
that they are constructed so that a hand cannot come into contact with a cap
when it is in place for explosion, or apply to the manufacture, sale,
possession, transportation, storage or use of those caps;
      (6)   The manufacture, sale, possession, transportation, storage or use
of novelties and trick noisemakers, auto burglar alarms, or model rockets and
model rocket motors designed, sold, and used for the purpose of propelling
recoverable aero models;
      (7)   The manufacture, sale, possession, transportation, storage or use
of wire sparklers;
      (8)   The conduct of radio-controlled special effect exhibitions that use
an explosive black powder charge of not more than one-quarter pound per charge,
and that are not connected in any manner to propellant charges; provided, that
the exhibition complies with all of the following:
         A.   No explosive aerial display is conducted in the exhibition;
         B.   The exhibition is separated from spectators by not less than 200
feet;
         C.   The person conducting the exhibition complies with regulations of
the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms of the United States Department of
the Treasury and the United States Department of Transportation with respect to
the storage and transport of the explosive black powder used in the exhibition.
(ORC 3743.80)
   (i)   Forfeiture and disposal.  Fireworks manufactured, sold, possessed,
transported, or used in violation of this section shall be forfeited by the
offender.  The Fire Marshal’s office or certified fire safety inspector’s
office shall dispose of seized fireworks pursuant to the procedures specified
in Ohio R.C. 2981.11 to 2981.13 for the disposal of forfeited property by law
enforcement agencies, and the Fire Marshal or that office is not liable for
claims for the loss of or damages to the seized fireworks.
(ORC 3743.68(B))
   (j)   Penalty.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (j)(2) or (j)(3) of this
section, whoever violates any provisions of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (2)   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty
to a violation of Ohio R.C. 3743.60(I) or Ohio R.C. 3743.61(I), or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, a violation of division (b)(5) of
this section or division (c)(5) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.
      (3)   Whoever violates division (e)(10) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.  In addition to any other penalties that may
be imposed on a licensed exhibitor of fireworks under this division and unless
the third sentence of this division applies, the person’s license as an
exhibitor of fireworks or as an assistant exhibitor of fireworks shall be
suspended, and the person is ineligible to apply for either type of license,
for a period of five years.  If the violation of division (e)(10) of this
section results in serious physical harm to persons or serious physical harm to
property, the person’s license as an exhibitor of fireworks or as an assistant
exhibitor of fireworks shall be revoked, and that person is ineligible to apply
for a license as or to be licensed as an exhibitor of fireworks or as an
assistant exhibitor of fireworks in this state.
(ORC 3743.99(C), (D))
§ 678.11  ENDANGERING AIRCRAFT AND AIRPORT OPERATIONS.
   (a)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   “Air gun.” A hand pistol or rifle that propels its projectile by
means of releasing compressed air, carbon dioxide, or other gas.
      (2)   “Airport operational surface.”  Any surface of land or water that
is developed, posted, or marked so as to give an observer reasonable notice
that the surface is designed and developed for the purpose of storing, parking,
taxiing, or operating aircraft, or any surface of land or water that is
actually being used for any of those purposes.
      (3)   “Firearm.”  Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2923.11.
      (4)   “Spring-operated gun.”  A hand pistol or rifle that propels a
projectile not less than four or more than five millimeters in diameter by
means of a spring.
   (b)   No person shall do either of the following:
      (1)   Knowingly throw an object at, or drop an object upon, any moving
aircraft.
      (2)   Knowingly shoot with a bow and arrow, or knowingly discharge a
firearm, air gun, or spring-operated gun, at or toward any aircraft.
   (c)   No person shall knowingly or recklessly shoot with a bow and arrow, or
shall knowingly or recklessly discharge a firearm, air gun, or spring-operated
gun, upon or over any airport operational surface.  This division does not
apply to the following:
      (1)   An officer, agent, or employee of this or any other state or of the
United States, or a law enforcement officer, authorized to discharge firearms
and acting within the scope of his or her duties.
      (2)   A person who, with the consent of the owner or operator of the
airport operational surface or the authorized agent of either, is lawfully
engaged in any hunting or sporting activity or is otherwise lawfully
discharging a firearm.
   (d)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of endangering
aircraft, a misdemeanor of the first degree.  If the violation creates any risk
of physical harm to any person, or if the aircraft that is the subject of the
violation is occupied, endangering aircraft is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
   (e)   Whoever violates division (c) of this section is guilty of endangering
airport operations, a misdemeanor of the second degree.  If the violation
creates a risk of physical harm to any person or substantial risk of serious
harm to any person, endangering airport operations is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.  In addition to any other penalty or sanction
imposed for the violation, the hunting license or permit of a person who
violates division (c) of this section while hunting shall be suspended or
revoked pursuant to Ohio R.C. 1533.68.
(ORC 2909.08(A) - (E))
§ 678.12  POSSESSING CRIMINAL TOOLS.
   (a)   No person shall possess or have under his or her control any
substance, device, instrument, or article, with purpose to use it criminally.
   (b)   Each of the following constitutes prima facie evidence of criminal
purpose:
      (1)   Possession or control of any dangerous ordnance, or the materials
or parts for making a dangerous ordnance, in the absence of circumstances
indicating the dangerous ordnance, materials or parts are intended for a
legitimate use.
      (2)   Possession or control of any substance, device, instrument, or
article designed or specially adapted for criminal use.
      (3)   Possession or control of any substance, device, instrument, or
article commonly used for criminal purposes, under circumstances indicating the
item is intended for criminal use.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of possessing criminal tools. 
Except as otherwise provided in this division, possessing criminal tools is a
misdemeanor of the first degree.  If the circumstances indicate that the
substance, device, instrument, or article involved in the offense was intended
for use in the commission of a felony, possessing criminal tools is a felony to
be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(ORC 2923.24)
§ 678.13  POSSESSION OF AN OBJECT INDISTINGUISHABLE FROM A FIREARM IN A SCHOOL
SAFETY ZONE.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly possess an object in a school safety zone if
both of the following apply:
      (1)   The object is indistinguishable from a firearm, whether or not the
object is capable of being fired.
      (2)   The person indicates that the person possesses the object and that
it is a firearm, or the person knowingly displays or brandishes the object and
indicates that it is a firearm.
   (b)   (1)   This section does not apply to any of the following:
         A.   An officer, agent, or employee of this or any other state or the
United States who is authorized to carry deadly weapons or dangerous ordnance
and is acting within the scope of the officer’s, agent’s, or employee’s duties,
a law enforcement officer who is authorized to carry deadly weapons or
dangerous ordnance, a security officer employed by a board of education or
governing body of a school during the time that the security officer is on duty
pursuant to that contract of employment, or any other person who has written
authorization from the board of education or governing body of a school to
convey deadly weapons or dangerous ordnance into a school safety zone or to
possess a deadly weapon or dangerous ordnance in a school safety zone and who
conveys or possesses the deadly weapon or dangerous ordnance in accordance with
that authorization;
         B.   Any person who is employed in this state, who is authorized to
carry deadly weapons or dangerous ordnance, and who is subject to and in
compliance with the requirements of Ohio R.C. 109.801, unless the appointing
authority of the person has expressly specified that the exemption provided in
this division (b)(1)B. does not apply to the person.
      (2)   This section does not apply to premises upon which home schooling
is conducted.  This section also does not apply to a school administrator,
teacher or employee who possesses an object that is indistinguishable from a
firearm for legitimate school purposes during the course of employment, a
student who uses an object that is indistinguishable from a firearm under the
direction of a school administrator, teacher or employee, or any other person
who, with the express prior approval of a school administrator, possesses an
object that is indistinguishable from a firearm for a legitimate purpose,
including the use of the object in a ceremonial activity, a play, re-enactment
or other dramatic presentation, school safety training, or a ROTC activity or
another similar use of the object.
      (3)   This section does not apply to a person who conveys or attempts to
convey a handgun into, or possesses a handgun in, a school safety zone if, at
the time of that conveyance, attempted conveyance, or possession of the
handgun, all of the following apply:
         A.   The person does not enter into a school building or onto school
premises and is not at a school activity.
         B.   The person is carrying a valid concealed handgun license or the
person is an active duty member of the armed forces of the United States and is
carrying a valid military identification card and documentation of successful
completion of firearms training that meets or exceeds the training requirements
described in R.C. § 2923.125(G)(1).
         C.   The person is in the school safety zone in accordance with 18
U.S.C. 922(q)(2)(B).
         D.   The person is not knowingly in a place described in Ohio R.C.
2923.126(B)(1) or (B)(3) to (B)(8).
      (4)   This section does not apply to a person who conveys or attempts to
convey a handgun into, or possesses a handgun in, a school safety zone if at
the time of that conveyance, attempted conveyance, or possession of the handgun
all of the following apply:
         A.   The person is carrying a valid concealed handgun license or the
person is an active duty member of the armed forces of the United States and is
carrying a valid military identification card and documentation of successful
completion of firearms training that meets or exceeds the training requirements
described in R.C. § 2923.125(G)(1).
         B.   The person leaves the handgun in a motor vehicle.
         C.   The handgun does not leave the motor vehicle.
         D.   If the person exits the motor vehicle, the person locks the motor
vehicle.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of illegal possession of an
object indistinguishable from a firearm in a school safety zone.  Except as
otherwise provided in this division, illegal possession of an object
indistinguishable from a firearm in a school safety zone is a misdemeanor of
the first degree.  If the offender previously has been convicted of a violation
of this section, illegal possession of an object indistinguishable from a
firearm in a school safety zone is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
   (d)   (1)   In addition to any other penalty imposed upon a person who is
convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of this section, and subject to
division (d)(2) of this section, if the offender has not attained 19 years of
age, regardless of whether the offender is attending or is enrolled in a school
operated by a board of education or for which the State Board of Education
prescribes minimum standards under Ohio R.C. 3301.07, the court shall impose
upon the offender a class four suspension of the offender’s probationary
driver’s license, restricted license, driver’s license, commercial driver’s
license, temporary instruction permit, or probationary commercial driver’s
license that then is in effect from the range specified in Ohio R.C. 4510.02(A)
(4) and  shall deny the offender the issuance of any permit or license of that
type during the period of the suspension. If the offender is not a resident of
this state, the court shall impose a class four suspension of the nonresident
operating privilege of the offender from the range specified in Ohio R.C.
4510.02(A)(4).
      (2)   If the offender shows good cause why the court should not suspend
one of the types of licenses, permits or privileges specified in division (d)
(1) of this section or deny the issuance of one of the temporary instruction
permits specified in division (d)(1) of this section, the court in its
discretion may choose not to impose the suspension, revocation or denial
required in division (d)(1) of this section, but the court, in its discretion,
instead may require the offender to perform community service for a number of
hours determined by the court.
   (e)   As used in this section, “object that is indistinguishable from a
firearm” means an object made, constructed or altered so that, to a reasonable
person without specialized training in firearms, the object appears to be a
firearm.
(ORC 2923.122(C) - (G))
Statutory reference:
   Conveyance or possession of deadly weapons or dangerous ordnance in a school
safety zone, felony offense, see Ohio R.C. 2923.122(A), (B)
§ 678.14  CONCEALED HANDGUN LICENSES: POSSESSION OF A REVOKED OR SUSPENDED
LICENSE; ADDITIONAL RESTRICTIONS; POSTING OF SIGNS PROHIBITING POSSESSION.
   (a)   Possession of a revoked or suspended concealed handgun license.
      (1)   No person, except in the performance of official duties, shall
possess a concealed handgun license that was issued and that has been revoked
or suspended.
      (2)   Whoever violates this division (a) is guilty of possessing a
revoked or suspended concealed handgun license, a misdemeanor of the third
degree.
(ORC 2923.1211(B), (C))
   (b)   Additional restrictions.  Pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2923.126:
      (1)   A.   A concealed handgun license that is issued under Ohio R.C.
2923.125 shall expire five years after the date of issuance. A licensee who has
been issued a license under that section shall be granted a grace period of 30
days after the licensee’s license expires during which the licensee’s license
remains valid. Except as provided in divisions (b)(2) and (b)(3) of this
section, a licensee who has been issued a concealed handgun license under Ohio
R.C. 2923.125 or 2923.1213 may carry a concealed handgun anywhere in this state
if the licensee also carries a valid license when the licensee is in actual
possession of a concealed handgun. The licensee shall give notice of any change
in the licensee’s residence address to the Sheriff who issued the license
within 45 days after that change.
         B.   If a licensee is the driver or an occupant of a motor vehicle
that is stopped as the result of a traffic stop or a stop for another law
enforcement purpose and if the licensee is transporting or has a loaded handgun
in the motor vehicle at that time, the licensee shall promptly inform any law
enforcement officer who approaches the vehicle while stopped that the licensee
has been issued a concealed handgun license and that the licensee currently
possesses or has a loaded handgun; the licensee shall not knowingly disregard
or fail to comply with lawful orders of a law enforcement officer given while
the motor vehicle is stopped, knowingly fail to remain in the motor vehicle
while stopped, or knowingly fail to keep the licensee’s hands in plain sight
after any law enforcement officer begins approaching the licensee while stopped
and before the officer leaves, unless directed otherwise by a law enforcement
officer; and the licensee shall not knowingly have contact with the loaded
handgun by touching it with the licensee’s hands or fingers, in any manner in
violation of Ohio R.C. 2923.16(E), after any law enforcement officer begins
approaching the licensee while stopped and before the officer leaves.
Additionally, if a licensee is the driver or an occupant of a commercial motor
vehicle that is stopped by an employee of the motor carrier enforcement unit
for the purposes defined in Ohio R.C. 5503.34 and if the licensee is
transporting or has a loaded handgun in the commercial motor vehicle at that
time, the licensee shall promptly inform the employee of the unit who
approaches the vehicle while stopped that the licensee has been issued a
concealed handgun license and that the licensee currently possesses or has a
loaded handgun.
         C.   If a licensee is stopped for a law enforcement purpose and if the
licensee is carrying a concealed handgun at the time the officer approaches,
the licensee shall promptly inform any law enforcement officer who approaches
the licensee while stopped that the licensee has been issued a concealed
handgun license and that the licensee currently is carrying a concealed
handgun; the licensee shall not knowingly disregard or fail to comply with
lawful orders of a law enforcement officer given while the licensee is stopped
or knowingly fail to keep the licensee’s hands in plain sight after any law
enforcement officer begins approaching the licensee while stopped and before
the officer leaves, unless directed otherwise by a law enforcement officer; and
the licensee shall not knowingly remove, attempt to remove, grasp, or hold the
loaded handgun or knowingly have contact with the loaded handgun by touching it
with the licensee’s hands or fingers, in any manner in violation of Ohio R.C.
2923.12(B), after any law enforcement officer begins approaching the licensee
while stopped and before the officer leaves.
      (2)   A valid concealed handgun license does not authorize the licensee
to carry a concealed handgun in any manner prohibited under Ohio R.C. 2923.12
(B) or in any manner prohibited under Ohio R.C. 2923.16. A valid license does
not authorize the licensee to carry a concealed handgun into any of the
following places:
         A.   A police station, sheriff’s office, or state highway patrol
station, premises controlled by the bureau of criminal identification and
investigation; a state correctional institution, jail, workhouse, or other
detention facility; any area of an airport passenger terminal that is beyond a
passenger or property screening checkpoint or to which access is restricted
through security measures by the airport authority or a public agency; or an
institution that is maintained, operated, managed, and governed pursuant to
R.C. § 5119.14(A) or R.C. § 5123.03(A)(1);
         B.   A school safety zone if the licensee’s carrying the concealed
handgun is in violation of Ohio R.C. 2923.122;
         C.   A courthouse or another building or structure in which a
courtroom is located if the licensee’s carrying the concealed handgun is in
violation of Ohio R.C. 2923.123;
         D.   Any premises or open air arena for which a D permit has been
issued under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4303 if the licensee’s carrying the concealed
handgun is in violation of Ohio R.C. 2923.121;
         E.   Any premises owned or leased by any public or private college,
university, or other institution of higher education, unless the handgun is in
a locked motor vehicle or the licensee is in the immediate process of placing
the handgun in a locked motor vehicle or unless the licensee is carrying the
concealed handgun pursuant to a written policy, rule, or other authorization
that is adopted by the institution’s board of trustees or other governing body
and that authorizes specific individuals or classes of individuals to carry a
concealed handgun on the premises;
         F.   Any church, synagogue, mosque, or other place of worship, unless
the church, synagogue, mosque, or other place of worship posts or permits
otherwise;
         G.   Any building that is a government facility of this state or a
political subdivision of this state and that is not a building that is used
primarily as a shelter, restroom, parking facility for motor vehicles, or rest
facility and is not a courthouse or other building or structure in which a
courtroom is located that is subject to division (b)(2)C. of this section,
unless the governing body with authority over the building has enacted a
statute, ordinance, or policy that permits a licensee to carry a concealed
handgun into the building;
         H.   A place in which federal law prohibits the carrying of handguns.
      (3)   A.   Nothing in this division (b) shall negate or restrict a rule,
policy, or practice of a private employer that is not a private college,
university, or other institution of higher education concerning or prohibiting
the presence of firearms on the private employer’s premises or property,
including motor vehicles owned by the private employer. Nothing in this
division (b) shall require a private employer of that nature to adopt a rule,
policy, or practice concerning or prohibiting the presence of firearms on the
private employer’s premises or property, including motor vehicles owned by the
private employer.
         B.   1.   A private employer shall be immune from liability in a civil
action for any injury, death, or loss to person or property that allegedly was
caused by or related to a licensee bringing a handgun onto the premises or
property of the private employer, including motor vehicles owned by the private
employer, unless the private employer acted with malicious purpose. A private
employer is immune from liability in a civil action for any injury, death, or
loss to person or property that allegedly was caused by or related to the
private employer’s decision to permit a licensee to bring, or prohibit a
licensee from bringing, a handgun onto the premises or property of the private
employer.
            2.   A political subdivision shall be immune from liability in a
civil action, to the extent and in the manner provided in Ohio R.C. Chapter
2744, for any injury, death, or loss to person or property that allegedly was
caused by or related to a licensee bringing a handgun onto any premises or
property owned, leased, or otherwise under the control of the political
subdivision. As used in this division, “political subdivision” has the same
meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2744.01.
            3.   An institution of higher education shall be immune from
liability in a civil action for any injury, death, or loss to person or
property that allegedly was caused by or related to a licensee bringing a
handgun onto the premises of the institution, including motor vehicles owned by
the institution, unless the institution acted with malicious purpose. An
institution of higher education is immune from liability in a civil action for
any injury, death, or loss to person or property that allegedly was caused by
or related to the institution’s decision to permit a licensee or class of
licensees to bring a handgun onto the premises of the institution.
         C.   1.   a.   Except as provided in division (b)(3)C.2. of this
section and Ohio R.C. 2923.1214, the owner or person in control of private land
or premises, and a private person or entity leasing land or premises owned by
the state, the United States, or a political subdivision of the state or the
United States, may post a sign in a conspicuous location on that land or on
those premises prohibiting persons from carrying firearms or concealed firearms
on or onto that land or those premises. Except as otherwise provided in this
division, a person who knowingly violates a posted prohibition of that nature
is guilty of criminal trespass in violation of Ohio R.C. 2911.21(A)(4) and is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If a person knowingly violates a
posted prohibition of that nature and the posted land or premises primarily was
a parking lot or other parking facility, the person is not guilty of criminal
trespass under Ohio R.C. 2911.21 or under any other criminal law of this state
or criminal law, ordinance, or resolution of a political subdivision of this
state, and instead is subject only to a civil cause of action for trespass
based on the violation.
               b.   If a person knowingly violates a posted prohibition of the
nature described in this division and the posted land or premises is a child
day-care center, type A family day-care home, or type B family day-care home,
unless the person is a licensee who resides in a type A family day-care home or
type B family day-care home, the person is guilty of aggravated trespass in
violation of R.C. § 2911.211. Except as otherwise provided in this division,
the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the person
previously has been convicted of a violation of this division or any
substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, or of any offense of
violence, if the weapon involved is a firearm that is either loaded or for
which the offender has ammunition ready at hand, or if the weapon involved is
dangerous ordnance, the offender is guilty of a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
            2.   A landlord may not prohibit or restrict a tenant who is a
licensee and who on or after September 9, 2008 enters into a rental agreement
with the landlord for the use of residential premises, and the tenant’s guest
while the tenant is present, from lawfully carrying or possessing a handgun on
those residential premises.
            3.   As used in division (b)(3)C. of this section:
               a.   “Residential premises” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C.
5321.01, except “residential premises” does not include a dwelling unit that is
owned or operated by a college or university.
               b.   “Landlord”, “tenant”, and “rental agreement” have the same
meanings as in Ohio R.C. 5321.01.
      (4)   A person who holds a valid concealed handgun license issued by
another state that is recognized by the Attorney General pursuant to a
reciprocity agreement entered into pursuant to Ohio R.C. 109.69 or a person who
holds a valid concealed handgun license under the circumstances described in
Ohio R.C. 109.69(B) has the same right to carry a concealed handgun in this
state as a person who was issued a concealed handgun license under Ohio R.C.
2923.125 and is subject to the same restrictions that apply to a person who
carries a license issued under that section.
      (5)   A.   A peace officer has the same right to carry a concealed
handgun in this state as a person who was issued a concealed handgun license
under Ohio R.C. 2923.125, provided that the officer when carrying a concealed
handgun under authority of this division is carrying validating identification.
For purposes of reciprocity with other states, a peace officer shall be
considered to be a licensee in this state.
         B.   An active duty member of the armed forces of the United States
who is carrying a valid military identification card and documentation of
successful completion of firearms training that meets or exceeds the training
requirements described in R.C. § 2923.125(G)(1) has the same right to carry a
concealed handgun in this state as a person who was issued a concealed handgun
license under R.C. § 2923.125 and is subject to the same restrictions as
specified in this division (b).
         C.   A tactical medical professional who is qualified to carry
firearms while on duty under Ohio R.C. 109.771 has the same right to carry a
concealed handgun in this state as a person who was issued a concealed handgun
license under Ohio R.C. 2923.125.
      (6)   A.   A qualified retired peace officer who possesses a retired
peace officer identification card issued pursuant to division (b)(6)B. of this
section and a valid firearms requalification certification issued pursuant to
division (b)(6)C. of this section has the same right to carry a concealed
handgun in this state as a person who was issued a concealed handgun license
under Ohio R.C. 2923.125 and is subject to the same restrictions that apply to
a person who carries a license issued under that section. For purposes of
reciprocity with other states, a qualified retired peace officer who possesses
a retired peace officer identification card issued pursuant to division (b)
(6)B. of this section and a valid firearms requalification certification issued
pursuant to division (b)(6)C. of this section shall be considered to be a
licensee in this state.
         B.   1.   Each public agency of this state or of a political
subdivision of this state that is served by one or more peace officers shall
issue a retired peace officer identification card to any person who retired
from service as a peace officer with that agency, if the issuance is in
accordance with the agency’s policies and procedures and if the person, with
respect to the person’s service with that agency, satisfies all of the
following:
               a.   The person retired in good standing from service as a peace
officer with the public agency, and the retirement was not for reasons of
mental instability.
               b.   Before retiring from service as a peace officer with that
agency, the person was authorized to engage in or supervise the prevention,
detection, investigation, or prosecution of, or the incarceration of any person
for, any violation of law and the person had statutory powers of arrest.
               c.   At the time of the person’s retirement as a peace officer
with that agency, the person was trained and qualified to carry firearms in the
performance of the peace officer’s duties.
               d.   Before retiring from service as a peace officer with that
agency, the person was regularly employed as a peace officer for an aggregate
of 15 years or more, or, in the alternative, the person retired from service as
a peace officer with that agency, after completing any applicable probationary
period of that service, due to a service-connected disability, as determined by
the agency.
            2.   A retired peace officer identification card issued to a person
under division (b)(6)B.1. of this section shall identify the person by name,
contain a photograph of the person, identify the public agency of this state or
of the political subdivision of this state from which the person retired as a
peace officer and that is issuing the identification card, and specify that the
person retired in good standing from service as a peace officer with the
issuing public agency and satisfies the criteria set forth in divisions (b)
(6)B.1.a. to (b)(6)B.1.d. of this section. In addition to the required content
specified in this division, a retired peace officer identification card issued
to a person under division (b)(6)B.1. of this section may include the firearms
requalification certification described in division (b)(6)C. of this section,
and if the identification card includes that certification, the identification
card shall serve as the firearms requalification certification for the retired
peace officer. If the issuing public agency issues credentials to active law
enforcement officers who serve the agency, the agency may comply with division
(b)(6)B.1. of this section by issuing the same credentials to persons who
retired from service as a peace officer with the agency and who satisfy the
criteria set forth in divisions (b)(6)B.1.a. to (b)(6)B.1.d. of this section,
provided that the credentials so issued to retired peace officers are stamped
with the word “RETIRED.”
            3.   A public agency of this state or of a political subdivision of
this state may charge persons who retired from service as a peace officer with
the agency a reasonable fee for issuing to the person a retired peace officer
identification card pursuant to division (b)(6)B.1. of this section.
         C.   1.   If a person retired from service as a peace officer with a
public agency of this state or of a political subdivision of this state and the
person satisfies the criteria set forth in divisions (b)(6)B.1.a. to (b)
(6)B.1.d. of this section, the public agency may provide the retired peace
officer with the opportunity to attend a firearms requalification program that
is approved for purposes of firearms requalification required under Ohio R.C.
109.801. The retired peace officer may be required to pay the cost of the
course.
            2.   If a retired peace officer who satisfies the criteria set
forth in divisions (b)(6)B.1.a. to (b)(6)B.1.d. of this section attends a
firearms requalification program that is approved for purposes of firearms
requalification required under Ohio R.C. 109.801, the retired peace officer’s
successful completion of the firearms requalification program requalifies the
retired peace officer for purposes of division (b)(6) of this section for five
years from the date on which the program was successfully completed, and the
requalification is valid during that five-year period. If a retired peace
officer who satisfies the criteria set forth in divisions (b)(6)B.1.a. to (b)
(6)B.1.d. of this section satisfactorily completes such a firearms
requalification program, the retired peace officer shall be issued a firearms
requalification certification that identifies the retired peace officer by
name, identifies the entity that taught the program, specifies that the retired
peace officer successfully completed the program, specifies the date on which
the course was successfully completed, and specifies that the requalification
is valid for five years from that date of successful completion. The firearms
requalification certification for a retired peace officer may be included in
the retired peace officer identification card issued to the retired peace
officer under division (b)(6)B. of this section.
            3.   A retired peace officer who attends a firearms requalification
program that is approved for purposes of firearms requalification required
under Ohio R.C. 109.801 may be required to pay the cost of the program.
      (7)   As used in division (b)(6) of this section:
         A.   “Governing body” has the same meaning as in R.C. § 154.01.
         B.   “Government facility of this State or a political subdivision of
this State” means any of the following:
            1.   A building or part of a building that is owned or leased by
the government of this State or a political subdivision of this State and where
employees of the government of this State or the political subdivision
regularly are present for the purpose of performing their official duties as
employees of the State or political subdivision;
            2.   The office of a deputy registrar serving pursuant to Ohio R.C.
Chapter 4503 that is used to perform deputy registrar functions.
         C.   “Qualified retired peace officer” means a person who satisfies
all of the following:
            1.   The person satisfies the criteria set forth in divisions (b)
(6)B.1.a. to (b)(6)B.1.d. of this section.
            2.   The person is not under the influence of alcohol or another
intoxicating or hallucinatory drug or substance.
            3.   The person is not prohibited by federal law from receiving
firearms.
         D.   “Retired peace officer identification card” means an
identification card that is issued pursuant to division (b)(6)B. of this
section to a person who is a retired peace officer.
         E.   “Tactical medical professional” has the same meaning as in Ohio
R.C. 109.71.
         F.   “Validating identification.” Means photographic identification
issued by the agency for which an individual serves as a peace officer that
identifies the individual as a peace officer of the agency.
(ORC 2923.126)
   (c)   Posting of signs prohibiting possession. Each person, board, or entity
that owns or controls any place or premises identified in Ohio R.C. 2923.126(B)
as a place into which a valid license does not authorize the licensee to carry
a concealed handgun, or a designee of such a person, board, or entity, shall
post in the following one or more conspicuous locations in the premises a sign
that contains a statement in substantially the following form: “Unless
otherwise authorized by law, pursuant to the Ohio Revised Code, no person shall
knowingly possess, have under the person’s control, convey, or attempt to
convey a deadly weapon or dangerous ordnance onto these premises.”
(ORC 2923.1212)
§ 678.15  DEFACED FIREARMS.
   (a)   No person shall do either of the following:
      (1)   Change, alter, remove, or obliterate the name of the manufacturer,
model, manufacturer’s serial number, or other mark of identification on a
firearm.
      (2)   Possess a firearm knowing or having reasonable cause to believe
that the name of the manufacturer, model, manufacturer’s serial number, or
other mark of identification on the firearm has been changed, altered, removed,
or obliterated.
   (b)   (1)   Whoever violates division (a)(1) of this section is guilty of
defacing identification marks of a firearm. Except as otherwise provided in
this division, defacing identification marks of a firearm is a misdemeanor of
the first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of division (a)(1) of this section, defacing
identification marks of a firearm is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (a)(2) of this section is guilty of
possessing a defaced firearm. Except as otherwise provided in this division,
possessing a defaced firearm is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the
offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of
division (a)(2) of this section, possessing a defaced firearm is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (c)   Division (a) of this section does not apply to any firearm on which no
manufacturer’s serial number was inscribed at the time of its manufacture.
(ORC 2923.201)
CHAPTER 698:  PENALTIES AND SENTENCING
Section
698.01   Definitions.
698.02   Penalties for misdemeanor.
698.03   Imposing sentence for misdemeanor.
698.04   Organizational penalties.
698.05   Multiple sentences.
698.06   Modification of sentence. (Repealed)
698.07   Suspension or revocation of driver’s license.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   See section histories for similar state law
   Definition of “imprisoned” - see Ohio R.C. 1.05
   Burden and degree of proof - see Ohio R.C. 2901.05
   Venue - see Ohio R.C. 2901.12
   Procedure on change of venue - see Ohio R.C. 2931.29
   Transfer of prisoner on change of venue - see Ohio R.C. 2931.30
   Payment of costs and expenses on change of venue - see Ohio R.C. 2931.31
   Degree of offense; charge and verdict; prior conviction - see Ohio R.C.
2945.75
   Satisfaction of fine; credit for time served - see Ohio R.C. 2947.14
   Criteria for probation; conditions for probation - see Ohio R.C. 2951.02
   Treatment of drug dependent persons in lieu of conviction - see Ohio R.C.
2951.041
   Definitions generally - see GEN. OFF.
606.01
   Classification of offenses - see GEN. OFF.
606.02
   Offenses defined - see GEN. OFF.
606.03
   Rules of construction - see GEN. OFF.
606.04
   Criminal law jurisdiction - see GEN. OFF.
606.05
   Limitation on prosecutions - see GEN. OFF.
606.06
   Requirements for criminal liability - see GEN. OFF.
606.07
   Culpable mental states - see GEN. OFF.
606.08
   Organizational criminal liability - see GEN. OFF.
606.09
   Personal accountability for organizational conduct - see GEN. OFF.
606.10
   Administration, enforcement and public service - see GEN. OFF.
Ch. 608
   Obstructing justice - see GEN. OFF.
608.07
§ 698.01  DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this chapter:
   (a)   “Dangerous offender” means a person who has committed an offense,
whose history, character and condition reveal a substantial risk that he or she
will be a danger to others, and whose conduct has been characterized by a
pattern of repetitive, compulsive or aggressive behavior with heedless
indifference to the consequences.
   (b)   “Repeat offender” means a person who has a history of persistent
criminal activity and whose character and condition reveal a substantial risk
that he or she will commit another offense. It is prima facie evidence that a
person is a repeat offender if any of the following applies:
      (1)   Having been convicted of one or more offenses of violence, as
defined in Ohio R.C. 2901.01, and having been imprisoned pursuant to sentence
for one or more of those offenses, the person commits a subsequent offense of
violence;
      (2)   Having been convicted of one or more sexually oriented offenses, as
defined in Ohio R.C. 2950.01, and having been imprisoned pursuant to sentence
for one or more of those offenses, the person commits a subsequent sexually
oriented offense;
      (3)   Having been convicted of one or more theft offenses, as defined in
Ohio R.C. 2913.01, and having been imprisoned pursuant to sentence for one or
more of those offenses, the person commits a subsequent theft offense;
      (4)   Having been convicted of one or more felony drug abuse offenses, as
defined in Ohio R.C. 2925.01, and having been imprisoned pursuant to sentence
for one or more of those offenses, the person commits a subsequent felony drug
abuse offense;
      (5)   Having been convicted of two or more felonies, and having been
imprisoned pursuant to sentence for any such offense, the person commits a
subsequent offense;
      (6)   Having been convicted of three or more offenses of any type or
degree other than traffic offenses, alcoholic intoxication offenses, or minor
misdemeanors, and having been imprisoned pursuant to sentence for any such
offense, the person commits a subsequent offense.
(ORC 2935.36(E))
§ 698.02  PENALTIES FOR MISDEMEANOR.
   (a)   Considerations in misdemeanor sentencing.
      (1)   A court that sentences an offender for a misdemeanor or minor
misdemeanor violation of any provision of the Ohio Revised Code, or of any
municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to a misdemeanor or minor
misdemeanor violation of a provision of the Ohio Revised Code, shall be guided
by the overriding purposes of misdemeanor sentencing. The overriding purposes
of misdemeanor sentencing are to protect the public from future crime by the
offender and others and to punish the offender. To achieve those purposes, the
sentencing court shall consider the impact of the offense upon the victim and
the need for changing the offender’s behavior, rehabilitating the defender, and
making restitution to the victim of the offense, the public, or the victim and
the public.
      (2)   A sentence imposed for a misdemeanor or minor misdemeanor violation
of an Ohio Revised Code provision or for a violation of a municipal ordinance
that is subject to division (a)(1) of this section shall be reasonably
calculated to achieve the two overriding purposes of misdemeanor sentencing set
forth in division (a)(1) of this section, commensurate with and not demeaning
to the seriousness of the offender’s conduct and its impact upon the victim,
and consistent with sentences imposed for similar offenses committed by similar
offenders.
      (3)   A court that imposes a sentence upon an offender for a misdemeanor
or minor misdemeanor violation of an Ohio Revised Code provision or for a
violation of a municipal ordinance that is subject to division (a)(1) of this
section shall not base the sentence upon the race, ethnic background, gender,
or religion of the offender.
      (4)   Divisions (a)(1) and (a)(2) of this section shall not apply to any
offense that is disposed of by a traffic violations bureau of any court
pursuant to Traffic Rule 13 and shall not apply to any violation of any
provision of the Ohio Revised Code that is a minor misdemeanor and that is
disposed of without a court appearance. Divisions (a)(1) to (a)(3) of this
section do not affect any penalties established by the municipality for a
violation of its ordinances that are not substantially equivalent to a
misdemeanor or minor misdemeanor violation of a provision of the Ohio Revised
Code.
(ORC 2929.21)
   (b)   Misdemeanor jail terms.
      (1)   Except as provided in §§
666.99 or
698.03 of this Code or Ohio R.C. 2929.22 or 2929.23 or division (b)(5) or (b)
(6) of this section and unless another term is required or authorized pursuant
to law, if the sentencing court imposing a sentence upon an offender for a
misdemeanor elects or is required to impose a jail term on the offender
pursuant to this chapter, the court shall impose a definite jail term that
shall be one of the following:
         A.   For a misdemeanor of the first degree, not more than 180 days;
         B.   For a misdemeanor of the second degree, not more than 90 days;
         C.   For a misdemeanor of the third degree, not more than 60 days;
         D.   For a misdemeanor of the fourth degree, not more than 30 days.
      (2)   A.   A court that sentences an offender to a jail term under
division (b) of this section may permit the offender to serve the sentence in
intermittent confinement or may authorize a limited release of the offender as
provided in division (d)(2) of this section. The court retains jurisdiction
over every offender sentenced to jail to modify the jail sentence imposed at
any time, but the court shall not reduce any mandatory jail term.
         B.   1.   If a prosecutor, as defined in Ohio R.C. 2935.01, has filed
a notice with the court that the prosecutor wants to be notified about a
particular case and if the court is considering modifying the jail sentence of
the offender in that case, the court shall notify the prosecutor that the court
is considering modifying the jail sentence of the offender in that case. The
prosecutor may request a hearing regarding the court’s consideration of
modifying the jail sentence of the offender in that case, and, if the
prosecutor requests a hearing, the court shall notify the eligible offender of
the hearing.
            2.   If the prosecutor requests a hearing regarding the court’s
consideration of modifying the jail sentence of the offender in that case, the
court shall hold the hearing before considering whether or not to release the
offender from the offender’s jail sentence.
      (3)   If a court sentences an offender to a jail term under division (b)
of this section and the court assigns the offender to a county jail that has
established a County Jail Industry Program pursuant to Ohio R.C. 5147.30, the
court shall specify, as part of the sentence, whether the offender may be
considered for participation in the program. During the offender’s term in the
county jail, the court retains jurisdiction to modify its specification
regarding the offender’s participation in the County Jail Industry Program.
      (4)   If a person sentenced to a jail term pursuant to division (b) of
this section, the court may impose as part of the sentence pursuant to Ohio
R.C. 2929.28 a reimbursement sanction, and, if the local detention facility in
which the term is to be served is covered by a policy adopted pursuant to Ohio
R.C.  307.93, 341.14, 341.19, 341.21, 341.23, 753.02, 753.04, 753.16, 2301.56,
or 2947.19 and Ohio R.C. 2929.37, both of the following apply:
         A.   The court shall specify both of the following as part of the
sentence:
            1.   If the person is presented with an itemized bill pursuant to
Ohio R.C. 2929.37 for payment of the costs of confinement, the person is
required to pay the bill in accordance with that section.
            2.   If the person does not dispute the bill described in division
(b)(4)A.1. of this section and does not pay the bill by the times specified in
Ohio R.C. 2929.37, the Clerk of the Court may issue a certificate of judgment
against the person as described in that section.
         B.   The sentence automatically includes any certificate of judgment
issued as described in division (b)(4)A.2. of this section.
      (5)   If an offender who is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation
of Ohio R.C. 4511.19(B), or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance,
also is convicted of or also pleads guilty to a specification of the type
described in Ohio R.C. 2941.1414 and if the court imposes a jail term on the
offender for the underlying offense, the court shall impose upon the offender
an additional definite jail term of not more than six months. The additional
jail term shall not be reduced pursuant to any provision of the Ohio Revised
Code. The offender shall serve the additional jail term consecutively to and
prior to the jail term imposed for the underlying offense and consecutively to
any other mandatory term imposed in relation to the offense.
      (6)   A.   If an offender is convicted of or pleads guilty to a
misdemeanor violation of Ohio R.C. 2907.23, 2907.24, 2907.241, or 2907.25, or
any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, and to a specification of the
type described in Ohio R.C. 2941.1421 and if the court imposes a jail term on
the offender for the misdemeanor violation, the court may impose upon the
offender an additional definite jail term as follows:
            1.   Subject to division (b)(6)A.2. of this section, an additional
definite jail term of not more than 60 days;
            2.   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one or more misdemeanor or felony violations of Ohio R.C.  2907.22,
2907.23, 2907.24, 2907.241, or 2907.25, or any substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, and also was convicted of or pleaded guilty to a
specification of the type described in Ohio R.C. 2941.1421 regarding one or
more of those violations, an additional definite jail term of not more than 120
days.
         B.   In lieu of imposing an additional definite jail term under
division (b)(6)A. of this section, the court may directly impose on the
offender a sanction that requires the offender to wear a real-time processing,
continual tracking electronic monitoring device during the period of time
specified by the court. The period of time specified by the court shall equal
the duration of an additional jail term that the court could have imposed upon
the offender under division (b)(6)A. of this section. A sanction imposed under
this division shall commence on the date specified by the court, provided that
the sanction shall not commence until after the offender has served the jail
term imposed for the misdemeanor violation of Ohio R.C. 2907.23, 2907.24,
2907.241, or 2907.25, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, and
any residential sanction imposed for the violation under division (d) of this
section or Ohio R.C. 2929.26. A sanction imposed under this division shall be
considered to be a community control sanction for purposes of division (c) or
this section or Ohio R.C. 2929.25, and all provisions of this Code and the Ohio
Revised Code that pertain to community control sanctions shall apply to a
sanction imposed under this division, except to the extent that they would by
their nature be clearly inapplicable. The offender shall pay all costs
associated with a sanction imposed under this division, including the cost of
the use of the monitoring device.
      (7)   If an offender is convicted of or pleads guilty to a misdemeanor
violation of Ohio R.C. 2903.13 and also is convicted of or pleads guilty to a
specification of the type described in Ohio R.C. 2941.1423 that charges that
the victim of the violation was a woman whom the offender knew was pregnant at
the time of the violation, the court shall impose on the offender a mandatory
jail term that is a definite term of at least 30 days.
      (8)   If a court sentences an offender to a jail term under this division
(b), the sentencing court retains jurisdiction over the offender and the jail
term. Upon motion of either party or upon the court’s own motion, the court, in
the court’s sole discretion and as the circumstances warrant, may substitute
one or more community control sanctions under division (d) or (e) of this
section for any jail days that are not mandatory jail days.
(ORC 2929.24)
   (c)   Misdemeanor community control sanctions.
      (1)   A.   Except as provided in §§
666.99 and
698.03 of this Code or Ohio R.C. 2929.22 and 2929.23 or when a jail term is
required by law, in sentencing an offender for a misdemeanor, other than a
minor misdemeanor, the sentencing court may do either of the following:
            1.   Directly impose a sentence that consists of one or more
community control sanctions authorized by divisions (d), (e), or (f) of this
section. The court may impose any other conditions of release under a community
control sanction that the court considers appropriate. If the court imposes a
jail term upon the offender, the court may impose any community control
sanction or combination of community control sanctions in addition to the jail
term.
            2.   Impose a jail term under division (b) of this section from the
range of jail terms authorized under that division for the offense, suspend all
or a portion of the jail term imposed, and place the offender under a community
control sanction or combination of community control sanctions authorized under
divisions (d), (e), or (f) of this section.
         B.   The duration of all community control sanctions imposed upon an
offender and in effect for an offender at any time shall not exceed five years.
         C.   At sentencing, if a court directly imposes a community control
sanction or combination of community control sanctions pursuant to division (c)
(1)A.1. of this section, the court shall state the duration of the community
control sanctions imposed and shall notify the offender that if any of the
conditions of the community control sanctions are violated the court may do any
of the following:
            1.   Impose a longer time under the same community control sanction
if the total time under all of the offender’s community control sanctions does
not exceed the five-year limit specified in division (c)(1)B. of this section;
            2.   Impose a more restrictive community control sanction under
division (d), (e), or (f) of this section, but the court is not required to
impose any particular sanction or sanctions;
            3.   Impose a definite jail term from the range of jail terms
authorized for the offense under division (b) of this section.
      (2)   If a court sentences an offender to any community control sanction
or combination of community control sanctions pursuant to division (c)(1)A.1.
of this section, the sentencing court retains jurisdiction over the offender
and the period of community control for the duration of the period of community
control. Upon the motion of either party or on the court’s own motion, the
court, in the court’s sole discretion and as the circumstances warrant, may
modify the community control sanctions or conditions of release previously
imposed, substitute a community control sanction or condition of release for
another community control sanction or condition of release previously imposed,
or impose an additional community control sanction or condition of release.
      (3)   A.   If a court sentences an offender to any community control
sanction or combination of community control sanctions authorized under
division (d), (e), or (f) of this section, the court shall place the offender
under the general control and supervision of the court or of a department of
probation in the jurisdiction that serves the court for purposes of reporting
to the court a violation of any of the conditions of the sanctions imposed. If
the offender resides in another jurisdiction and a department of probation has
been established to serve the Municipal Court or County Court in that
jurisdiction, the sentencing court may request the Municipal Court or the
County Court to receive the offender into the general control and supervision
of that department of probation for purposes of reporting to the sentencing
court a violation of any of the conditions of the sanctions imposed. The
sentencing court retains jurisdiction over any offender whom it sentences for
the duration of the sanction or sanctions imposed.
         B.   The sentencing court shall require as a condition of any
community control sanction that the offender abide by the law and not leave the
state without the permission of the court or the offender’s probation officer.
In the interests of doing justice, rehabilitating the offender, and ensuring
the offender’s good behavior, the court may impose additional requirements on
the offender.  The offender’s compliance with the additional requirements also
shall be a condition of the community control sanction imposed upon the
offender.
      (4)   A.   If the court imposing sentence upon an offender sentences the
offender to any community control sanction or combination of community control
sanctions authorized under division (d), (e), or (f) of this section, and the
offender violates any of the conditions of the sanctions, the public or private
person or entity that supervises or administers the program or activity that
comprises the  sanction shall report the violation directly to the sentencing
court or to the department of probation or probation officer with general
control and supervision over the offender. If the public or private person or
entity reports the violation to the department of probation or probation
officer, the department or officer shall report the violation to the sentencing
court.
         B.   If an offender violates any condition of a community control
sanction, the sentencing court may impose upon the violator one or more of the
following penalties:
            1.   A longer time under the same community control sanction if the
total time under all of the community control sanctions imposed on the violator
does not exceed the five-year limit specified in division (c)(1)B. of this
section;
            2.   A more restrictive community control sanction;
            3.   A combination of community control sanctions, including a jail
term.
         C.   If an offender was acting pursuant to R.C. § 2925.11(B)(2)(b), or
any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, and in so doing violated the
conditions of a community control sanction based on a minor drug possession
offense, as defined in R.C. § 2925.11, the sentencing court may consider the
offender’s conduct in seeking or obtaining medical assistance for another in
good faith or for self or may consider the offender being the subject of
another person seeking or obtaining medical assistance in accordance with that
division as a mitigating factor before imposing any of the penalties described
in division (c)(4)B. of this section.
         D.   If the court imposes a jail term upon a violator pursuant to
division (c)(4)B. of this section, the total time spent in jail for the
misdemeanor offense and the violation of a condition of the community control
sanction shall not exceed the maximum jail term available for the offense for
which the sanction that was violated was imposed. The court may reduce the
longer period of time that the violator is required to spend under the longer
sanction or the more restrictive sanction imposed under division (c)(4)B. of
this section by all or part of the time the violator successfully spent under
the sanction that was initially imposed.
      (5)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, if an offender, for
a significant period of time, fulfills the conditions of a community control
sanction imposed pursuant to division (d), (e), or (f) of this section in an
exemplary manner, the court may reduce the period of time under the community
control sanction or impose a less restrictive community control sanction.
Fulfilling the conditions of a community control sanction does not relieve the
offender of a duty to make restitution under division (f) of this section.
(ORC 2929.25)
   (d)   Community residential sanction.
      (1)   Except when a mandatory jail term is required by law, the court
imposing a sentence for a misdemeanor, other than a minor misdemeanor, may
impose upon the offender any community residential sanction or combination of
community residential sanctions under this division (d).  Community residential
sanctions include, but are not limited to, the following:
         A.   A term of up to 180 days in a halfway house or a term in a
halfway house not to exceed the longest jail term available for the offense,
whichever is shorter, if the political subdivision that would have
responsibility for paying the costs of confining the offender in a jail has
entered into a contract with the halfway house for use of the facility for
misdemeanor offenders;
         B.   If the offender is an eligible offender, as defined in Ohio R.C.
307.932, a term in a community alternative sentencing center or district
community alternative sentencing center established and operated in accordance
with that section, in the circumstances specified in that section, with one of
the conditions of the sanction being that the offender successfully complete
the portion of the sentence to be served in the center.
      (2)   A sentence to a community residential sanction under division (d)
(1)B. of this section shall be in accordance with Ohio R.C. 307.932. In all
other cases, The court that sentences an offender to a community residential
sanction under this division (d) may do either or both of the following:
         A.   Permit the offender to serve the offender’s sentence in
intermittent confinement, overnight, on weekends or at any other time or times
that will allow the offender to continue at the offender’ occupation or care
for the offender’ family;
         B.   Authorize the offender to be released so that the offender may
seek or maintain employment, receive education or training, receive treatment,
perform community service, or otherwise fulfill an obligation imposed by law or
by the court. A release pursuant to this division shall be only for the
duration of time that is needed to fulfill the purpose of the release and for
travel that reasonably is necessary to fulfill the purposes of release.
      (3)   The court may order that a reasonable portion of the income earned
by the offender upon a release pursuant to division (d)(2) of this section be
applied to any financial sanction imposed under division (f) of this section.
      (4)   No court shall sentence any person to a prison term for a
misdemeanor or to a jail term for a minor misdemeanor.
      (5)   If a court sentences a person who has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a misdemeanor to a community residential sanction as described in
division (d)(1) of this section, at the time of reception and at other times
the person in charge of the operation of the halfway house, community
alternative sentencing center, district community alternative sentencing
center, or other place at which the offender will serve the residential
sanction determines to be appropriate, the person in charge of the operation of
the halfway house, community alternative sentencing center, district community
alternative sentencing center, or other place may cause the convicted offender
to be examined and tested for tuberculosis, HIV infection, hepatitis,
including, but not limited to, hepatitis A, B, and C, and other contagious
diseases. The person in charge of the operation of the halfway house, community
alternative sentencing center, district community alternative sentencing
center, or other place at which the offender will serve the residential
sanction may cause a convicted offender in the halfway house, community
alternative sentencing center, district community alternative sentencing
center, or other place who refuses to be tested or treated for tuberculosis,
HIV infection, hepatitis, including, but not limited to, hepatitis A, B, and C,
or another contagious disease to be tested and treated involuntarily.
      (6)   The municipality may enter into a contract with a halfway house for
use of the halfway house to house misdemeanor offenders under a sanction
imposed under division (d)(1)A. of this section.
(ORC 2929.26)
   (e)   Nonresidential sanction where jail term is not mandatory.
      (1)   Except when a mandatory jail term is required by law, the court
imposing a sentence for a misdemeanor, other than a minor misdemeanor, may
impose upon the offender any nonresidential sanction or combination of
nonresidential sanctions authorized under this division.  Nonresidential
sanctions include, but are not limited to, the following:
         A.   A term of day reporting;
         B.   A term of house arrest with electronic monitoring or continuous
alcohol monitoring or both electronic monitoring and continuous alcohol
monitoring, a term of electronic monitoring or continuous alcohol monitoring
without house arrest, or a term of house arrest without electronic monitoring
or continuous alcohol monitoring;
         C.   A term of community service of up to 500 hours for misdemeanor of
the first degree or 200 hours for a misdemeanor of the second, third, or fourth
degree;
         D.   A term in a drug treatment program with a level of security for
the offender as determined necessary by the court;
         E.   A term of intensive probation supervision;
         F.   A term of basic probation supervision;
         G.   A term of monitored time;
         H.   A term of drug and alcohol use monitoring, including random drug
testing;
         I.   A curfew term;
         J.   A requirement that the offender obtain employment;
         K.   A requirement that the offender obtain education or training;
         L.   Provided the court obtains the prior approval of the victim, a
requirement that the offender participate in victim-offender mediation;
         M.   If authorized by law, suspension of the offender’s privilege to
operate a motor vehicle, immobilization or forfeiture of the offender’s motor
vehicle, a requirement that the offender obtain a valid motor vehicle
operator’s license, or any other related sanction;
         N.   A requirement that the offender obtain counseling if the offense
is a violation of Ohio R.C. 2919.25 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance or a violation of Ohio R.C.  2903.13 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance involving a person who was a family or household member at
the time of the violation, if the offender committed the offense in the
vicinity of one or more children who are not victims of the offense, and if the
offender or the victim of the offense is a parent, guardian, custodian, or
person in loco parentis of one or more of those children. This division does
not limit the court in requiring that the offender obtain counseling for any
offense or in any circumstance not specified in this division.
      (2)   If the court imposes a term of community service pursuant to
division (e)(1)C. of this section, the offender may request that the court
modify the sentence to authorize the offender to make a reasonable
contribution, as determined by the court, to the general fund of the county,
municipality, or other local entity that provides funding to the court. The
court may grant the request if the offender demonstrates a change in
circumstances from the date the court imposes the sentence or that the
modification would otherwise be in the interests of justice. If the court
grants the request, the offender shall make a reasonable contribution to the
court, and the clerk of the court shall deposit that contribution into the
general fund of the county, municipality, or other local entity that provides
funding to the court. If more than one entity provides funding to the court,
the clerk shall deposit a percentage of the reasonable contribution equal to
the percentage of funding the entity provides to the court in that entity’s
general fund.
      (3)   In addition to the sanctions authorized under division (e)(1) of
this section, the court imposing a sentence for a misdemeanor, other than a
minor misdemeanor, upon an offender who is not required to serve a mandatory
jail term may impose any other sanction that is intended to discourage the
offender or other persons from committing a similar offense if the sanction is
reasonably related to the overriding purposes and principles of misdemeanor
sentencing.
      (4)   The court imposing a sentence for a minor misdemeanor may impose a
term of community service in lieu of all or part of a fine. The term of
community service imposed for a minor misdemeanor shall not exceed 30 hours. 
After imposing a term of community service, the court may modify the sentence
to authorize a reasonable contribution, as determined by the court, to the
appropriate general fund as provided in division (e)(2) of this section.
(ORC 2929.27)
   (f)   Financial sanctions.
      (1)   In addition to imposing court costs pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2947.23,
the court imposing a sentence upon an offender for a misdemeanor, including a
minor misdemeanor, may sentence the offender to any financial sanction or
combination of financial sanctions authorized under this division (f). If the
court in its discretion imposes one or more financial sanctions, the financial
sanctions that may be imposed pursuant to this section include, but are not
limited to, the following:
         A.   Restitution.
            1.   Unless the misdemeanor offense is a minor misdemeanor or could
be disposed of by the Traffic Violations Bureau serving the court under Traffic
Rule 13, restitution by the offender to the victim of the offender’s crime or
any survivor of the victim, in an amount based upon the victim’s economic loss.
The court may not impose restitution as a sanction pursuant to this division if
the offense is a minor misdemeanor or could be disposed of by the Traffic
Violations Bureau serving the court under Traffic Rule 13. If the court
requires restitution, the court shall order that the restitution be made to the
victim in open court or to the adult probation department that serves the
jurisdiction or the clerk of the court on behalf of the victim.
            2.   If the court imposes restitution, the court shall determine
the amount of restitution to be paid by the offender. If the court imposes
restitution, the court may base the amount of restitution it orders on an
amount recommended by the victim, the offender, a presentence investigation
report, estimates or receipts indicating the cost of repairing or replacing
property, and other information, provided that the amount the court orders as
restitution shall not exceed the amount of economic loss suffered by the victim
as a direct and proximate result of the commission of the offense. If the court
decides to impose restitution, the court shall hold an evidentiary hearing on
restitution if the offender, victim, or survivor disputes the amount of
restitution. If the court holds an evidentiary hearing, at the hearing the
victim or survivor has the burden to prove by a preponderance of the evidence
the amount of restitution sought from the offender.
            3.   All restitution payments shall be credited against any
recovery of economic loss in a civil action brought by the victim or any
survivor of the victim against the offender.  No person may introduce evidence
of an award of restitution under this section in a civil action for purposes of
imposing liability against an insurer under Ohio R.C. 3937.18.
            4.   If the court imposes restitution, the court may order that the
offender pay a surcharge, of not more than 5% of the amount of the restitution
otherwise ordered, to the entity responsible for collecting and processing
restitution payments.
            5.   The victim or survivor of the victim may request that the
prosecutor in the case file a motion, or the offender may file a motion, for
modification of the payment terms of any restitution ordered. If the court
grants the motion, it may modify the payment terms as it determines
appropriate.
         B.   Fines. A fine of the type described in divisions (f)(1)B.1. and
2. of this section payable to the appropriate entity as required by law:
            1.   A fine in the following amount:
               a.   For a misdemeanor of the first degree, not more than one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00);
               b.   For a misdemeanor of the second degree, not more than seven
hundred fifty dollars ($750.00);
               c.   For a misdemeanor of the third degree, not more than five
hundred dollars ($500.00);
               d.   For a misdemeanor of the fourth degree, not more than two
hundred fifty dollars ($250.00);
               e.   For a minor misdemeanor, not more than one hundred fifty
dollars ($150.00).
            2.   A state fine or cost as defined in Ohio R.C. 2949.111.
         C.   Reimbursement.
            1.   Reimbursement by the offender of any or all of the costs of
sanctions incurred by the government, including, but not limited to, the
following:
               a.   All or part of the costs of implementing any community
control sanction, including a supervision fee under Ohio R.C. 2951.021;
               b.   All or part of the costs of confinement in a jail or other
residential facility, including, but not limited to, a per diem fee for room
and board, the costs of medical and dental treatment, and the costs of
repairing property damaged by the offender while confined;
               c.   All or part of the cost of purchasing and using an
immobilizing or disabling device, including a certified ignition interlock
device, or a remote alcohol monitoring device that a court orders an offender
to use under Ohio R.C. 4510.13.
            2.   The amount of reimbursement under division (f)(1)C.1. of this
section shall not exceed the total amount of reimbursement the offender is able
to pay and shall not exceed the actual cost of the sanctions. The court may
collect any amount of reimbursement the offender is required to pay under that
division. If the court does not order reimbursement under that division,
confinement costs may be assessed pursuant to a repayment policy adopted under
Ohio R.C. 2929.37. In addition, the offender may be required to pay the fees
specified in Ohio R.C. 2929.38 in accordance with that section.
      (2)   A.   If the court determines a hearing is necessary, the court may
hold a hearing to determine whether the offender is able to pay the financial
sanction imposed pursuant to this division (f) or court costs or is likely in
the future to be able to pay the sanction or costs.
         B.   If the court determines that the offender is indigent and unable
to pay the financial sanction or court costs, the court shall consider imposing
and may impose a term of community service under division (e)(1) of this
section in lieu of imposing a financial sanction or court costs. If the court
does not determine that the offender is indigent, the court may impose a term
of community service under division (e)(1) of this section in lieu of or in
addition to imposing a financial sanction under this division (f) and in
addition to imposing court costs. The court may order community service for a
minor misdemeanor pursuant to division (e)(4) of this section in lieu of or in
addition to imposing a financial sanction under this section and in addition to
imposing court costs. If a person fails to pay a financial sanction or court
costs, the court may order community service in lieu of the financial sanction
or court costs.
      (3)   A.   The offender shall pay reimbursements imposed upon the
offender pursuant to division (f)(1)C. of this section to pay the costs
incurred by a county pursuant to any sanction imposed under division (d), (e),
or (f) of this section or in operating a facility used to confine offenders
pursuant to a sanction imposed under division (d) of this section to the County
Treasurer. The County Treasurer shall deposit the reimbursements in the
county’s General Fund. The county shall use the amounts deposited in the fund
to pay the costs incurred by the county pursuant to any sanction imposed under
division (d), (e), or (f) of this section or in operating a facility used to
confine offenders pursuant to a sanction imposed under division (d) of this
section.
         B.   The offender shall pay reimbursements imposed upon the offender
pursuant to division (f)(1)C. of this section to pay the costs incurred by a
municipal corporation pursuant to any sanction imposed under division  (d),
(e), or (f) of this section or in operating a facility used to confine
offenders pursuant to a sanction imposed under division (d) of this section to
the Treasurer of the municipal corporation. The Treasurer shall deposit the
reimbursements in the municipal corporation’s General Fund. The municipal
corporation shall use the amounts deposited in the fund to pay the costs
incurred by the municipal corporation pursuant to any sanction imposed under
division (d), (e), or (f) of this section or in operating a facility used to
confine offenders pursuant to a sanction imposed under division (d) of this
section.
         C.   The offender shall pay reimbursements imposed pursuant to
division (f)(1)C. of this section for the costs incurred by a private provider
pursuant to a sanction imposed under division (d), (e), or (f) of this section
to the provider.
      (4)   In addition to any other fine that is or may be imposed under this
division (f), the court imposing sentence upon an offender for misdemeanor
domestic violence or menacing by stalking may impose a fine of not less than
$70 nor more than $500, which shall be transmitted to the Treasurer of Ohio to
be credited to the address confidentiality program fund created by R.C. §
111.48.
      (5)   A.   Except as otherwise provided in this division (f)(5), a
financial sanction imposed under division (f)(1) of this section is a judgment
in favor of the state or the political subdivision that operates the court that
imposed the financial sanction, and the offender subject to the financial
sanction is the judgment debtor. A financial sanction of reimbursement imposed
pursuant to division (f)(1)C.1.a. of this section upon an offender is a
judgment in favor of the entity administering the community control sanction,
and the offender subject to the financial sanction is the judgment debtor.  A
financial sanction of reimbursement imposed pursuant to division (f)(1)C.1.b.
of this section upon an offender confined in a jail or other residential
facility is a judgment in favor of the entity operating the jail or other
residential facility, and the offender subject to the financial sanction is the
judgment debtor. A financial sanction of restitution imposed pursuant to
division (f)(1)A. of this section is an order in favor of the victim of the
offender’s criminal act that can be collected through a certificate of judgment
as described in division (f)(5)B.1. of this section, through execution as
described in division (f)(5)B.2. of this section or through an order as
described in division (f)(5)B.3. of this section and the offender shall be
considered for purposes of the collection as a judgment debtor.
         B.   Once a financial sanction is imposed as a judgment or order under
this division, the victim, private provider, state, or political subdivision
may do any of the following:
            1.   Obtain from the Clerk of the court in which the judgment was
entered a certificate of judgment that shall be in the same manner and form as
a certificate of judgment issued in a civil action;
            2.   Obtain execution of the judgment or order through any
available procedure, including any of the procedures identified in Ohio R.C.
2929.18(D)(1) and (D)(2) or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
            3.   Obtain an order for the assignment of wages of the judgment
debtor under Ohio R.C. 1321.33 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance.
      (6)   The civil remedies authorized under division (f)(5) of this section
for the collection of the financial sanction supplement, but do not preclude,
enforcement of the criminal sentence.
      (7)   Each court imposing a financial sanction upon an offender under
this division (f) may designate the Clerk of the Court or another person to
collect the financial sanction. The Clerk, or another person authorized by law
or the court to collect the financial sanction may do the following:
         A.   Enter into contracts with one or more public agencies or private
vendors for the collection of amounts due under the sanction. Before entering
into a contract for the collection of amounts due from an offender pursuant to
any financial sanction imposed pursuant to this division (f), a court shall
comply with Ohio R.C. 307.86 to 307.92.
         B.   Permit payment of all or any portion of the sanction in
installments, by financial transaction device if the court is a County Court or
a Municipal Court operated by a county, or by any other reasonable method, in
any time, and on any terms that the court considers just, except that the
maximum time permitted for payment shall not exceed five years. If the court is
a County Court or a Municipal Court operated by a county, the acceptance of
payments by any financial transaction device shall be governed by the policy
adopted by the Board of County Commissioners of the county pursuant to Ohio
R.C. 301.28. If the court is a Municipal Court not operated by a county, the
Clerk may pay any fee associated with processing an electronic transfer out of
public money or may charge the fee to the offender.
         C.   To defray administrative costs, charge a reasonable fee to an
offender who elects a payment plan rather than a lump sum payment of any
financial sanction.
      (8)   No financial sanction imposed under this division (f) shall
preclude a victim from bringing a civil action against the offender.
(ORC 2929.28)
§ 698.03  IMPOSING SENTENCE FOR MISDEMEANOR.
   (a)   (1)   Unless a mandatory jail term is required to be imposed by Ohio
R.C. 1547.99(G), 4510.14(B), or 4511.19(G), or any other provision of the
Revised Code, or any municipal ordinance, a court that imposes a sentence under
this chapter upon an offender for a misdemeanor or minor misdemeanor has
discretion to determine the most effective way to achieve the purposes and
principles of sentencing set forth in §
698.02.
      (2)   Unless a specific sanction is required to be imposed or is
precluded from being imposed by the section setting forth an offense or the
penalty for an offense or by any provision of §§
666.99 or
698.02 of this Code or Ohio R.C. 2929.23 to 2929.28, a court that imposes a
sentence upon an offender for a misdemeanor may impose on the offender any
sanction or combination of sanctions under §
698.02(b) to (f). The court shall not impose a sentence that imposes an
unnecessary burden on local government resources.
   (b)   (1)   In determining the appropriate sentence for a misdemeanor, the
court shall consider all of the following factors:
         A.   The nature and circumstances of the offense or offenses;
         B.   Whether the circumstances regarding the offender and the offense
or offenses indicate that the offender has a history of persistent criminal
activity and that the offender’s character and condition reveal a substantial
risk that the offender will commit another offense;
         C.   Whether the circumstances regarding the offender and the offense
or offenses indicate that the offender’s history, character, and condition
reveal a substantial risk that the offender will be a danger to others and that
the offender’s conduct has been characterized by a pattern of repetitive,
compulsive, or aggressive behavior with heedless indifference to the
consequences;
         D.   Whether the victim’s youth, age, disability, or other factor made
the victim particularly vulnerable to the offense or made the impact of the
offense more serious;
         E.   Whether the offender is likely to commit future crimes in
general, in addition to the circumstances described in divisions (b)(1)B. and
C. of this section;
         F.   Whether the offender has an emotional, mental, or physical
condition that is traceable to the offender’s service in the armed forces of
the United States and that was a contributing factor in the offender’s
commission of the offense or offenses;
         G.   The offender’s military service record.
      (2)   In determining the appropriate sentence for a misdemeanor, in
addition to complying with division (b)(1) of this section, the court may
consider any other factors that are relevant to achieving the purposes and
principles of sentencing set forth in §
698.02(a).
   (c)   Before imposing a jail term as a sentence for a misdemeanor, a court
shall consider the appropriateness of imposing a community control sanction or
a combination of community control sanctions under §
698.02(c), (d), (e), and (f). A court may impose the longest jail term
authorized under §
698.02(b) only upon offenders who commit the worst forms of the offense or upon
offenders whose conduct and response to prior sanctions for prior offenses
demonstrate that the imposition of the longest jail term is necessary to deter
the offender from committing a future crime.
   (d)   (1)   A sentencing court shall consider any relevant oral or written
statement made by the victim, the defendant, the defense attorney, or the
prosecuting authority regarding sentencing for a misdemeanor. This division
does not create any rights to notice other than those rights authorized by Ohio
R.C. Chapter 2930.
      (2)   At the time of sentencing for a misdemeanor or as soon as possible
after sentencing, the court shall notify the victim of the offense of the
victim’s right to file an application for an award of reparations pursuant to
Ohio R.C. 2743.51 to 2743.72.
(ORC 2929.22)
§ 698.04  ORGANIZATIONAL PENALTIES.
   (a)   Regardless of the other penalties provided in §
698.02, an organization convicted of an offense pursuant to §
606.09 shall be fined by the court as follows:
      (1)   For a misdemeanor of the first degree, not more than five thousand
dollars ($5,000.00);
      (2)   For a misdemeanor of the second degree, not more than four thousand
dollars ($4,000.00);
      (3)   For a misdemeanor of the third degree, not more than three thousand
dollars ($3,000.00);
      (4)   For a misdemeanor of the fourth degree, not more than two thousand
dollars ($2,000.00);
      (5)   For a minor misdemeanor, not more than one thousand dollars
($1,000.00);
      (6)   For a misdemeanor not specifically classified, not more than two
thousand dollars ($2,000.00);
      (7)   For a minor misdemeanor not specifically classified, not more than
one thousand dollars ($1,000.00).
   (b)   When an organization is convicted of an offense not specifically
classified, and the section defining the offense or penalty plainly indicates a
purpose to impose the penalty provided for violation upon organizations, then
such penalty shall be imposed in lieu of the penalty provided in this section.
   (c)   When an organization is convicted of an offense not specifically
classified, and the penalty provided includes a higher fine than that provided
in this section, then the penalty imposed shall be pursuant to the penalty
provided for violation of the section defining the offense.
   (d)   This section does not prevent the imposition of available civil
sanctions against an organization convicted of an offense pursuant to §
606.09, either in addition to or in lieu of a fine imposed pursuant to this
section.
(ORC 2929.31)
§ 698.05  MULTIPLE SENTENCES.
   (a)   Except as provided in division (b) of this section, Ohio R.C. 2929.14
(C), or Ohio R.C. 2971.03(D) or (E), a prison term, jail term, or  sentence of
imprisonment shall be served concurrently with any other prison term, jail
term, or sentence of imprisonment imposed by a court of this municipality, the
state, another state, or the United States.  Except as provided in division (b)
(2) of this section, a jail term or sentence of imprisonment for misdemeanor
shall be served concurrently with a prison term or sentence of imprisonment for
felony served in a state or federal correctional institution.
   (b)   (1)   A jail term or sentence of imprisonment for a misdemeanor shall
be served consecutively to any other prison term, jail term, or sentence of
imprisonment when the trial court specifies that it is to be served
consecutively or when it is imposed for a misdemeanor violation of Ohio R.C.
2907.322, 2921.34 or 2923.131.  When consecutive sentences are imposed for
misdemeanors under this division, the term to be served is the aggregate of the
consecutive terms imposed, except that the aggregate term to be served shall
not exceed 18 months.
      (2)   A jail term or sentence of imprisonment imposed for a misdemeanor
violation of Ohio R.C. 4510.14, 4510.16, 4510.21, or 4511.19, or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, shall be served consecutively to
a prison term that is imposed for a felony violation of Ohio R.C. 2903.06,
2903.07, 2903.08 or 4511.19 or a felony violation of Ohio R.C. 2903.04
involving the operation of a motor vehicle by the offender and that is served
in a state correctional institution when the trial court specifies that it is
to be served consecutively. When consecutive jail terms or sentences of
imprisonment and prison terms are imposed for one or more misdemeanors and one
or more felonies under this division, the term to be served is the aggregate of
the consecutive terms imposed, and the offender shall serve all terms imposed
for a felony before serving any term imposed for a misdemeanor.
(ORC 2929.41)
§ 698.06  MODIFICATION OF SENTENCE. (REPEALED)
   (EDITOR’S NOTE:  Section 698.06 was repealed as part of the 2003 updating
and revision of this Municipal Code because substantially equivalent state law
(Ohio R.C. 2929.51) was repealed by the Ohio General Assembly.)
§ 698.07  SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF DRIVER’S LICENSE.
   Except as otherwise provided in Ohio R.C. 4510.07 or in any other provision
of the Revised Code, whenever an offender is convicted of or pleads guilty to a
violation of any provision of this Code of Ordinances that is substantially
equivalent to a provision of the Revised Code, and a court is permitted or
required to suspend a person’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or
permit for a violation of that provision, a court, in addition to any other
penalties authorized by law, may suspend the offender’s driver’s or commercial
driver’s license or permit or nonresident operating privileges for the period
of time the court determines appropriate, but the period of suspension imposed
for the violation of the provision of this Code of Ordinances shall not exceed
the period of suspension that is permitted or required to be imposed for the
violation of the provision of the Revised Code to which the provision of this
Code of Ordinances is substantially equivalent.
(ORC 4510.05)
PART EIGHT:  BUSINESS REGULATION AND TAXATION CODE
      TITLE TWO - Business Regulation
         Chap.
804.   Amusements, Theaters and Shows.
         Chap.
820.   Emergency Alarms.
         Chap.
840.   Mechanical and Electronic Amusement Devices.
         Chap.
842.   Mechanical Music Devices.
         Chap.
844.   Mobile Food Vending.
         Chap.
852.   Peddlers and Solicitors.
         Chap.
866.   Taxicabs.
         Chap.
868.   Sexually Oriented Businesses and Penalty.
         Chap.
870.   Video Service Providers.
         Chap.
872.   Telecommunication Carriers.
      TITLE FOUR - Taxation
         Chap.
880.   Earned Income Tax Regulations Effective Through December 31, 2015.
         Chap.
881.   Earned Income Tax Regulations Effective Beginning January 1, 2016.
         Chap.
882.   Motor Vehicle License Tax.
TITLE TWO:  BUSINESS REGULATION
CHAPTER 804:  AMUSEMENTS, THEATERS AND SHOWS
Section
804.01   Amusements generally; license required; application; fee.
804.02   Issuance of license; regulations.
804.03   License suspension; hearing.
804.04   Liability of owner of premises.
804.05   Refunds.
804.06   Display of license after suspension.
804.07   Carnivals and circuses.
804.08   Theaters and shows.
804.99   Penalty.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Power to regulate shows - see Ohio R.C. 715.48, 715.63, 3765.02
   Bingo - see GEN. OFF.
630.06 et seq.
   Safety of crowds at live entertainment performances - see GEN. OFF.
636.19
   Mechanical and electronic amusement devices - see B.R. & T.
Ch. 840
§ 804.01  AMUSEMENTS GENERALLY; LICENSE REQUIRED; APPLICATION; FEE.
   (a)   No person shall conduct any amusement at any permanent or temporary
place of amusement or any itinerant form of amusement within the municipality
without first filing an application for a permanent, temporary or itinerant
form of amusement license with the Chief of Police. Every application for such
license shall be made upon a form prescribed, prepared and furnished by the
Chief of Police, and shall set forth:
      (1)   The name under which the applicant conducts or intends to conduct
an amusement;
      (2)   Whether the applicant conducts or intends to conduct a permanent or
temporary form of amusement;
      (3)   The location of the permanent or temporary place of amusement;
      (4)   If the applicant has or intends to have more than one place of
amusement within the municipality, the location of each place of amusement,
and, in the case of an itinerant form of amusement, the date and length of time
such amusement is to be conducted at each place;
      (5)   In the case of an application for a license for a temporary place
of amusement, the name and address of the owner, lessee or custodian of the
premises upon which such amusement is to be conducted, and, if the applicant is
an association or corporation, the names and addresses of the principal
officers thereof, and any other information prescribed by the Chief of Police
for purposes of identification; and
      (6)   Such other information as the Chief of Police may require.
   (b)   The application shall be signed and verified by oath or affirmation by
the person  conducting the amusement if a natural person, or, in the case of an
association, by a member or partner thereof, or, in the case of a corporation,
by an executive officer thereof or some person specifically authorized by the
corporation to sign the application, to which shall be attached the written
evidence of his or her authority.
   (c)   At the time of making such application, the applicant shall pay to the
Chief of Police a fee of one dollar ($1.00) for each license.
(1974 Code, § 705.01)
§ 804.02  ISSUANCE OF LICENSE; REGULATIONS.
   Upon approval of the application and the payment of the license fee required
by §
804.01, the Chief of Police shall grant to each applicant, unless withheld for
cause, a permanent, temporary or itinerant amusement license for each place of
amusement within the municipality which is set forth in his or her application.
Such license shall be subject to the following regulations.
   (a)   An amusement license shall be valid only for the person in whose name
it is issued and for the conduct of amusements at the place designated therein.
   (b)   An amusement license shall not be assignable.
   (c)   An amusement license shall be conspicuously displayed at the place for
which issued during the period of ticket sales and conduct of the amusement.
   (d)   All licenses for permanent places of amusement shall expire on
September 30, next following the date upon which they are issued, unless sooner
surrendered by the licensee or suspended or revoked for cause by the Chief of
Police.
   (e)   Licenses for temporary places of amusement or for forms of itinerant
amusement shall expire at the time specified therein.
   (f)   The holder of an itinerant amusement license shall notify the Chief of
Police promptly of any change in the original contemplated itinerary, either as
to the date or time of the conduct of the amusement at each place.
   (g)   Licenses issued for permanent places of amusement under the provisions
of §§
804.01 through
804.06 may be renewed annually before October 1, upon application made to the
Chief of Police and the payment of a renewal fee of one dollar ($1.00).
(1974 Code, § 705.02)
§ 804.03  LICENSE SUSPENSION; HEARING.
   The Chief of Police may suspend or, after hearing, revoke an amusement
license granted under the provisions of §§
804.01 through
804.06 whenever he or she finds that the holder thereof has failed to comply
with any of the provisions of §§
804.01 through
804.06 or any rules or regulations of the Chief of Police prescribed, adopted
and promulgated under §§
804.01 through
804.06. Upon suspending or revoking any amusement license, the Chief of Police
shall require the holder thereof to surrender to him or her immediately all
licenses or duplicates thereof issued to him or her, and the holder shall
surrender promptly all such licenses to the Chief of Police as required.
Whenever the Chief of Police suspends an amusement license, he or she shall
notify the holder immediately and afford him or her a hearing, if no hearing
has already been afforded and one is desired. After such hearing, the Chief of
Police shall either rescind his or her order of suspension or, upon good cause
appearing therefor, shall continue the suspension or revoke the license.
(1974 Code, § 705.03)
§ 804.04  LIABILITY OF OWNER OF PREMISES.
   No owner, lessee or custodian of the premises upon which an amusement is to
be conducted shall lease to, or permit the same to be used by, any person who
is not the owner of a license duly issued by the Chief of Police under the
provisions of §§
804.01 through
804.06. Any such owner, lessee or custodian who leases to, or permits such
premises to be used for such purpose by, any person who is not the owner of a
license duly issued under the provisions of §§
804.01 through
804.06, shall be liable for the amount of any taxes levied in connection with
any amusement so conducted upon such premises, and such taxes shall be a lien
upon such premises.
(1974 Code, § 705.04)
§ 804.05  REFUNDS.
   The Director of Finance shall refund any license fee erroneously paid or to
the extent overpaid on any license application. The Chief of Police, on
application of the licensee or otherwise, may determine the amount of any such
erroneous payment or overpayment. The Chief of Police shall thereupon draw a
warrant for such certified amount on the Director of Finance to the person
entitled to such refund. 
(1974 Code, § 705.05)
§ 804.06  DISPLAY OF LICENSE AFTER SUSPENSION.
   No person, being the holder of a license issued under the provisions of this
chapter, shall display such license at the place for which such license was
issued during a period of suspension or after revocation of the same by the
Chief of Police, and during a period of ticket sales and conduct of an
amusement.
(1974 Code, § 705.06)
§ 804.07  CARNIVALS AND CIRCUSES.
   (a)   License required.  No person who is the owner, manager, agent or
person in charge thereof, shall exhibit or present, or cause or permit to be
exhibited or presented, within the municipality, any public exhibition or
presentation of a carnival or circus, for which any money or admission charge
or reward is in any manner demanded or received, or any street parade thereof,
unless a license has been obtained as provided in this section.
   (b)   Issuance of license; fee.  The Chief of Police is hereby authorized to
grant a license to any suitable person applying for the same to present or
exhibit in the municipality a carnival or a circus and/or a street parade
thereof, upon the payment of a license fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for
each day of performance thereof.
   (c)   Bond.  The Chief of Police is hereby authorized to demand and receive,
before granting any license required by this chapter, a good and sufficient
bond in a sum not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) to indemnify the
municipality against any loss or damage to any street or other municipal
property, to protect the citizens against any losses through nonpayment of just
claims for materials furnished and for work and labor by reason of the
presentation, exhibition or parade of any carnival or circus and/or a street
parade thereof.
(1974 Code, § 705.07)
§ 804.08  THEATERS AND SHOWS.
   (a)   License required; fee; exceptions.
      (1)   No person shall exhibit any public motion picture show, theatrical
or vaudeville show or other similar performance for which admission is charged,
without first obtaining a license as herein provided.
      (2)   Such license shall be issued by the Chief of Police and shall be
subject to a fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) per year, which may be prorated to a
monthly basis, but with a minimum fee of five dollars ($5.00).
      (3)   The provisions of this section shall not be applicable to any show,
performance, exhibition or entertainment exhibited or conducted by the
residents of the municipality, the proceeds of which shall be devoted to any
religious, educational, benevolent or charitable purpose.
   (b)   Authority of Police Chief; revocation of license.
      (1)   The Chief of Police may stop any performance and revoke any license
issued under this section in case any show, exhibition or performance is
conducted or exhibited in any theater or place of amusement contrary to the
laws of this state or the provisions of these Codified Ordinances or any
ordinance of the municipality.
      (2)   In case any such license is revoked, the unearned portion of the
license fee shall be returned to the licensee.
(1974 Code, § 705.08)
§ 804.99  PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor for a first offense and shall be fined not more than one hundred
fifty dollars ($150.00).  For any subsequent offense, the offender is guilty of
a misdemeanor of the third degree and shall be fined not more than five hundred
dollars ($500.00) or imprisoned not more than 60 days, or both.  A separate
offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a violation
occurs or continues.
CHAPTER 820:  EMERGENCY ALARMS
Section
820.01   Prohibited alarm systems.
820.02   Permit required.
820.03   Permit fees.
820.04   Permit issuance; renewal.
820.05   Permit revocation.
820.06   Conditions for granting of permit.
820.07   Conditions for alarm connections to municipality.
820.99   Penalty.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Traffic direction during emergencies - see TRAF.
404.08
   Theft alarms - see TRAF.
438.20
   Misconduct at emergencies - see GEN. OFF.
648.06
   False alarms - see GEN. OFF.
648.07,
648.08
§ 820.01  PROHIBITED ALARM SYSTEMS.
   The following alarm systems shall be prohibited in the municipality:
   (a)   Automatic dialing devices.  No person shall use or permit or cause to
be used any device or telephone attachment which automatically selects any
telephone line allocated by the telephone company to the city or any of its
departments or divisions.
   (b)   Certain local alarms.  No person shall install or maintain a local
alarm which sounds a horn, bell, buzzer or other type of alarm audible outside
the premises, if such alarm does not become silent automatically within one-
half hour after the device first sounds, or if the alarm produces an intensity
of sound in excess of 65 decibels at 100 feet from the building being served.
(Ord. 83-O-663, passed 4-5-1983)
§ 820.02  PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No person shall install any alarm which connects to any municipal department
without first obtaining a permit therefor from the Police Department.  No owner
and/or tenant of any premises shall allow such an installation unless a permit
has been obtained from the Chief of Police or his or her representative as
provided herein. The Chief shall refuse to issue a permit to any applicant
whose equipment is incompatible with municipal equipment or does not conform to
these regulations, or whose officers and/or agents are unable to reasonably
demonstrate that they will protect the confidentiality and integrity of the
system. 
(Ord. 83-O-663, passed 4-5-1983)
§ 820.03  PERMIT FEES.
   A permit application fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for installations
in the municipality and two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for premises
outside the municipality, but serviced by agreement, shall be required.
Existing installations shall be subject to the requirements of this section,
including those pertaining to permits. However, no permit application fee will
be charged to an existing alarm holder. Permit renewals shall be without
charge, except that if more than five false alarms were reported from the
premises in the past year, the following permit renewal fee applies to that
permit holder for the next year.
 
Six false alarms           $25.00
More than six false alarms $25.00, plus $50.00 for each false alarm over six
 
(Ord. 83-O-663, passed 4-5-1983)
§ 820.04  PERMIT ISSUANCE; RENEWAL.
   Upon proper application by an authorized person for a business or other
approved permit use to connect installed equipment to the police station for
receipt of emergency police alarms, the Chief, or his or her authorized
representative, may issue a permit for such connection. Connection by public
officials and others with special requirements may, for good cause, be granted
where the municipality finds it to be in the public interest. Permits must be
renewed annually by application therefor.
(Ord. 83-O-663, passed 4-5-1983)
§ 820.05  PERMIT REVOCATION.
   (a)   For a violation of this chapter, for refusal to permit access to
premises as provided in this chapter, for an incomplete or untruthful
application, for failure to properly maintain an installation, or for ten or
more false alarms in any 12-month period (excluding acts of God), the Chief of
Police may revoke a permit. Written notice shall be given not less than seven
days prior to revocation. The permit holder may appeal within seven days of the
revocation to the Manager. If an appeal is filed in writing within such time
period, the Manager shall hold a hearing on the issues and shall render a
decision on the basis of the facts presented. The Manager’s decision shall be
final. Service of notice shall be complete when delivered by mail or in person
or when left at the premises where the equipment is located, in a conspicuous
place or with a person there living or working.
   (b)   If a permit is revoked, but thereafter the affected party demonstrates
the ability to conform to these regulations and desires reinstatement, a new
application fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for premises in the
municipality or two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for premises outside the
municipality, plus an additional two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00), shall be
paid prior to installation.
(Ord. 83-O-663, passed 4-5-1983)
§ 820.06  CONDITIONS FOR GRANTING OF PERMIT.
   By application for a permit hereunder, the applicant agrees as follows:
   (a)   The Chief of Police or the representative designated by him or her
shall be permitted at reasonable times to enter upon the premises of the
applicant to inspect the alarm equipment. Such officers shall be permitted
entrance to the applicant’s premises at any time to investigate alarm signals
conveyed to the municipality.
   (b)   The rules and regulations hereunder and the applicable charges shall
be observed and complied with by the applicant.
   (c)   If the municipality is subject to any claim for loss, damage or
expense arising from or related to the provision of alarm service to an
applicant, such applicant shall indemnify and hold the municipality harmless
therefrom.
(Ord. 83-O-663, passed 4-5-1983)
§ 820.07  CONDITIONS FOR ALARM CONNECTIONS TO MUNICIPALITY.
   (a)   All emergency alarms installed upon premises for the purpose of
detecting and signaling the presence of unauthorized intrusion or robbery shall
not be connected in any way to a municipal department unless and until the
installation conforms to this section.
   (b)   All equipment shall meet the applicable standards of the Underwriters’
Laboratories and/or other recognized industry standards.
   (c)   The sensory mechanism used in connection with such device must be
adjusted to suppress false indications of intrusion so that the device will not
be actuated by impulses due to transient pressure changes in water pipes, short
flashes of light, wind noises such as the rattling or vibrating of doors or
windows, vehicular noise adjacent to the installation or other forces unrelated
to genuine alarms.
   (d)   All components comprising such a device must be maintained by the
owner or lessee in good repair to ensure reliability of operation.
   (e)   Each alarm shall be equipped with instructions from the supplier on
the operation and maintenance of such device.
   (f)   The Chief of Police shall be furnished with a copy of the instructions
on the operation of the device. If the Chief of Police or his or her
representative finds such instructions to be incomplete, unclear or otherwise
inadequate, he or she may require revised instructions.
   (g)   Each alarm must have available 24 hour supplier repair service, seven
days a week, which service responds within 12 hours of the service call.
   (h)   The person for whom an automatic protection device has been installed
shall be responsible for having the device repaired within 48 hours after he or
she learns, either from his or her own sources or from notification by the
municipality, that the device is not working properly.
   (i)   All equipment referred to in this section shall be maintained in good
operating condition. The Chief of Police may require that repairs be made
whenever he or she has determined that such repairs are necessary to ensure
proper operation.
(Ord. 83-O-663, passed 4-5-1983)
§ 820.99  PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor for a first offense and shall be fined not more than one hundred
dollars ($100.00).  For any subsequent offense, the offender is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree and shall be fined not more than five hundred
dollars ($500.00) or imprisoned not more than 60 days, or both.  A separate
offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a violation
occurs or continues.
CHAPTER 840:  MECHANICAL AND ELECTRONIC AMUSEMENT DEVICES
Section
840.01   Definitions.
840.02   Pinball machines and video games; permit required; exception.
840.03   Permit fee for pinball machines and video games.
840.04   Other devices; permit required; exception.
840.05   Permit fee for other devices.
840.06   Application.
840.07   Term.
840.08   Transferability.
840.09   Display.
840.10   Revocation.
840.99   Penalty.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Tampering with coin machines - see GEN. OFF.
672.05
   Use of slugs - see GEN. OFF.
672.13
   Amusements generally - see B.R. & T.
Ch. 804
   Mechanical musical devices - see B.R. & T.
Ch. 842
§ 840.01  DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this chapter:
   (a)   “Pinball machine” means any device operated by hand or foot, putting
into operation or motion a ball or mechanism, where figures, numbers or letters
change on each pull or push of a handle, knob, arm, plunger or button, which
device is used for the entertainment of the public by depositing a coin therein
or by paying a specific charge to play such game.
(1974 Code, § 717.02)
   (b)   “Video game” means a machine which, upon the insertion of a coin or
slug, activates a screen or lighted area with action thereon, and operates or
may be operated for use as a game, contest or amusement.
§ 840.02  PINBALL MACHINES AND VIDEO GAMES; PERMIT REQUIRED; EXCEPTION.
   No person operating a business or a firm, partnership, corporation, club,
society, fraternal organization, lodge or association located in the
municipality shall have on display in the various aforementioned premises, a
pinball machine, video game or other similar or related device, coin-actuated
or otherwise, for the purpose of affording amusement to the customers, members
or guests frequenting the aforementioned premises, unless such person, firm,
partnership, corporation, club, society, fraternal organization, lodge or
association has obtained from the municipality a permit to display the
aforementioned pinball machine, video game or other similar or related device,
coin-actuated or otherwise, with the exception that this chapter does not apply
to private homes in this municipality.
§ 840.03  PERMIT FEE FOR PINBALL MACHINES AND VIDEO GAMES.
   Every person operating a business or a firm, partnership, corporation, club,
society, fraternal organization, lodge or association located in the
municipality, to whom a permit is granted under this chapter, shall pay to the
municipality an annual permit fee of ten dollars ($10.00) each for every
pinball machine, video game or other similar or related device displayed in
such premises.
§ 840.04  OTHER DEVICES; PERMIT REQUIRED; EXCEPTION.
   No person operating a business or a firm, partnership, corporation, club,
society, fraternal organization, lodge or association located in the
municipality shall have on display for the amusement of customers, members or
guests, in the various aforementioned premises, any bowling game, skee-ball,
shuffle board, bumper pool or other mechanical or electronic device, or any
similar or related device, coin-actuated or otherwise, that requires the direct
and actual physical control of the player in order for the player to achieve a
score, for which such player is striving, unless such person, firm,
partnership, corporation, club, society, fraternal organization, lodge or
association has obtained from the municipality a permit to display such bowling
game, skee-ball, shuffle board, bumper pool or other mechanical or electronic
device, or any other similar or related device, coin-actuated or otherwise,
with the exception that this chapter does not apply to private homes in this
municipality.
§ 840.05  PERMIT FEE FOR OTHER DEVICES.
   Every person operating a business or a firm, partnership, corporation, club,
society, fraternal organization, lodge or association located in the
municipality to whom a permit is granted, shall pay to the municipality an
annual permit fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) each for every bowling game,
skee-ball, shuffle board, bumper pool or other mechanical or electronic device,
or any other similar or related device displayed in such premises.
§ 840.06  APPLICATION.
   When any person, firm, partnership, corporation, club, society, fraternal
organization, lodge or association desires to obtain the aforementioned
permits, such applicant shall fill out a form furnished by the municipality,
which must be signed by the applicant.
(1974 Code, § 717.06)
§ 840.07  TERM.
   All of the aforementioned permits shall be dated from January 1 of each
calendar year and shall expire on December 31 of the same year that the permit
is issued, and no proration or rebate shall be made for any unused portion of
the life of such permit.
(1974 Code, § 717.07)
§ 840.08  TRANSFERABILITY.
   No transfer of a permit from one holder to another shall be allowed unless
the consent of the Chief of Police has been obtained and the consent is
endorsed on such permit.
(1974 Code, § 717.08)
§ 840.09  DISPLAY.
   Every permit holder shall post such permit conspicuously in the room where
the aforementioned machines or devices are displayed.
(1974 Code, § 717.09)
§ 840.10  REVOCATION.
   No person under the age of 18 years shall be permitted to operate or play
any game or device licensed hereunder, nor shall it be used for gambling
purposes. If any game or device licensed hereunder is operated contrary to the
provisions of this section, it and all other machines or devices displayed
shall be subject to seizure by any law enforcement officer of the municipality.
Upon conviction, the permit of the offending holder shall be subject to
revocation by the municipality.
(1974 Code, § 717.10)
§ 840.99  PENALTY.
   (a)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor for a first offense and shall be fined not more than one
hundred fifty dollars ($150.00).  For any subsequent offense, the offender is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree and shall be fined not more than
five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisoned not more than 60 days, or both.  A
separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a
violation occurs or continues.
(Adopting Ordinance)
   (b)    In addition to the penalty provided in division (a) hereof, the court
shall order the surrender to the municipality by the defendant of all permits
held under this chapter.
(1974 Code, § 717.99)
CHAPTER 842:  MECHANICAL MUSIC DEVICES
Section
842.01   Permit required; exception.
842.02   Application.
842.03   Fee.
842.04   Transferability.
842.05   Display.
842.06   Regulation of sound.
842.07   Exceptions from application of chapter.
842.99   Penalty.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Tampering with coin machines - see GEN. OFF.
672.05
   Use of slugs - see GEN. OFF.
672.13
   Amusements generally - see B.R. & T.
Ch. 804
   Performance standards for noise - see P. & Z.
1260.30(a)
§ 842.01  PERMIT REQUIRED; EXCEPTION.
   No person shall display, maintain or permit to be played, a juke box or
other similar or related device for the musical entertainment of the public in
the municipality unless such person has first obtained a permit therefor.
However, this chapter shall not apply to private residences.
(1974 Code, § 721.01)
§ 842.02  APPLICATION.
   Every person desiring to display a mechanical musical device must make
application to the Chief of Police for a permit therefor, in writing, giving
the name and address of the applicant, the type of device to be displayed and
the location where it will be maintained. Such application must be signed by
the applicant.
(1974 Code, § 721.02)
§ 842.03  FEE.
   Every person to whom a permit is granted shall pay a fee therefor of ten
dollars ($10.00) per year or any part thereof, for each machine. All permits
shall expire at the end of the calendar year, December 31. A new permit must be
obtained on or before January 1 of the following year.
(1974 Code, § 721.03)
§ 842.04  TRANSFERABILITY.
   No transfer of a permit, either as to person or place, shall be permitted,
except with the consent of the Chief of Police, which consent shall be endorsed
upon the permit.
(1974 Code, § 721.04)
§ 842.05  DISPLAY.
   Every permittee shall keep his or her permit conspicuously posted in the
room where the device herein mentioned is displayed.
(1974 Code, § 721.05)
§ 842.06  REGULATION OF SOUND.
   Every permittee shall be required to regulate the sound of a mechanical
musical device located in his or her establishment so that it will not be
audible for a distance of more than ten feet from the exterior limits of such
establishment.
(1974 Code, § 721.06)
§ 842.07  EXCEPTIONS FROM APPLICATION OF CHAPTER.
   (a)   Excepted from the permit and audible distance provisions of this
chapter shall be schools, churches or other benevolent organizations that are
conducting some special function, such as a carnival, bazaar or dance, solely
for their own benefit.
   (b)   However, such schools, churches or other benevolent organizations
conducting the aforesaid functions shall be required to cease all of this type
of musical entertainment promptly at 12:00 midnight of each day of operation
and remain silent until 12:00 noon of each succeeding day.
(1974 Code, § 721.07)
§ 842.99  PENALTY.
   (a)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall, for a
first offense, be fined not more than one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) and,
for a second and subsequent offenses, shall be fined not more than five hundred
dollars ($500.00) or imprisoned not more than six months, or both. Each day
such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
   (b)   In addition to the penalty provided in division (a) hereof, the court
shall order the surrender to the municipality by the defendant of all permits
held under this chapter.
(1974 Code, § 721.99)
CHAPTER 844:  MOBILE FOOD VENDING
Section
844.01   Definitions.
844.02   License required for operation.
844.03   Application for license.
844.04   Application fee.
844.05   Inspection for license, generally.
844.06   Requirements for issuing a license.
844.99   Penalty.
§ 844.01  DEFINITIONS.
   When used in this chapter of the Columbiana City Codes:
   (a)   "Food" shall mean a raw, cooked, or processed edible substance, ice,
beverage, or ingredient used or intended for use or for sale in whole or in
part for human consumption.
   (b)   "Food service operation" shall mean, for the purposes of a mobile food
vending license, a place, location, site, or separate area where food intended
to be served in individual portions is prepared or served for a charge or
required donation. As used in this division, "served" means a response made to
an order for one or more individual portions of food in a form that is edible
without washing, cooking, or additional preparation and "prepared" means any
action that affects a food other than receiving or maintaining it at the
temperature at which it was received.
   (c)   "Food trailer" shall mean any vehicle without motive power that is
designed to be drawn by a motor vehicle and is specifically designed or used
for food vending operations.
   (d)   "Food truck" shall mean a vehicle propelled by an engine which has
been specifically designed or used for mobile food vending.
   (e)   "Food truck industry" shall mean both food trucks and food trailers.
   (f)   "Food vending operation" shall mean a place, location, site, or
separate area where food intended to be served in individual portions is
prepared or served for a charge or required donation. As used in this division,
"served" means a response made to an order for one or more individual portions
of food in a form that is edible without washing, cooking, or additional
preparation and "prepared" means any action that affects a food other than
receiving or maintaining it at the temperature at which it was received.
   (g)   "Health license" shall mean an official document issued by a
department of health pursuant to Ohio R.C. 3701. Such health license shall be
separate from any other license required under this chapter. Such document may
be either an annual health license or a temporary health license.
   (h)   "Licensing period" shall mean the sixteenth day of March to the
fifteenth day of March of the next succeeding year.
   (i)   "Mobile food vending court" shall mean a location where the public
right of way is closed for vehicular traffic on a temporary or permanent basis
to allow two or more mobile food vending units to operate from such location.
   (j)   "Mobile food vending license" shall mean an official document issued
by the City of Columbiana authorizing operation of a mobile food vending unit
within the corporate limits of the City of Columbiana.
   (k)   "Mobile food vending unit" shall mean a food service operation or
retail food establishment that is operated from a food truck or food trailer,
and that can or does routinely change location. For the purposes of a mobile
food vending license, "mobile food vending unit" excludes food delivery
operations and vending machines, as defined in Ohio R.C. 3717.01(L).
   (l)   "Mobile food vendor" shall mean every corporation, association, joint
stock association, person, firm or partnership, their lessees, directors,
receivers, trustees, appointees by any court whatsoever, or the heirs,
executors, administrators, or personal representatives or assignees of any
deceased owner, owning, controlling, operating or managing any mobile food
vending unit.
   (m)   "Operator" shall mean the individual who manages one or more mobile
food vending units whether as the owner, an employee of the owner or as an
independent contractor. Each license issued is applicable to one mobile food
vendor unit.
   (n)   "Permanently revoke" shall, for the purposes of a mobile food vending
license, mean to terminate all rights and privileges under a license for a
period of 90 days or greater and to render the holder of a license ineligible
to reapply for said license.
   (o)   "Permitted mobile food vendor" shall mean for purposes of the City of
Columbiana, those mobile food vendors defined as concession trailers/trucks,
frozen food trucks, soft-serve ice cream trucks, and mobile cookers and BBQ
pits. Units that do not meet these descriptions will not be issued a mobile
food vendor license.
   (p)   "Public right of way" shall mean any property owned by the City of
Columbiana, including but not limited to, any street, road, alley, sidewalk,
vacant lot, or other tract of land.
   (q)   "Revoke" shall, for the purposes of a mobile food vending license,
mean to terminate all rights or privileges under a license for a period not to
exceed 90 days after which the individual must reapply for a license.
   (r)   "Retail food establishment" shall, for the purposes of a mobile food
vending license, mean a premises or part of a premises where food is stored,
processed, prepared, manufactured, or otherwise held or handled for sale of
food to a person who is the ultimate consumer.
   (s)   "Special event" shall, for the purposes of a mobile food vending
license, mean any activity or gathering or assemblage of people upon public
property or in the public right of way for which a block party, street closure,
race event, parade permit, community market, or other like permit has been
issued by the City of Columbiana.
   (t)   "Suspend" shall, for the purposes of a mobile food vending license,
mean to temporarily deprive a licensee of rights or privileges under a license
for a period not to exceed 90 days.
(Ord. 18-O-2954, passed 4-17-2018)
§ 844.02  LICENSE REQUIRED FOR OPERATION.
   (a)   No individual or organization shall operate, or cause to be operated,
any mobile food vending unit within the corporate limits of the City of
Columbiana without a current and valid mobile food vending license issued in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
   (b)   No individual or organization shall operate, or cause to be operated,
any mobile food vending unit within the corporate limits of the City of
Columbiana without a current and valid health license issued in accordance with
laws, rules and regulations established in the Ohio Revised Code, the Ohio
Administrative Code, or the Columbiana City Codes, whichever is applicable.
Further, the city requires that the valid health license be issued by either
Columbiana or Mahoning County Health Departments.
   (c)   Mobile food vending units that only operate as part of a special event
or public event may not require a mobile food vending license, pursuant to the
approval of City Council. Such units must comply with any health licensing
requirements of the State of Ohio.
   (d)   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as superseding,
supplanting, or otherwise replacing any duty imposed by Ohio R.C. Chapter 3701
or 3717, or rules or regulations promulgated thereunder, upon an applicant for
a health license, or upon a department of health in the conduct of its
responsibilities relative to mobile food vending units.
   (e)   Each mobile food vending license shall identify the license plate
number of the mobile food vending unit for which the license has been issued.
   (f)   Landowners that own mobile food vendor units are exempt from permit
fees to operate their mobile food vendor units on their own property. An
application is still required to be completed to register the mobile food
vendor unit. If the landowner chooses to operate the mobile food vendor unit on
property other than the landowner's property, then the applicable fees will
apply.
(Ord. 18-O-2954, passed 4-17-2018)
§ 844.03  APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   (a)   An application packet for a mobile food vending license must be
submitted by the owner of the unit to the City Manager or his or her designee.
A separate application packet must be submitted for each unit. Application for
a mobile food vending license shall be on a form prescribed by the City of
Columbiana and shall substantially comply with division (b) of this section.
The owner of a unit must show proof of a current and valid health license from
a Department of Health from Columbiana or Mahoning County, Ohio.
   (b)   Application for a mobile food vending license shall be made under oath
and shall contain the following information and/or material:
      (1)   Name, permanent address, telephone number, electronic mail address,
date of birth, and driver's license number of the mobile food vending unit
owner;
      (2)   Business name or DBA, permanent address, and telephone number, if
different from the owner information;
      (3)   Proof of Ohio Department of Taxation Itinerant Vendors License, if
required;
      (4)   Proof of insurance, as required by this chapter, or by any city,
state, or federal law, rule, or policy;
      (5)   A physical description of the unit proposed to be licensed for
mobile food vending;
      (6)   Current and valid state vehicle registration information for the
unit proposed to be licensed for mobile food vending;
      (7)   Proof of a city income tax filing number or exemption from the City
of Columbiana division of income tax;
      (8)   Proof that the applicant is current and compliant in the payment of
any City of Columbiana taxes on payroll and net profits at the time such proof
is submitted; or if the applicant is not current and compliant in the payment
of any City of Columbiana taxes on payroll and net profits, that applicant has
entered into an agreement to pay any delinquency and is abiding by the terms of
the agreement at the time such proof is submitted;
      (9)   Proof of a filing number or exemption from the Ohio Department of
Taxation;
      (10)   Affirmation that, upon issuance of a license, the applicant will
conduct a criminal background check prior to allowing any person to operate the
mobile food vending unit in the public right of way;
      (11)   Affirmation that, upon issuance of a license, the applicant will
provide to the license section written documentation of any change in the
information required by this chapter, as well as written documentation of any
modification, damage, destruction, or decommissioning of the unit, within ten
calendar days of any such change;
      (12)   A description of the source of potable water for the mobile food
vending unit as well as a description of where waste water will be held and
discharged as it pertains to mobile food vending unit services; and
      (13)   Any other information required by the City of Columbiana or the
Department of Health.
   (c)   The City Manager or his or her designee must examine all applications
for a mobile food vending license filed under this chapter and make, or cause
to be made, any further investigation into the application as is deemed
necessary in order to make a timely determination regarding the application.
   (d)   The city shall provide a written determination to each applicant. If a
complete application for a mobile food vending license is not approved, any
reason(s) for that determination must be provided to each applicant in writing.
   (e)   Upon approval of the application(s), each unit proposed to be licensed
for mobile food vending is subject to inspection as provided for herein prior
to the issuance of any mobile food vending license or health license. Nothing
in this section shall limit the authority of a Department of Health to conduct
an inspection as otherwise allowed by the State of Ohio.
   (f)   Any rules or ordinances that contain information related to the
license process or operation of a mobile food unit shall be provided to the
applicant.
(Ord. 18-O-2954, passed 4-17-2018)
§ 844.04  APPLICATION FEE.
   (a)   The following non-refundable licenses are available for mobile food
vendor units:
      (1)   Single day license: Twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for the operation
of the mobile food vendor unit for one approved day;
      (2)   Six month license: One hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) for the
operation of the mobile food vendor unit for the period of March 16 through
September 15 of the issuing calendar year;
      (3)   Annual license: Three hundred dollars ($300.00) for the operation
of the mobile food vendor unit for a 12-month period from March 16 of the
issuing year to March 15 of the following year.
   (b)   A non-refundable surcharge of 10% will be added to each license to
cover the cost of refuse removal from city trash receptacles in the following
amounts: single day license - two dollars and fifty cents ($2.50); six month
license - fifteen dollars ($15.00); annual license - thirty dollars ($30.00).
   (c)   City Council reserves the right to waive any of the above licensing
fees for special events, as well as charitable and/or nonprofit organizations
upon a request for a waiver of fees.
   (d)   City Council reserves the right to modify this fee structure after the
first annual license period.
(Ord. 18-O-2954, passed 4-17-2018)
§ 844.05  INSPECTION FOR LICENSE, GENERALLY.
   (a)   Prior to the issuance of a mobile food vending license, every unit
must be inspected as provided for in Ohio R.C. Chapter 3717, and a health
license from either the Columbiana County or Mahoning County Health Department
shall be submitted.
   (b)   Nothing in this section shall limit periodic inspections by the City
of Columbiana at the discretion of the City Manager or his or her designee.
(Ord. 18-O-2954, passed 4-17-2018)
§ 844.06  REQUIREMENTS FOR ISSUING A LICENSE.
   (a)   A license shall be issued in accordance with this chapter to an
individual or entity:
      (1)   Who has received approval of an application as provided for in §
844.03 of this chapter;
      (2)   Whose mobile food vending unit has passed the inspections required
under this chapter;
      (3)   Whose mobile food vending unit is in compliance with all applicable
requirements of this chapter and has obtained any permits, licenses or prior
approval required by any city, state or federal agency;
      (4)   Who has not been denied a license under this chapter within the
immediate past year, unless the applicant can and does show to the satisfaction
of the City Manager or his or her designee that the reasons for such earlier
denial no longer exist;
      (5)   Who has paid all applicable application and/or license fees; and
      (6)   Who is not otherwise refused a license under the requirements of
this chapter.
   (b)   If the applicant intends to operate in the public right-of-way, the
city may refuse to issue licenses for operation in the public right-of-way as
required by this chapter to any person:
      (1)   Who has been convicted of a felony, misdemeanor or code violation
involving a sex offense, traffic in controlled substances, or any offense of
violence as defined in Columbiana City Codes, such conviction being entered
within the seven years;
      (2)   Obtaining a license by a false statement in his or her application;
      (3)   Failing to comply with the mobile food vending unit operation and
vehicle standards established in this chapter;
      (4)   Misrepresenting or otherwise making false statements in his or her
affidavit that he or she would conduct criminal background checks on all
employees;
      (5)   Failing to post and maintain required decal(s) and information;
      (6)   Failing to offer receipts to customers or to supply receipts when
the customer answers in the affirmative;
      (7)   Receiving citations for impeding the flow or operation of
pedestrian and vehicle traffic, creating unsanitary conditions, becoming an
attractive nuisance for children or any other infraction of the Columbiana City
Codes;
      (8)   Verbally threatening or attempting to intimidate any employee of
the City of Columbiana for actions taken in the enforcement of the provisions
of this chapter;
      (9)   Failing to maintain general liability insurance for each mobile
food vending unit;
      (10)   Conviction for any crime committed in or from the mobile food
vending unit;
(Ord. 18-O-2954, passed 4-17-2018)
§ 844.99  PENALTY.
   A violation of any section of this chapter shall be deemed a criminal
violation as follows:
   (a)   Whoever violates §
844.02 shall be guilty of misdemeanor of the first degree. Any such violation
shall constitute a separate offense on each successive day continued. Strict
liability is intended to be imposed for a violation of this section.
   (b)   Whoever violates §§
844.05 or
844.06 shall be guilty of a minor misdemeanor. Strict liability is intended to
be imposed for a violation of these sections.
   (c)   A violation of any other section of
Chapter 844 may be grounds for the suspension, revocation or permanent
revocation of the mobile food vending unit license or in the case of a new
application may be grounds to refuse to issue such license for a determinate
period of time up to 90 days or permanently, in addition to any other penalties
established for such violation in applicable sections of the Columbiana City
Code.
(Ord. 18-O-2954, passed 4-17-2018)
CHAPTER 852:  PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
Section
852.01   License required.
852.02   License application; issuance; fee.
852.03   License expiration; revocation.
852.04   Exemptions from application of chapter.
852.05   Registration; notification of canvassing.
852.06   Hours of business.
852.07   Misrepresentation; falsification.
852.08   Signs prohibiting soliciting.
852.99   Penalty.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Power to inspect food products - see Ohio R.C. 715.46
   Power to regulate - see Ohio R.C. 715.61 et seq.
   Charitable solicitations - see Ohio R.C. Ch. 1716
   Frozen desserts - see Ohio R.C. 3717.51 et seq.
   Trespassing - see GEN. OFF.
642.10,
642.11
   Littering - see GEN. OFF.
660.03
§ 852.01  LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person shall sell, offer for sale, barter, exchange or go from door to
door soliciting the purchase or gift of any goods or other articles of value or
money, or offer any services for hire or commission in any place in, upon or
along the streets or other public places in the municipality, without first
obtaining a license pursuant to this chapter.  Such person shall have such
license with him or her at all times while exercising such calling and shall,
upon demand, exhibit the license to any police officer or official of the
municipality or to any occupant of any residence or business establishment in
the municipality being contacted or solicited.
(Ord. 85-O-841, passed 9-3-1985)
§ 852.02  LICENSE APPLICATION; ISSUANCE; FEE.
   (a)   Any person desiring the license required by §
852.01 shall make application therefor to the Chief of Police or his or her
authorized representative. Such person shall furnish the following as evidence
of his or her identity and character:
      (1)   His or her name, present residence address, permanent or business
address, telephone number, Social Security number and date of birth;
      (2)   A brief description of the nature of the business and the kinds of
goods or services to be peddled or solicited, and the area of the municipality
to be solicited;
      (3)   The name, address and telephone number of the applicant’s employer
and credentials showing authorization by or representation of such employer. If
the applicant is self-employed, he or she shall so state.
      (4)   Submission to fingerprinting, if requested, by the Police
Department for local police files and for the purpose of determining the
criminal record, if any, of the applicant.
   (b)   A license shall be issued unless it is determined by the Chief of
Police or his or her authorized representative that the applicant has willfully
misrepresented his or her identity or intention, has violated any of the
provisions of this chapter or has been convicted of any felony or misdemeanor
involving force, violence or moral turpitude or in any way connected with the
act of peddling or soliciting, other than a traffic offense. The fee for the
license shall be ten dollars ($10.00) per year.
(Ord 85-O-841, passed 9-3-1985)
§ 852.03  LICENSE EXPIRATION; REVOCATION.
   Any license issued pursuant to this chapter shall expire at the end of one
year following the date of issuance, and may be revoked or suspended at any
time by the Chief of Police or his or her authorized representative if the
person to whom it is issued is found to have willfully misrepresented his or
her identity or intention, has been convicted of any felony or misdemeanor
involving force, violence or moral turpitude or in any way connected with the
act of peddling or soliciting, other than a traffic offense, or has violated
any of the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 85-O-841, passed 9-3-1985)
§ 852.04  EXEMPTIONS FROM APPLICATION OF CHAPTER.
   The following persons shall be entirely exempt from the application of the
provisions of this
Chapter 852:
   (a)   Any person soliciting or peddling newspapers or disseminating
religious, charitable, civic, educational, or political information;
   (b)   Any person soliciting contributions for, or offering of sale, any
goods, or publications for, any religious, charitable, civic, educational or
political organization;
   (c)   Any person who is otherwise exempt from the provisions of this chapter
pursuant to the laws of the State of Ohio or the United States.
(Ord. 85-O-841, passed 9-3-1985; Ord. 02-O-1964, passed 8-20-2002)
§ 852.05  REGISTRATION; NOTIFICATION OF CANVASSING.
   (a)   Every person subject to this chapter, prior to soliciting or peddling
from door to door in the municipality, shall register his or her name, address
and telephone number with the Police Department for identification purposes.
However, if the solicitation is on behalf of an organization only, the
responsible officer thereof shall register the name, address and telephone
number of the organization.
   (b)   Such person or the responsible officer on behalf of an organization
shall notify the Police Department personally of the time period and specific
areas in the municipality in which soliciting or peddling will be conducted. No
person or organization shall solicit or peddle from door to door at any time
without having given such specific prior notice, and no person shall peddle or
solicit in an area or at a time not previously listed with the Police
Department.
(Ord. 85-O-841, passed 9-3-1985)
§ 852.06  HOURS OF BUSINESS.
   No person, except for good cause shown, shall peddle or solicit from door to
door in the municipality before 9:00 a.m. or after 9:00 p.m. on any day.
(Ord. 85-O-841, passed 9-3-1985)
§ 852.07  MISREPRESENTATION; FALSIFICATION.
   No peddler or solicitor shall register a false or fictitious name or
address, or represent by words or action that he or she is the employee, agent,
partner or representative of any person or organization when, in fact, he or
she is not the employee, agent, partner or representative of such person or
organization.
(Ord. 85-O-841, passed 9-3-1985)
§ 852.08  SIGNS PROHIBITING SOLICITING.
   No person, while engaged in soliciting or peddling regulated by this
chapter, shall knock at the door or ring the doorbell of any home, apartment or
other dwelling unit in the municipality upon which is clearly displayed at the
entrance a notice which reads “No Solicitors,” or which otherwise clearly
purports to prohibit peddlers, solicitors or vendors on the premises, unless
such person is or has been invited upon the premises by the occupant thereof.
(Ord. 85-O-841, passed 9-3-1985)
§ 852.99  PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor for a first offense and shall be fined not more than one hundred
fifty dollars ($150.00).  For any subsequent offense, the offender is guilty of
a misdemeanor of the third degree and shall be fined not more than five hundred
dollars ($500.00) or imprisoned not more than 60 days, or both.  A separate
offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a violation
occurs or continues.
CHAPTER 866:  TAXICABS
Section
866.01   Taxicab defined.
866.02   Vehicle license required; duration; fee.
866.03   License application; issuance.
866.04   Insurance required.
866.05   Taxicab stands.
866.06   Displaying rates; excessive charges.
866.07   Minor operators prohibited.
866.08   Suspension and revocation of vehicle license.
866.09   Renewal of vehicle license.
866.99   Penalty.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Operation of motor vehicles generally - see TRAF.
Ch. 432
   D.U.I.; reckless operation; speed - see TRAF.
Ch. 434
   Licensing and accidents - see TRAF.
Ch. 436
   Vehicle equipment - see TRAF.
Ch. 438
   Commercial vehicles - see TRAF. Chs.
440,
442
   Parking - see TRAF.
Ch. 452
   Taxicab stands - see TRAF.
452.11
§ 866.01  TAXICAB DEFINED.
   As used in this chapter, “taxicab” means any vehicle whose owner or driver
solicits, secures or accepts passengers for hire upon hail or request on the
public streets in the municipality.
(1974 Code, § 729.01)
§ 866.02  VEHICLE LICENSE REQUIRED; DURATION; FEE.
   (a)   No person shall operate or cause to be operated a taxicab, or proffer
the services of any vehicle as a taxicab, unless the owner of such vehicle has
obtained a taxicab license, as herein provided, covering such vehicle.
   (b)   Every such taxicab license shall expire on December 31 of the year in
which issued. Licenses issued on or after July 1 of any year shall be issued at
one-half the annual license fee herein provided.
   (c)   The annual license fee for each taxicab shall be ten dollars ($10.00).
Any taxicab company operating 50 taxicabs or more shall be entitled to a
certificate to be known as a fleet certificate, for the sum of two hundred
dollars ($200.00).
(1974 Code, § 729.02)
§ 866.03  LICENSE APPLICATION; ISSUANCE.
   (a)   Applications for licenses and certificates shall be filed with the
Chief of Police on forms approved by him or her. Such application shall contain
a statement of the name and address of the applicant, the character of the
business to be transacted, the kind of equipment, the number of taxicabs to be
used, the conditions of the equipment and such other facts as may be required
by the Chief of Police.
   (b)   The Chief of Police shall investigate and may hold a hearing upon each
application for a license. If the Chief finds upon such investigation and/or
hearing that the public convenience and necessity do not justify the operation
of the vehicle for which the license is desired, he or she shall forthwith
notify the applicant of his or her findings. If he or she finds from such
investigation and/or hearing that the public convenience and necessity do
justify the operation of the vehicle or vehicles for which license is desired,
he or she shall forthwith notify the applicant. The applicant may appeal the
decision of the Chief to Council, provided such appeal is perfected within ten
days from the date of such decision. Council, after giving all proper parties
an opportunity to be heard, shall either affirm, modify or reverse the Chief’s
decision. The action of Council shall be final.
(1974 Code, § 729.03)
§ 866.04  INSURANCE REQUIRED.
   No licenses or certificates shall be issued, nor shall any taxicab be
operated on the streets of the municipality, until the applicant has filed with
the Chief of Police, a casualty insurance policy of an insurance company
subject to the approval of the Municipal Attorney. Such policy shall indemnify
such applicant in the sum of at least three hundred thousand dollars
($300,000.00) for injury or death to one person, five hundred thousand dollars
($500,000.00) for injury or death to more than one person in the same accident
and three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) for property damage in any one
accident through the operation of the taxicab of such applicant. Such policy
shall further contain a clause obligating the casualty company to give ten
days’ written notice to the Chief of Police before cancellation of such policy.
§ 866.05  TAXICAB STANDS.
   At the time of issuing the license, the Chief of Police shall designate a
regular parking space for the taxicab or taxicabs, and he or she may prescribe
rules for usage of such stand suitable to the applicant’s business and
agreeable with the public convenience and welfare.
(1974 Code, § 729.05)
§ 866.06  DISPLAYING RATES; EXCESSIVE CHARGES.
   Every taxicab shall display at all times a printed list of the fares and
rates to be charged to passengers for transportation. No owner or driver shall
charge any amount in excess of such printed rates unless by mutual agreement
between the passenger and the driver entered into before leaving the point of
departure.
(1974 Code, § 729.06)
§ 866.07  MINOR OPERATORS PROHIBITED.
   No person under 18 years of age shall operate a taxicab on any street or
alley of the municipality.
(1974 Code, § 729.07)
§ 866.08  SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION OF VEHICLE LICENSE.
   Whenever a licensee fails to make a reasonable or consistent effort to
operate his or her taxicab or taxicabs for a period of 60 days, the Chief of
Police may either suspend or revoke such license after giving the licensee an
opportunity to show cause why his or her license should not be suspended or
revoked. Such hearing shall be held by the Chief within ten days after such 60-
day period, and the licensee shall be notified of the time and place of such
hearing by registered mail. Upon failure of the licensee to show cause, the
Chief shall revoke or suspend the license, whichever shall best serve the
interests of the community, and such revocation or suspension shall become
effective upon notice served upon such licensee.
(1974 Code, § 729.08)
§ 866.09  RENEWAL OF VEHICLE LICENSE.
   All owners of taxicabs hereby licensed, at the completion of the year for
which such license was issued, shall be entitled to a renewal for each
succeeding year without a finding of convenience or necessity, provided all
other requirements of this chapter have been complied with.
(1974 Code, § 729.09)
§ 866.99  PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor for a first offense and shall be fined not more than one hundred
fifty dollars ($150.00).  For any subsequent offense, the offender is guilty of
a misdemeanor of the third degree and shall be fined not more than five hundred
dollars ($500.00) or imprisoned not more than 60 days, or both.  A separate
offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a violation
occurs or continues.
CHAPTER 868:  SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES AND PENALTY
Section
868.01   Purpose, intent and findings.
868.02   Definitions.
868.03   Classifications.
868.04   Sexually oriented business license required.
868.05   Sexually oriented business employee license required.
868.06   Issuance or renewal of sexually oriented business license.
868.07   Issuance or renewal of sexually oriented business employee license.
868.08   Fees for sexually oriented business license.
868.09   Fees for sexually oriented business employee license.
868.10   Expiration of sexually oriented business license.
868.11   Expiration of sexually oriented business employee license.
868.12   Suspension of sexually oriented business license.
868.13   Suspension of sexually oriented business employee license.
868.14   Revocation of sexually oriented business license.
868.15   Revocation of sexually oriented business employer license.
868.16   Appeals rights.
868.17   Transfer of sexually oriented business license.
868.18   Transfer of sexually oriented business employee license.
868.19   Location.
868.20   Regulations regarding public nudity.
868.21   Prohibition against minors in a sexually oriented business.
868.22   Hours of operation.
868.23   Escort agencies.
868.24   Nude model studios.
868.25   Adult motels.
868.26   Regulations pertaining to exhibition of sexually explicit films,
videos, or live entertainment in viewing rooms.
868.27   Effective date.
868.28   Injunction.
868.29   Severability.
868.99   Penalty.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Power to restrain houses of ill fame - see Ohio R.C. 715.52
   Sex related offenses - see Ohio R.C. Ch. 2907; GEN. OFF.
Ch. 666
   Disseminating matter harmful to juveniles - see GEN. OFF.
666.11 et seq.
   Juveniles on premises prohibited - see GEN. OFF.
666.18
§ 868.01  PURPOSE, INTENT AND FINDINGS.
   (a)   Purpose.  It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate sexually
oriented businesses to promote the health, safety, morals and general welfare
of the citizens of the municipality and to establish reasonable and uniform
regulations regarding sexually oriented businesses within the municipality. The
provisions of this chapter have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a
limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials,
including sexually oriented materials. Similarly, it is not the intent or
effect of this chapter to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually
oriented materials protected by the First Amendment, or to deny access by the
distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their
intended market. Neither is it the intent nor effect of this chapter to condone
or legitimize the distribution of obscene material.
   (b)   Findings.  Based on evidence concerning the adverse secondary effects
of adult uses on the community presented in reports made available to the
Council, and on findings incorporated in the cases of Municipality of Renton v.
Playtime Theatres, Inc., 475 U.S. 41 (1986), Young v. American Mini Theatres,
426 U.S. 50 (1976), FW/P8S, Inc. v. Municipality of Dallas, 493 U.S. 215
(1990); Barnes v. Glen Theatre, Inc..501 U.S. 560 (1991), Municipality of Erie
v. Pap’s A.M., 120 5. Ct. 1382 (2000), and on studies in other communities
including, but not limited to: Phoenix and Tucson, Arizona, the Council finds.
      (1)   Sexually oriented businesses lend themselves to ancillary unlawful
and unhealthy activities that are presently uncontrolled by the operators of
the establishments. Further, there is presently no mechanism to make the owners
of these establishments responsible for the activities that occur on their
premises.
      (2)   Certain employees of sexually oriented businesses, defined in this
chapter as adult theaters and adult cabarets, engage in higher incidence of
certain types of illicit sexual behavior than employees of other
establishments.
      (3)   Sexual acts, including masturbation, and oral and anal sex, occur
at sexually oriented businesses, especially those which provide private or
semi-private booths or cubicles for viewing films, videos, or live sex shows.
      (4)   Offering and providing such space encourages such activities, which
creates unhealthy conditions.
      (5)   Persons frequent certain adult theaters, adult arcades, and other
sexually oriented businesses for the purpose of engaging in sex within the
premises of such sexually oriented businesses.
      (6)   At least 50 communicable diseases may be spread by activities
occurring in sexually oriented businesses, including, but not limited to,
syphilis, gonorrhea, human immunodeficiency virus infection (HIV-AIDS), genital
herpes, hepatitis B, Non A, Non B amebiasis, salmonella infections and shigella
infections.
      (7)   Since 1981 there has been an increasing cumulative number of
reported cases of AIDS (acquired immunodeficiency syndrome) caused by the human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV) in the United States: 600 in 1982; 2,200 in 1983;
4,600 in 1984; 8,555 in 1985, and 253,448 through December 31, 1992.
      (8)   The number of cases of early (less than one year) syphilis in the
United States reported annually has risen, with 33,613 cases reported in 1982,
and 45,200 through November, 1990.
      (9)   The number of cases of gonorrhea in the United States reported
annually remains at a high level, with over one-half million cases being
reported in 1990.
      (10)   In his report of October 22, 1986, the Surgeon General of the
United States has advised the American public that AIDS and HIV infection may
be transmitted through sexual contact, intravenous drug abuse, exposure to
infected blood and blood components, and from an infected mother to her
newborn.
      (11)   According to the best scientific evidence, AIDS and HIV infection,
as well as syphilis and gonorrhea, are principally transmitted by sexual acts.
      (12)   Sanitary conditions in some sexually oriented businesses are
unhealthy, in part, because the activities conducted there are unhealthy, and,
in part, because of the unregulated nature of the activities and the failure of
the owners and the operators of the facilities to self-regulate those
activities and maintain those facilities.
      (13)   Numerous studies and reports have determined that semen is found
in the areas of sexually oriented businesses where persons view “adult”
oriented films.
      (14)   The findings noted in divisions (1) through (13) raise substantial
governmental concerns.
      (15)   Sexually oriented businesses have operational characteristics
which should be reasonably regulated in order to protect those substantial
governmental concerns.
      (16)   A reasonable licensing procedure is an appropriate mechanism to
place the burden of that reasonable regulation on the owners and the operators
of the sexually oriented businesses. Further, such a licensing procedure will
place an incentive on the operators to see that the sexually oriented business
is run in a manner consistent with the health, safety, and welfare of its
patrons and employees, as well as the citizens of the municipality. It is
appropriate to require reasonable assurances that the licensee is the actual
operator of the sexually oriented business, fully in possession and control of
the premises and activities occurring therein.
      (17)   Removal of doors on adult booths and requiring sufficient lighting
on premises with adult booths advances a substantial governmental interest in
curbing the illegal and unsanitary sexual activity occurring in adult theaters.
      (18)   Requiring licensees of sexually oriented businesses to keep
information regarding current employees and certain past employees will help
reduce the incidence of certain types of criminal behavior by facilitating the
identification of potential witnesses or suspects and by preventing minors from
working in such establishments.
      (19)   The disclosure of certain information by those persons ultimately
responsible for the day-to-day operation and maintenance of the sexually
oriented business, where such information is substantially related to the
significant governmental interest in the operation of such uses, will aid in
preventing the spread of sexually transmitted diseases.
      (20)   In the prevention of the spread of communicable diseases, it is
desirable to obtain a limited amount of information regarding certain employees
who may engage in the conduct which this chapter is designed to prevent, or who
are likely to be witnesses to such conduct.
      (21)   The fact that an applicant for an adult use license has been
convicted of a sexually related crime leads to the rational assumption that the
applicant may engage in that conduct in contravention of this chapter.
      (22)   The barring of such individuals from the management of adult uses
for a period of years serves as a deterrent to, and prevents conduct which
leads to, the transmission of sexually transmitted diseases.
      (23)   The general welfare, health, morals, and safety of the citizens of
the municipality will be promoted by the enactment of this chapter.
(Ord. 01-O-1888, passed 5-15-2001)
§ 868.02  DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this chapter, certain terms are defined as follows.
   (a)   “Adult arcade” means any place to which the public is permitted or
invited wherein coin operated or slug operated or electronically, electrically,
or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, or
other image producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer
persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are
distinguished or characterized by the depicting or describing of “specified
sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas.”
   (b)   “Adult Bookstore,” “Adult novelty store” or “Adult video store” means
a commercial establishment which has as a significant or substantial portion of
its stock-in-trade, or derives a significant or substantial portion of its
revenues or devotes a significant or substantial portion of its interior
business or advertising, or utilizes 20% or more of its sales or display space
for the sale or rental, for any form of consideration, of any one or more of
the following:
      (1)   Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or
photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, compact discs, slides, or
other visual representations, which depict or describe “specified sexual
activities” or “specified anatomical areas;”
      (2)   Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia which are designed for use
or marketed primarily for stimulation of human genital organs or for
sadomasochistic use or abuse of the user or others.
   (c)   “Adult cabaret” means a nightclub, bar, restaurant or similar
commercial establishment which regularly features:
      (1)   Persons who appear in a state of nudity;
      (2)   Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of
“specified anatomical areas” or by “specified sexual activities;” or
      (3)   Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other
photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or
description of “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas.”
   (d)   “Adult motel” means a hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment
which:
      (1)   Offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration,
provides patrons with closed circuit television transmissions, films, motion
pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions which
are characterized by the depiction or description of “specified sexual
activities” or “specified anatomical areas,” and has a sign visible from the
public right-of-way which advertises the availability of this adult type of
photographic reproductions;
      (2)   Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less
than ten hours; or
      (3)   Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to subrent the room
for a period of time that is less than ten hours.
   (e)   “Adult motion picture theater” means a commercial establishment where,
for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides,
or similar photographic reproductions are regularly shown which are
characterized by the exposure of “specified sexual activities” or “specified
anatomical areas.”
   (f)   “Adult theater” means a theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar
commercial establishment which regularly features persons who appear in a state
of nudity, semi-nudity or live performances which are characterized by the
exposure of “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas.”
   (g)   “Chief of Police” means the Chief of Police of Columbiana or his or
her designated agent.
   (h)   “Employee” means a person who performs any service on the premises of
a sexually oriented business on a full-time, part-time or contract basis,
whether or not the person is denominated an employee, independent contractor,
agent or otherwise and whether or not the person is paid a salary, wage or
other compensation by the operator of the business. Employee does not include a
person exclusively on the premises for repair or maintenance of the premises or
equipment on the premises, or for the delivery of goods to the premises.
   (i)   “Escort” means a person who, for consideration, agrees or offers to
act as a companion, guide, or date for another person, or who agrees or offers
to privately model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for another
person.
   (j)   “Escort agency” means a person or business association who furnishes,
offers to furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary
business purposes, for a gratuity or other consideration.
   (k)   “Establishment” means and includes any of the following:
      (1)   The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as a
new business;
      (2)   The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually
oriented business, to any sexually oriented business;
      (3)   The addition of any sexually oriented business to any other
existing sexually oriented business; or
      (4)   The relocation of any sexually oriented business.
   (1)   “Nude model studio” means any place where a person who appears in a
state of nudity or displays “specified anatomical areas” is provided to be
observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculpted, photographed, or similarly
depicted by other persons who pay money or any form of consideration.
   (m)   “Nudity” or “state of nudity” shall have the same meaning as defined
by Ohio R.C. 2907.01.
   (n)   “Operates” or “causes to operate” means to cause to function or to put
or keep in operation. A person may be found to be operating or causing to be
operated a sexually oriented business whether or not that person is an owner,
part owner, or sexually oriented business licensee of the business.
   (o)   “Person” means an individual, proprietorship, corporation,
partnership, limited liability company or any other business entity.
   (p)   “Public park” means public land which has been designated for park or
recreational activities including, but not limited to, a park, playground,
nature trails, swimming pool, reservoir, athletic field, basketball or tennis
courts, pedestrian bicycle paths, open space, wilderness areas, or similar
public land within the municipality which is under the control, operation or
management of the municipality, county or state.
   (q)   “Residential district” shall have the same meaning as defined by the
Columbiana Zoning Code.
   (r)   “Residential use” means a single family, duplex, multiple family, or
mobile home park, mobile home subdivision and campground use.
   (s)   “School” means any public or private educational facility including,
but not limited to child day care facilities, nursery schools, preschools,
kindergartens, elementary schools, primary schools, intermediate schools,
junior high schools, middle schools, high schools, vocational schools,
secondary schools, continuation schools, special education schools, junior
colleges and universities.
   (t)   “Semi-nude” means the showing of the female breast below a horizontal
line across the top of the areola at its highest point or the showing of the
male or female buttocks. This definition shall include the entire lower portion
of the human female breast, but shall not include any portion of the cleavage
of the human female breast exhibited by a dress, blouse, skirt, leotard,
bathing suit, or other wearing apparel provided the areola is not exposed in
whole or in part.
   (u)   “Sexual encounter center”’ means a business or commercial enterprise
that, as one if its primary business purposes, offers for any form of
consideration:
      (1)   Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between
persons of the opposite sex; or
      (2)   Activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the
same sex when one or more of the persons is in a state of nudity.
   (v)   “Sexually oriented business” means an adult arcade, adult bookstore or
adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture theater,
adult theater, escort agency, nude model studio, or sexual encounter center.
   (w)   “Sexually oriented business licensee” means an individual in whose
name a sexually oriented business license has been issued, and in the case of a
“sexually oriented business employee licensee,” a person in whose name a
sexually oriented business license has been issued authorizing employment in a
sexually oriented business.
   (x)   “Specified anatomical areas” means human genitals in a state of sexual
arousal or exposed for the purpose of sexually arousing another.
   (y)   “Specified sexual activities” means and includes any of the following:
      (1)   The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic
region, buttocks, anus, or female breasts;
      (2)   Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including
intercourse, oral copulation, or sodomy;
      (3)   Masturbation, actual or simulated; and
      (4)   Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the
activities set forth in divisions (y)(1) to (3) hereof.
   (z)   “Substantial enlargement” of a sexually oriented business means the
increase in floor area occupied by the business by more than 25%, as the floor
area exists as of the date of the issuance of the sexually oriented business
license.
   (aa)   “Transfer of ownership or control” of a sexually oriented business
means and includes any of the following:
      (1)   The sale, lease, or sublease of the business;
      (2)   The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest
in the business, whether by sale, exchange, or similar means; or
      (3)   The establishment of a trust, gift, or other similar legal device
which transfers the ownership or control of the business, except for transfer
by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the person possessing
the ownership or control.
(Ord. 01-O-1888, passed 5-15-2001)
§ 868.03  CLASSIFICATIONS.
   Sexually oriented businesses are classified as follows:
   (a)   Adult arcades;
   (b)   Adult bookstores or adult video stores;
   (c)   Adult cabarets;
   (d)   Adult motels;
   (e)   Adult motion picture theaters;
   (f)   Adult theaters;
   (g)   Escort agencies;
   (h)   Nude model studios; and
   (i)   Sexual encounter centers.
(Ord. 01-O-1888, passed 5-15-2001)
§ 868.04  SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (a)   No person shall operate a sexually oriented business without a valid
sexually oriented business license issued by the municipality for the
particular type of sexually oriented business classification.
   (b)   All applications for a sexually oriented business license must be made
on forms provided by the Chief of Police, which forms shall require the
information and verification outlined as Exhibit I, originally attached to Ord.
01-O-1888, copies of which are on file in the Manager’s office, and are made a
part hereof.
(Ord. 01-O-1888, passed 5-15-2001)
§ 868.05  SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS EMPLOYEE LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (a)   No person who operates a sexually oriented business shall employ a
person who does not have a sexually oriented business employee license.
   (b)   No person shall obtain employment with a sexually oriented business
without having secured a sexually oriented business employee license issued by
the municipality.
   (c)   All applications for a sexually oriented business employee license
must be made on forms provided by the Chief of Police.
(Ord. 01-O-1888, passed 5-15-2001)
§ 868.06  ISSUANCE OR RENEWAL OF SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS LICENSE.
   (a)   The Chief of Police shall approve the issuance or renewal of a
sexually oriented business license to an applicant within 30 days after receipt
of an application unless the Chief of Police finds one or more of the following
to be true:
      (1)   An applicant is under 18 years of age;
      (2)   An applicant, applicant’s spouse or person residing with the
applicant, is overdue in payment to the municipality of taxes, fees, fines, or
penalties assessed against or imposed upon the applicant, applicant’s spouse or
person residing with the applicant;
      (3)   An applicant, applicant’s spouse or person residing with the
applicant has been convicted of any violation of a provision of this chapter.
The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect;
      (4)   The sexually oriented business license fee required by this chapter
has not been paid;
      (5)   An applicant has been employed in a sexually oriented business
within the preceding 12 months and has demonstrated an inability to operate or
manage a sexually oriented business premises in a peaceful and law abiding
manner, thus necessitating action by law enforcement officers;
      (6)   An applicant has been convicted of:
         A.   Any felony;
         B.   Any offense listed in Ohio R.C. 2907;
         C.   Any offense listed in Ohio R.C. 2950.01, including all
subsections of such offenses regardless of whether or not such offenses are
classified by the State of Ohio as “sexually oriented offenses,” and regardless
of the ages of the persons involved in such cases, a violation of Ohio R.C.
2919.22, 2919.23, 2919.24, or of an offense defined by existing or former laws
of this state, present or former ordinances of any municipality of any state,
former or present law of any state or of the United States, or a violation
under the law applicable in military courts that is or was substantially
equivalent to any of the listed offenses, or of an attempt to commit,
conspiracy to commit, or complicity to commit any such offenses; or
      (7)   An applicant proposes a site which does not comply with the
location regulations as set forth in §
868.19 hereof.
   (b)   The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on
the disqualification of the applicant.
   (c)   The sexually oriented business license shall state on its face the
name of the person to which it is granted, the expiration date, and the address
of the sexually oriented business.
   (d)   All sexually oriented business licenses shall be posted in a
conspicuous place at or near the entrance of the sexually oriented business so
that they may be easily read at any time.
(Ord. 01-O-1888, passed 5-15-2001; Ord. 02-O-1941, passed 3-19-2002)
§ 868.07  ISSUANCE OR RENEWAL OF SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS EMPLOYEE LICENSE.
   (a)   The Chief of Police shall approve the issuance or a renewal of a
sexually oriented business employee license to an applicant within 30 days
after receipt of an application unless the Chief of Police finds one or more of
the following items to be true:
      (1)   An applicant is under 18 years of age;
      (2)   An applicant is overdue in payment to the municipality of taxes,
fees, fines, or penalties assessed against or imposed upon the applicant;
      (3)   An applicant has been convicted of a violation of a provision of
this chapter;
      (4)   The sexually oriented business employee license fee required by
this chapter has not been paid;
      (5)   An applicant has been employed in a sexually oriented business
within the preceding 12 months and has demonstrated an inability to maintain
employment in a peaceful and law abiding manner, thus necessitating action by
law enforcement officers; and
      (6)   An applicant has been convicted of:
         A.   Any felony;
         B.   Any offense listed in Ohio R.C. 2907; and/or
         C.   Any offense listed in Ohio R.C. 2950.01, including all
subsections of such offenses, regardless of whether or not such offenses are
classified by the State of Ohio as “sexually oriented offenses,” and regardless
of the ages of the persons involved in such cases, a violation of Ohio R.C.
2919.22, 2919.23, 2919.24, or of an offense defined by existing or former laws
of this state, present or former ordinances of any municipality of any state,
former or present law of any state or of the United States, or a violation of
the law applicable in military courts that is or was substantially equivalent
to any of the listed offenses, or of an attempt to commit, conspiracy to commit
or complicity to commit any such offenses.
   (b)   The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on
the disqualification of the applicant.
   (c)   The sexually oriented business employee license shall state on its
face the name of the person to whom it is granted, the expiration date, and the
address of the sexually oriented business by whom the employee will be
employed.
   (d)   All sexually oriented business employee licenses shall be posted in a
conspicuous place at or near the entrance of the sexually oriented business so
that they may be easily read at any time
(Ord. 01-O-1888, passed 5-15-2001)
§ 868.08  FEES FOR SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS LICENSE.
   (a)   Every application for a sexually oriented business license whether for
a new license or for renewal of an existing license, shall be accompanied by a
fifty dollar ($50.00) nonrefundable application and investigation fee.
   (b)   In addition to the application and investigation fee required above,
every sexually oriented business that is granted a sexually oriented business
license, new or renewal, shall pay the municipality an annual non-refundable
license fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) within 30 days of issuance or
renewal of the license.
   (c)   All fees for sexually oriented business licenses shall be submitted to
the Chief of Police.
(Ord. 01-O-1888, passed 5-15-2001)
§ 868.09  FEES FOR SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS EMPLOYEE LICENSE.
   (a)   Every application for a sexually oriented business employee license,
whether for a new license or for renewal of an existing license, shall be
accompanied by a fifty dollar ($50.00) non-refundable application and
investigation fee.
   (b)   All fees for sexually oriented business employee licenses shall be
submitted to the Chief of Police.
(Ord. 01-O-1888, passed 5-15-2001)
§ 868.10  EXPIRATION OF SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS LICENSE.
   (a)   Each sexually oriented business license shall expire one year from the
date of issuance and may be renewed only by making application provided for in
§
868.04 hereof.
   (b)   Applications for renewal should be made at least 30 days before the
expiration date, and when made less than 30 days before the expiration date,
the expiration of the sexually oriented business license will not be affected.
   (c)   It is the responsibility of the sexually oriented business license
holder to apply for renewal.
(Ord. 01-O-1888, passed 5-15-2001)
§ 868.11  EXPIRATION OF SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS EMPLOYEE LICENSE.
   (a)   Each sexually oriented business employee license shall expire one year
from the date of issuance and may be renewed only by making application as
provided for in §
868.05 hereof.
   (b)   Applications for renewal should be made at least 30 days before the
expiration date, and when made less than 30 days before the expiration date,
the expiration of the sexually oriented business employee license will not be
affected.
   (c)   It is the responsibility of the sexually oriented business employee
license holder to apply for renewal.
(Ord. 01-O-1888, passed 5-15-2001)
§ 868.12  SUSPENSION OF SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS LICENSE.
   The Chief of Police shall suspend a sexually oriented business license for a
period not to exceed 30 days if he or she determines that a sexually oriented
business licensee has:
   (a)   Violated or is not in compliance with this chapter;
   (b)   Recklessly permitted gambling by any person on the sexually oriented
business premises;
   (c)   Demonstrated inability to operate or manage a sexually oriented
business in a peaceful and law abiding manner thus necessitating action by law
enforcement officers.
(Ord. 01-O-1888, passed 5-15-2001; Ord. 02-O-1941, passed 3-19-2002)
§ 868.13  SUSPENSION OF SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS EMPLOYEE LICENSE.
   The Chief of Police shall suspend a sexually oriented business employee
license for a period not to exceed 30 days if he or she determines that a
sexually oriented business employee licensee has:
   (a)   Violated or is not in compliance with this chapter;
   (b)   Recklessly permitted gambling by any person on the sexually oriented
business premises; and/or
   (c)   Demonstrated inability to operate or manage a sexually oriented
business in a peaceful and law abiding manner thus necessitating action by law
enforcement officers.
(Ord. 01-O-1888, passed 5-15-2001; Ord. 02-O-1941, passed 3-19-2002)
§ 868.14  REVOCATION OF SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS LICENSE.
   (a)   The Chief of Police shall revoke a sexually oriented business license
if a cause of suspension in §
868.12 occurs and the sexually oriented business license has been suspended
within the preceding 12 months.
   (b)   The Chief of Police shall revoke a sexually oriented business license
if he or she determines that the sexually oriented business licensee:
      (1)   Gave false or misleading information in the material submitted to
the Chief of Police during the application process;
      (2)   Recklessly allowed possession, use, or sale of controlled
substances on the premises;
      (3)   Recklessly allowed prostitution on the premises;
      (4)   Recklessly operated the sexually oriented business during a period
of time when the sexually oriented business licensee’s license was suspended;
      (5)   Has been convicted of an offense listed in §
868.06(a)(6).
      (6)   Recklessly allowed any act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral
copulation, masturbation, or sexual contact to occur in or on the sexually
oriented business licensed premises; or
      (7)   Is delinquent in payment more than 90 days to the municipality for
income taxes, or any other taxes or assessments which the municipality imposes,
or sales taxes related to the sexually oriented business.
   (c)   The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on
the revocation of the sexually oriented business license.
   (d)   Division (b)(6) hereof does not apply to adult motels as grounds for
revoking the sexually oriented business license unless the sexually oriented
business licensee recklessly allowed the act of sexual intercourse, sodomy,
oral copulation, masturbation, or sexual contact to occur in a public place or
within public view.
   (e)   A sexually oriented business license revocation shall continue for one
year and the sexually oriented business licensee shall not be issued a sexually
oriented business license or a sexually oriented business employee license for
one year from the date the revocation became effective.
(Ord. 01-O-1888, passed 5-15-2001)
§ 868.15  REVOCATION OF SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS EMPLOYER LICENSE.
   (a)   The Chief of Police shall revoke a sexually oriented business employee
license if a cause of suspension in §
868.13 occurs and the sexually oriented business employee license has been
suspended within the preceding 12 months.
   (b)   The Chief of Police shall revoke a sexually oriented business employee
license if he or she determines that the sexually oriented business employee
licensee:
      (1)   Gave false or misleading information in the material submitted to
the Chief of Police during the application process;
      (2)   Recklessly allowed possession, use, or sale of controlled
substances on the premises;
      (3)   Recklessly allowed prostitution on the premises;
      (4)   Recklessly operated the sexually oriented business during a period
of time when the sexually oriented business licensee’s license was suspended;
      (5)   Has been convicted of an offense listed in §
868.06(a)(6).
      (6)   Recklessly allowed any act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral
copulation, masturbation, or sexual contact to occur in or on the sexually
oriented business licensed premises; or
      (7)   Is delinquent in payment of more than 90 days to the municipality
for income taxes, or any other taxes or assessments which the municipality
imposes, or sales taxes related to the sexually oriented business.
   (c)   The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on
the revocation of the sexually oriented business employee license.
   (d)   Division (b)(6) hereof does not apply to adult motels as grounds for
revoking the sexually oriented business employee license unless the sexually
oriented business employee licensee recklessly allowed the act of sexual
intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation, or sexual contact to occur
in a public place or within public view.
   (e)   A sexually oriented business employee license revocation shall
continue for one year and the sexually oriented business employee license shall
not be issued a sexually oriented business employee license for one year from
the date the revocation became effective.
(Ord. 01-O-1888, passed 5-15-2001)
§ 868.16  APPEALS RIGHTS.
   If the Chief of Police denies the issuance of a sexually oriented business
license or sexually oriented business employee license or suspends or revokes a
sexually oriented business license or sexually oriented business employee
license, he or she shall forthwith so notify the applicant or sexually oriented
business licensee in writing by certified mail, return receipt requested, or by
personal service, of the denial, suspension or revocation.
   (a)   Any denial, suspension, or revocation of a new or renewal license
under the provisions of this chapter, may be appealed to the Board of Zoning
Appeals of the City of Columbiana by written notice within ten days of receipt
of notice of such denial, suspension, or revocation. Unless the applicant
requests a longer period, the Board must hold a hearing on the appeal within
ten days and must issue a written decision affirming or reversing the denial,
suspension, or revocation within five days after the hearing.
   (b)   Any decision by the Board of Zoning Appeals of the City of Columbiana
shall be a final appealable order, and the applicant, the licensee, or the
municipality may seek prompt judicial review of such administrative action in
any Court of competent jurisdiction.
   (c)   In the event that an applicant, licensee, or the municipality seeks
judicial review of a decision by the Board of Zoning Appeals of the City of
Columbiana, the appellant shall file written notice of such appeal with the
Board of Zoning Appeals stating the grounds for the appeal. Within ten days of
receiving such written notice of appeal, or within such shorter time as may be
ordered by the court, the Board shall transmit to the court in which appeal was
sought a copy of the full administrative record of the matter, including a
complete transcript of all the original papers, testimony, and evidence
offered, heard, and taken into consideration in issuing the final order. The
Board and all other departments or agencies of the municipality shall provide
any further information, assistance, or cooperation requested by the reviewing
court without delay.
   (d)   Any licensee operating a sexually oriented business prior to the
denial of a license renewal application, or the suspension or revocation of a
license, may continue to operate the business during the pendency of an appeal
to the Board of Zoning Appeals of the City of Columbiana or to a court.
   (e)   Any licensee acting as an employee in a sexually oriented business
prior to the denial of a license renewal application, or the suspension or
revocation of a license, may continue to serve in such capacity during the
pendency of an appeal to the Board of Zoning Appeals of the City of Columbiana
or to a court.
   (f)   In the event that an applicant for a new sexually oriented business
license or new sexually oriented business employee license seeks judicial
review of the denial of a new license, the municipality will issue such
applicant a provisional sexually oriented business license or sexually oriented
business employee license upon the written request of the applicant, which
provisional license will:
      (1)   Allow the applicant for a sexually oriented business license to
operate the sexually oriented business named in the license application under
the same terms as a normal sexually oriented business license issued pursuant
to §
868.06 of this chapter for the period of time specified in division (g) of this
section;
      (2)   Allow an applicant for a sexually oriented business employee
license to act as an employee on the premises of a sexually oriented business
under the same terms as a normal sexually oriented business employee license
issued pursuant to §
868.07 of this chapter for the period of time specified in division (g) of this
section; and
      (3)   Be subject to the same requirements as a sexually oriented business
license or sexually oriented business employee license issued under §§
868.06 or
868.07 of this chapter.
   (g)   A provisional license will expire on whichever of the following three
dates is earliest:
      (1)   The date that a judicial decision is issued upholding the license
denial;
      (2)   The date on which a non-provisional sexually oriented business
license or sexually oriented business employee license is issued to the
applicant pursuant to a judicial decision overturning the license denial; or
      (3)   The date one year from the issuance of the provisional license.
   (h)   In the event that judicial review of the denial of a new license
application is still pending 30 days before the expiration date of a
provisional license the provisional licensee may file a renewal license
application with the Chief of Police pursuant to §§
868.06 or
868.07 of this chapter. The Chief of Police shall grant an application for
renewal of a provisional license unless he or she determines that new grounds
exist for denial of a license application pursuant to §§
868.06 or
868.07 of this chapter which did not exist at the time of the original license
application. In the event that an application for renewal of a provisional
license is denied and the applicant seeks judicial review of that denial, the
municipality has the right to consolidate such review with the pending judicial
appeal of the previous license denial.
(Ord. 01-O-1888, passed 5-15-2001; Ord. 02-O-1941, passed 3-19-2002)
§ 868.17  TRANSFER OF SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS LICENSE.
   Sexually oriented business licenses are not transferable. A sexually
oriented business license shall not operate a sexually oriented business at any
place other than the address designated in the sexually oriented business
license.
(Ord. 01-O-1888, passed 5-15-2001)
§ 868.18  TRANSFER OF SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS EMPLOYEE LICENSE.
   Sexually oriented business employee licenses are not transferable. A
sexually oriented business employee licensee shall not work at any place other
than the address designated in the sexually oriented business employee license.
(Ord. 01-O-1888, passed 5-15-2001)
§ 868.19  LOCATION.
   Sexually oriented businesses shall be permitted uses only within a C-
4 Intensive and Automobile-Oriented Commercial District, and shall be subject
to the provisions of
Chapter 1282 of the Columbiana Zoning Code.
(Ord. 01-O-1888, passed 5-15-2001)
§ 868.20  REGULATIONS REGARDING PUBLIC NUDITY.
   (a)   No person in a sexually oriented business shall recklessly appear in a
state of nudity or depict specified sexual activities.
   (b)   No person in a sexual oriented business shall appear in a semi-nude
condition unless the person is an employee who while semi-nude shall be at
least ten feet from any patron or customer and on a stage at least three feet
above the floor.
   (c)   No employee while semi-nude in a sexually oriented business, shall
solicit or accept any pay or gratuity from any patron or customer.
   (d)   No patron or customer shall pay or give any gratuity to an employee
while the employee is semi-nude in a sexually oriented business.
   (e)   No employee while semi-nude in a sexually oriented business shall
touch a patron or customer or the clothing of a patron or customer.
   (f)   No patron or customer shall touch an employee of a sexually oriented
business while the employee is on duty.
(Ord. 01-O-1888, passed 5-15-2001)
§ 868.21  PROHIBITION AGAINST MINORS IN A SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS.
   (a)   No person under the age of 18 years is permitted on the premises of a
sexually oriented business.
   (b)   No person shall recklessly allow a person under the age of 18 years on
the premises of a sexually oriented business.
(Ord. 01-O-1888, passed 5-15-2001)
§ 868.22  HOURS OF OPERATION.
   (a)   No sexually oriented business shall remain open at any time between
the hours of 1.00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on weekdays and Saturdays.
   (b)   No sexually oriented business shall remain open at any time between
the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 12:00 p.m. on Sundays or on legal holidays as
defined by Ohio R.C. 1.14.
(Ord. 01-O-1888, passed 5-15-2001)
§ 868.23  ESCORT AGENCIES.
   No person shall recklessly act as an escort or recklessly agree to act as an
escort for any person under the age of 18 years. An escort agency shall not
employ any person under the age of 18 years.
(Ord. 01-O-1888, passed 5-15-2001)
§ 868.24  NUDE MODEL STUDIOS.
   (a)   No person shall appear in a state of nudity or recklessly allow
another to appear in a state of nudity in an area of a nude model studio
premises which can be viewed from the public right-of-way.
   (b)   No nude model studio shall place or permit a bed, sofa, or mattress in
any room on the premises, except that a sofa may be placed in a reception room
open to the public.
(Ord. 01-O-1888, passed 5-15-2001)
§ 868.25  ADULT MOTELS.
   (a)   Evidence that a sleeping room in a hotel, motel, or similar commercial
establishment has been rented and vacated two or more times in a period of time
that is less than ten hours creates a rebuttable presumption that the
establishment is an adult motel as that term is defined in this chapter.
   (b)   No person shall, while in control of a sleeping room in a hotel,
motel, or similar commercial establishment that does not have a sexually
oriented business license, rent or subrent a sleeping room to a person and,
within ten hours from the time the room is rented, rent or subrent the same
sleeping room again.
   (c)   For the purpose of this section, the terms “rent” or “subrent” mean
the act of permitting a room to be occupied for any form of consideration.
(Ord. 01-O-1888, passed 5-15-2001)
§ 868.26  REGULATIONS PERTAINING TO EXHIBITION OF SEXUALLY EXPLICIT FILMS,
VIDEOS, OR LIVE ENTERTAINMENT IN VIEWING ROOMS.
   (a)   A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented
business (other than an adult motel) which exhibits on the premises, in a
viewing room, booth or otherwise, a film, video cassette, live entertainment,
or other video reproduction which depicts specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas, shall comply with the following requirements.
      (1)   Upon application for a sexually oriented license, the application
shall be accompanied by a diagram of the premises showing a plan thereof
specifying the location of one or more manager’s stations and the location of
all overhead lighting fixtures and designating any portion of the premises in
which patrons will not be permitted. A manager’s station may not exceed 32
square feet of floor area. The diagram shall also designate the place at which
the permit, if granted, will be conspicuously posted. A professionally prepared
diagram in the nature of an engineer’s or architect’s blueprint shall not be
required: however, each diagram should be oriented to the north or to some
designated street or object and should be drawn to a designated scale or with
marked dimensions sufficient to show the various internal dimensions of all
areas of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six
inches. The municipality may waive the foregoing diagram for renewal
applications if the applicant adopts a diagram that was previously submitted
and certifies that the configuration of the premises has not been altered since
it was prepared.
      (2)   The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by the
applicant.
      (3)   No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager’s
station may be made without the prior approval of the municipality.
      (4)   It is the duty of the licensee of the premises to ensure that at
least one licensed employee is on duty and situated in each manager’s station
at all times that any patron is present inside the premises.
      (5)   The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner
that there is an unobstructed view from a manager’s station of every area of
the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose, excluding
restrooms. Restrooms may not contain video reproduction equipment. If the
premises has two or more manager’s stations designated, then the interior of
the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed
view of each area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for
any purpose from at least one of the manager’s stations. The view required in
this division must be by direct line of sight from the manager’s station or by
the closed circuit television system and cameras hereinafter referenced.
      (6)   It shall be the duty of the licensee to ensure that the view area
specified in division (a)(5) remains unobstructed by any doors, curtains,
partitions, walls, merchandise, display racks, or other materials and, at all
times, to ensure that no patron is permitted access to any area of the premises
which has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted in
the application filed pursuant to division (a)(1) of this section.
      (7)   No viewing room or booth may be occupied by more than one patron at
any time.
      (8)   The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of
sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted
access at an illumination of not less than five foot candles as measured at the
floor level.
      (9)   It shall be the duty of the licensee to ensure that the
illumination described above is maintained at all times that any patron is
present in the premises.
      (10)   No licensee shall allow openings of any kind to exist between
viewing rooms or booths.
      (11)   No person shall make or attempt to make an opening of any kind
between viewing booths or rooms.
      (12)   The licensee shall, during each business day, regularly inspect
the walls between the viewing booths or rooms to determine if any openings or
holes exist.
      (13)   The licensee shall cause all floor coverings where viewing takes
place to be nonporous, easily cleanable surfaces, with no rugs or carpeting.
      (14)   The licensee shall cause all wall surfaces and ceiling surfaces to
be constructed of, or permanently covered by, nonporous, easily cleanable
material. No wood, plywood, composition board, or other porous material shall
be used within 48 inches of the floor.
      (15)   A closed circuit television system shall be maintained and
operated with a television monitor(s) located in the area of the manager’s
station(s), in the clear view of the public, and available for continuous
viewing by the manager on duty.
      (16)   A camera or cameras shall be installed in any booth areas and
shall scan each hallway and aisle way of the entranceway to any booth or room.
      (17)   The closed circuit television system shall operate on a switcher
system so that television monitor(s) will switch sequentially and continuously
from one camera to another. The continuous switching process will be timed to
allow an adequate view of each area surveyed by each camera while accomplishing
a complete circuit within less than one minute. To the extent necessary, more
than one television monitor shall be installed so that there will be adequate
circuits to provide a complete view of the entire interior premises, including
any booth areas, but excluding restrooms, in less than one minute.
      (18)   In the event of a malfunction of any of the closed circuit
television equipment described in this section, the sexually oriented business
licensee shall act promptly to repair or cause to be repaired any such
malfunction within 24 hours, and shall maintain documentation of the date and
time of any such malfunction and all measures taken to effect a repair. If an
equipment malfunction cannot be repaired within 24 hours, those areas of the
premises which are not able to be monitored as a result of the malfunction
shall be closed until repairs are completed.
   (b)   A person having a duty under divisions (a)(1) through (18) herein
commits a misdemeanor of the first degree if he or she knowingly fails to
fulfill that duty.
(Ord. 01-O-1888, passed 5-15-2001)
§ 868.27  EFFECTIVE DATE.
   That the effective date of this chapter shall be the date upon which the
ordinance enacting this chapter is passed by the Council of Columbiana.
(Ord. 01-O-1888, passed 5-15-2001)
§ 868.28  INJUNCTION.
   A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business
without a valid license or in violation of §
868.17 of this chapter is subject to a suit for injunction as well as
prosecution for criminal violations.
(Ord. 01-O-1888, passed 5-15-2001)
§ 868.29  SEVERABILITY.
   Each section and provision of this chapter are hereby declared to be
independent divisions and subdivisions and, not withstanding any other evidence
of legislative intent, it is hereby declared to be the controlling legislative
intent that if any provisions of the chapter, or the application thereof to any
person or circumstance is held to be invalid, the remaining sections or
provisions and the application of such sections and provisions to any person or
circumstances other than those to which it is held invalid, shall not be
affected thereby, and it is hereby declared that such sections and provisions
would have been passed independently of such section or provision so known to
be invalid.
(Ord. 01-O-1888, passed 5-15-2001)
§ 868.99  PENALTY.
   (a)   Except as provided by divisions (b) or (c) hereof, any person
violating this chapter, upon conviction, is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
first degree punishable by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars
($1,000.00), six months in jail or a combination of both.
   (b)   It is an affirmative defense, as defined by Ohio R.C. 2901.05, to
prosecution under §§
868.04,
868.19 or
868.20(d) that a person appearing in a state of nudity did so in a modeling
class operated:
      (1)   By a college, junior college or university supported entirely or
partly by taxation;
      (2)   By a private college or university which maintains and operates
educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior
college or university supported entirely or party by taxation; or
      (3)   In a structure:
         A.   Which has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and
no other advertising that indicates a nude person is available for viewing;
         B.   Where in order to participate in a class a student must enroll at
least three days in advance of the class; and
         C.   Where no more than one nude model is on the premises at any one
time.
   (c)   It is an affirmative defense, as defined by Ohio R.C. 2901.05, to
prosecution under §§
868.04(a) or
868.19 of this chapter that each item of descriptive, printed, film or video
material offered for sale or rental, taken as a whole, contains serious
literary, artistic, political or scientific value.
(Ord. 01-O-1888, passed 5-15-2001)
CHAPTER 870:  VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDERS
Section
870.01   Video service provider fees.
870.02   City Manager’s duties.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Interrupting or impairing television - see Ohio R.C. 2909.04
   “Property” defined to include cable television service - see GEN. OFF.
606.01
   “Services” defined to include cable television service - see GEN. OFF.
642.01
§ 870.01  VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER FEES.
   In accordance with the requirements of Ohio R.C. 1332.32, and subject to its
taking effect, all video service providers providing video service in the city
pursuant to a video service authorization obtained from the Director of the
Ohio Department of Commerce shall pay video service provider fees (VSP fees) in
the amount of 5% of gross revenues received from providing video service in the
city, which gross revenue base shall include advertising revenues. The VSP fee
shall be paid quarterly, not sooner than 45 days nor later than 60 days after
the end of each calendar quarter.
(Ord. 07-O-2405, passed 9-18-2007)
§ 870.02  CITY MANAGER’S DUTIES.
   The City Manager is hereby authorized and directed, upon receipt of notice
from a video service provider that it will begin providing video service in the
city pursuant to a state-issued video service authorization, to provide such
video service provider with notice of the VSP fee as determined by this Council
above, which notice may be given by overnight (return receipt), certified mail,
or other manner of delivery, no later than ten days from receipt of the
provider’s notice.
(Ord. 07-O-2405, passed 9-18-2007)
CHAPTER 872:  TELECOMMUNICATION CARRIERS
Section
872.01   Purpose.
872.02   Definitions.
872.03   Registration.
872.04   Telecommunications license.
872.05   Telecommunications franchise.
872.06   Cable television franchise.
872.07   Application to existing franchise ordinances and agreements.
872.08   Registration required.
872.09   Registration fee.
872.10   Purpose of registration.
872.11   Telecommunications license.
872.12   Telecommunications franchise.
872.13   Fees and compensation.
872.14   Conditions of grant.
872.15   Construction standards.
872.16   Severability.
872.99   Penalty.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Contracts with administrative agencies - see Ohio R.C. 125.021
   County zoning of towers - see Ohio R.C. 303.211
   Township zoning of towers - see Ohio R.C. 519.211
   Telecommunications; alternative regulation - see Ohio R.C. Ch. 4927
§ 872.01  PURPOSE.
   The purpose and intent of this chapter is to:
   (a)   Establish a local policy concerning telecommunications providers and
services;
   (b)   Establish clear local guidelines, standards and time frames for the
exercise of local authority with respect to the regulation of
telecommunications providers and services;
   (c)   Promote competition in telecommunications;
   (d)   Minimize unnecessary local regulation of telecommunications providers
and services;
   (e)   Encourage the provision of advanced and competitive telecommunications
services on the widest possible basis to the businesses, institutions and
residents of the municipality;
   (f)   Permit and manage reasonable access to the public ways of the
municipality for telecommunications purposes on a competitively neutral basis;
   (g)   Conserve the limited physical capacity of the public ways held in
public trust by the municipality;
   (h)   Assure that the municipality’s current and ongoing costs of granting
and regulating private access to and use of the public ways are fully paid by
the persons seeking such access and causing such costs;
   (i)   Secure fair and reasonable compensation to the municipality and the
residents of the municipality for permitting private use of the public ways;
   (j)   Assure that all telecommunications carriers providing facilities or
services within the municipality comply with the ordinances, rules and
regulations of the municipality;
   (k)   Assure that the municipality can continue to fairly and responsibly
protect the public health, safety and welfare; and
   (l)   Enable the municipality to discharge its public trust consistent with
rapidly evolving federal and state regulatory policies, industry competition
and technological development.
(Ord. 00-O-1838, passed 10-3-2000)
§ 872.02  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   “Affiliate” means a person that (directly or indirectly) owns or controls,
is owned or controlled by, or is under common ownership or control with another
person.
   “Cable Act” shall mean the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, 47
U.S.C. § 532 et seq., as now and hereafter amended.
   “Cable operator” means a telecommunications carrier providing or offering to
provide “cable service” within the municipality as that term is defined in the
Cable Act.
   “Cable service” for the purpose of this chapter shall have the same meaning
provided by the Cable Act.
   “Excess capacity” means the volume or capacity in any existing or future
duct, conduit, manhole, handhole or other utility facility within the public
way that is or will be available for use for additional telecommunications
facilities.
   “FCC” or “Federal Communications Commission” means the federal
administrative agency, or lawful successor, authorized to regulate and oversee
telecommunications carriers, services and providers on a national level.
   “Municipality” means the City of Columbiana in Columbiana County, Ohio.
   “Municipality property” means and includes all real property owned by the
municipality, other than public streets and utility easements as those terms
are defined herein, and all property held in a proprietary municipality by the
municipality, which are not subject to right-of-way licensing and franchising
as provided in this chapter.
   “Other ways” means the highways, streets, alleys, utility easements or other
rights-of-way within the municipality, but under the jurisdiction and control
of a governmental entity other than the municipality.
   “Overhead facilities” means utility poles, utility facilities and
telecommunications facilities located above the surface of the ground,
including the underground supports and foundations for such facilities.
   “Person” means and includes corporations, companies, associations, joint
stock companies or associations, firms, partnerships, limited liability
companies and individuals and includes their lessors, trustees and receivers.
   “Public street” means any highway, street, alley or other public right-of-
way for motor vehicle travel under the jurisdiction and control of the
municipality which has been acquired, established, dedicated or devoted to
highway purposes not inconsistent with telecommunications facilities.
   “Public way” means and includes all public streets and utility easements, as
those terms are defined herein, now or hereafter owned by the municipality, but
only to the extent of the municipality’s right, title, interest or authority to
grant a license or franchise to occupy and use such streets and easements for
telecommunications facilities.
   “PUCO” or “Public Utilities Commission of Ohio” means the state
administrative agency, or lawful successor, authorized to regulate and oversee
telecommunications carriers, services and providers in the State of Ohio.
   “State” means the State of Ohio.
   “Surplus space” means that portion of the usable space on a utility pole
which has the necessary clearance from other pole users, as required by the
orders and regulations of the municipality, and, if applicable, the PUCO, to
allow its use by a telecommunications carrier for a pole attachment.
   “Telecommunications carrier” means and includes every person that directly
or indirectly owns, controls, operates or manages plants, equipment or property
within the municipality, used or to be used for the purpose of offering
telecommunications service.
   “Telecommunications facilities” means the plant, equipment and property,
including but not limited to, cables, wires, conduits, ducts, pedestals,
antennae, electronics and other appurtenances used or to be used to transmit,
receive, distribute, provide or offer telecommunications services.
   “Telecommunications provider” means and includes every person who provides
telecommunications service over telecommunications facilities without any
ownership or management control of the facilities.
   “Telecommunications service” means the providing or offering for rent, sale
or lease, or in exchange for other value received, of the transmittal of voice,
data, image, graphic and video programming information between or among points
by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio, satellite or similar
facilities, with or without benefit of any closed transmission medium.
   “Telecommunications system.”  See “Telecommunications facilities.”
   “Underground facilities” means utility and telecommunications facilities
located under the surface of the ground, excluding the underground foundations
or supports for overhead facilities.
   “Usable space” means the total distance between the top of a utility pole
and the lowest possible attachment point that provides the minimum allowable
vertical clearance as specified in the orders and regulations of the
municipality and, if applicable, the PUCO.
   “Utility easement” means any easement owned by the municipality and
acquired, established, dedicated or devoted for public utility purposes not
inconsistent with telecommunications facilities.
   “Utility facilities” means the plant, equipment and property, including but
not limited to the poles, pipes, mains, conduits, ducts, cables, wires, plant
and equipment located under, on or above the surface of the ground within the
public ways of the municipality and used or to be used for the purpose of
providing utility or telecommunications services.
(Ord. 00-O-1838, passed 10-3-2000)
§ 872.03  REGISTRATION.
   Except as otherwise provided herein, all telecommunications carriers and
providers engaged in the business of transmitting, supplying or furnishing of
telecommunications originating or terminating in the municipality shall
register with the municipality pursuant to §§
872.08 through
872.10 of this chapter.
(Ord. 00-O-1838, passed 10-3-2000)
§ 872.04  TELECOMMUNICATIONS LICENSE.
   Except as otherwise provided therein, any telecommunications carriers who
desire to construct, install, operate, maintain, or otherwise locate
telecommunications facilities in, under, over or across any public way of the
municipality for the sole purpose of providing telecommunications service to
persons and areas outside the municipality shall first obtain a license
granting the use of such public ways from the municipality pursuant to §
872.11 of this chapter.
(Ord. 00-O-1838, passed 10-3-2000)
§ 872.05  TELECOMMUNICATIONS FRANCHISE.
   Except as otherwise provided herein, any telecommunications carriers who
desire to construct, install, operate, maintain or otherwise locate
telecommunications facilities in, under, over or across any public way of the
municipality, and to also provide telecommunications service to persons or
areas in the municipality, shall first obtain a franchise granting the use of
such public ways from the municipality pursuant to §
872.12 of this chapter.
(Ord. 00-O-1838, passed 10-3-2000)
§ 872.06  CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE.
   Except as otherwise provided herein, any telecommunications carrier who
desires to construct, install, operate, maintain or locate telecommunications
facilities in any public way of the municipality for the purpose of providing
cable service to persons in the municipality shall first obtain a cable
franchise from the municipality.
(Ord. 00-O-1838, passed 10-3-2000)
§ 872.07  APPLICATION TO EXISTING FRANCHISE ORDINANCES AND AGREEMENTS.
   This chapter shall have no effect on any existing franchise ordinance or
franchise agreement until:
   (a)   The expiration of the franchise ordinance or agreement; or
   (b)   An amendment to an unexpired franchise ordinance or franchise
agreement, unless both parties agree to defer full compliance to a specific
date not later than the present expiration date.
(Ord. 00-O-1838, passed 10-3-2000)
§ 872.08  REGISTRATION REQUIRED.
   All telecommunications carriers and providers that offer or provide any
telecommunications service for a fee directly to the public, either within the
municipality, or outside the corporate limits from telecommunications
facilities within the municipality, shall register with the municipality
pursuant to this section on forms to be provided by the Municipal Manager,
which shall include the following:
   (a)   The identity and legal status of the registrant, including any
affiliates;
   (b)   The name, address and telephone number of the officer, agent or
employee responsible for the accuracy of the registration statement;
   (c)   A description of registrant’s existing or proposed telecommunications
facilities within the municipality;
   (d)   A description of the telecommunications service that the registrant
intends to offer or provide, or is currently offering or providing, to persons,
firms, businesses or institutions within the municipality;
   (e)   Information sufficient to determine whether the registrant is subject
to public way licensing or franchising under this chapter;
   (f)   Information sufficient to determine whether the transmission,
origination or receipt of the telecommunications services provided or to be
provided by the registrant constitutes an occupation or privilege subject to
any municipal telecommunications tax, utility message tax or other occupation
tax imposed by the municipality;
   (g)   Information sufficient to determine that the applicant has applied for
and received any certificate of authority required by the PUCO to provide
telecommunications services or facilities within the municipality.
   (h)   Information sufficient to determine that the applicant has applied for
and received any construction permit, operating license or other approvals
required by the Federal Communications Commission to provide telecommunications
services or facilities within the municipality; and
   (i)   Such other information as the Municipal Manager may reasonably
require.
(Ord. 00-O-1838, passed 10-3-2000)
§ 872.09  REGISTRATION FEE.
   Each application for registration as a telecommunications carrier or
provider shall be accompanied by a fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00).
(Ord. 00-O-1838, passed 10-3-2000)
§ 872.10  PURPOSE OF REGISTRATION.
   The purpose of registration under §§
872.08 through
872.10 is to:
   (a)   Provide the municipality with accurate and current information
concerning the telecommunications carriers and providers who offer or provide
telecommunications services within the municipality, or that own or operate
telecommunication facilities within the municipality;
   (b)   Assist the municipality in enforcement of this chapter;
   (c)   Assist the municipality in the collection and enforcement of any
municipal taxes, franchise fees or charges that may be due the municipality;
and
   (d)   Assist the municipality in monitoring compliance with local, state and
federal laws.
(Ord. 00-O-1838, passed 10-3-2000)
§ 872.11  TELECOMMUNICATIONS LICENSE.
   (a)   Telecommunications license.  A telecommunications license shall be
required of any telecommunications carrier who desires to occupy specific
public ways of the municipality for the sole purpose of providing
telecommunications services to persons or areas outside the municipality.
   (b)   License application.  Any person that desires a telecommunications
license pursuant to this section shall file an application with the
municipality which shall include the following information:
      (1)   The identity of the license applicant, including all affiliates of
the applicant;
      (2)   A description of the telecommunications services that are or will
be offered or provided by licensee over its telecommunications facilities;
      (3)   A description of the transmission medium that will be used by the
licensee to offer or provide such telecommunications services;
      (4)   Preliminary engineering plans, specifications and a network map of
the facilities to be located within the municipality, all in sufficient detail
to identify:
         A.   The location and route requested for applicant’s proposed
telecommunications facilities;
         B.   The location of all overhead and underground public utility,
telecommunication, cable, water, sewer drainage and other facilities in the
public way along the proposed route;
         C.   The location(s), if any, for interconnection with the
telecommunications facilities of other telecommunications carriers; and
         D.   The specific trees, structures, improvements, facilities and
obstructions, if any, that applicant proposes to temporarily or permanently
remove or relocate;
      (5)   If applicant is proposing to install overhead facilities, evidence
that surplus space is available for locating its telecommunications facilities
on existing utility poles along the proposed route;
      (6)   If applicant is proposing an underground installation in existing
ducts or conduits within the public ways, information in sufficient detail to
identify:
         A.   The excess capacity currently available in such ducts or conduits
before installation of applicant’s telecommunications facilities; and
         B.   The excess capacity, if any, that will exist in such ducts or
conduits after installation of applicant’s telecommunications facilities.
      (7)   If applicant is proposing an underground installation within new
ducts or conduits to be constructed within the public ways:
         A.   The location proposed for the new ducts or conduits; and
         B.   The excess capacity that will exist in such ducts or conduits
after installation of applicant’s telecommunications facilities.
      (8)   A preliminary construction schedule and completion date;
      (9)   A preliminary traffic control plan in accordance with the ODOT
Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices;
      (10)   Financial statements prepared in accordance with generally
accepted accounting principles demonstrating the applicant’s financial ability
to construct, operate, maintain, relocate and remove the facilities;
      (11)   Information in sufficient detail to establish the applicant’s
technical qualifications, experience and expertise regarding the
telecommunications facilities and services described in the application;
      (12)   Information to establish that the applicant has obtained all other
governmental approvals and permits to construct and operate the facilities and
to offer or provide the telecommunications services;
      (13)   All fees, deposits or charges required pursuant to §
872.13 of this chapter; and
      (14)   Such other and further information as may be required by the
Municipal Manager.
   (c)   Determination by the municipality.  Within 120 days after receiving a
complete application under division (b) hereof, the Municipal Manager shall
issue a written determination granting or denying the application in whole or
in part, applying the following standards. If the application is denied, the
written determination shall include the reasons for denial.
      (a)   The financial and technical ability of the applicant.
      (b)   The legal ability of the applicant.
      (c)   The capacity of the public ways to accommodate the applicant’s
proposed facilities.
      (d)   The capacity of the public ways to accommodate additional utility
and telecommunications facilities if the license is granted.
      (e)   The damage or disruption, if any, of public or private facilities,
improvements, service travel or landscaping if the license is granted.
      (f)   The public interest in minimizing the cost and disruption of
construction within the public ways.
      (g)   The service that applicant will provide to the community and
region.
      (h)   The effect, if any, on public health, safety and welfare if the
license is granted.
      (i)   The availability of alternate routes and/or locations for the
proposed facilities.
      (j)   Applicable federal and state telecommunications laws, regulations
and policies.
      (k)   Such other factors as may demonstrate that the grant to use the
public ways will serve the community interest.
   (d)   Agreement.  No license granted hereunder shall be effective until the
applicant and the municipality have executed a written agreement setting forth
the particular terms and provisions under which the license to occupy and use
public ways of the municipality will be granted.
   (e)   Nonexclusive grant.  No license granted under this chapter shall
confer any exclusive right, privilege, license or franchise to occupy or use
the public ways of the municipality for delivery of telecommunications services
or any other purposes.
   (f)   Rights granted.  No license granted under this chapter shall convey
any right, title or interest in the public ways, but shall be deemed a license
only to use and occupy the public ways for the limited purposes and term stated
in the grant. Further, no license shall be construed as any warranty of title.
   (g)   Term of grant.  Unless otherwise specified in a license agreement, a
telecommunications license granted hereunder shall be in effect for a term of
ten years.
   (h)   License route.  A telecommunications license granted under this
section shall be limited to a grant of specific public ways and defined
portions thereof.
   (i)   Location of facilities.  Unless otherwise specified in a license
agreement, all facilities shall be constructed, installed and located in
accordance with the following terms and conditions.
      (1)   Telecommunications facilities shall be installed within an existing
underground duct or conduit whenever excess capacity exists within such utility
facility.
      (2)   A licensee with permission to install overhead facilities shall
install its telecommunications facilities on pole attachments to existing
utility poles only, and then only if surplus space is available.
      (3)   Whenever any existing electric utilities, cable facilities or
telecommunications facilities are located underground within a public way of
the municipality, a licensee with permission to occupy the same public way must
also locate its telecommunications facilities underground.
      (4)   Whenever any new or existing electric utilities, cable facilities
or telecommunications facilities are located or relocated underground within a
public way of the municipality, a grantee that currently occupies the same
public way shall relocate its facilities underground within a reasonable period
of time, which shall not be later than the end of the grant term. Absent
extraordinary circumstances or undue hardship as determined by the Municipal
Engineer, such relocation shall be made concurrently to minimize the disruption
of the public ways.
      (5)   Whenever new telecommunications facilities will exhaust the
capacity of a public street or utility easement to reasonably accommodate
future telecommunications carriers or facilities, the grantee shall provide
additional ducts, conduits, manholes and other facilities for nondiscriminatory
access to future telecommunications carriers.
   (j)   Construction permits.  All licensees are required to obtain
construction permits for telecommunications facilities as required in §
872.14 of this chapter provided, however, that nothing in this section shall
prohibit the municipality and a licensee from agreeing to alternative plan
review, permit and construction procedures in a license agreement, provided
such alternative procedures provide substantially equivalent safeguards for
responsible construction practices.
   (k)   Compensation to municipality.  Each license granted under this chapter
is subject to the municipality’s right, which is expressly reserved, to
annually fix a fair and reasonable compensation to be paid for the property
rights granted to the licensee; provided, nothing in this chapter shall
prohibit the municipality and a licensee from agreeing to the compensation to
be paid.
   (l)   Service to municipality users.  A licensee may be permitted to offer
or provide telecommunications services to persons or areas within the
municipality upon submitting an application for approval pursuant to §
872.11 hereof.
   (m)   Amendment of grant.
      (1)   A new license application and grant shall be required of any
telecommunications carrier that desires to extend or locate its
telecommunications facilities in public ways of the municipality which are not
included in a license previously granted under this chapter.
      (2)   If ordered by the municipality to locate or relocate its
telecommunications facilities in public ways not included in a previously
granted license, the municipality shall grant a license amendment without
further application.
   (n)   Renewal applications.  A grantee that desires to renew its license
under this section shall, not more than 180 days nor less than 90 days before
expiration of the current license, file an application with the municipality
for renewal of its license which shall include the following information:
      (1)   The information required pursuant to division (b) of this section;
and
      (2)   Any information required pursuant to the license agreement between
the municipality and the grantee.
   (o)   Renewal determinations.  Within 90 days after receiving a complete
application under division (n) hereof, the Municipal Manager shall issue a
written determination granting or denying the renewal application in whole or
in part, applying the following standards. If the renewal application is
denied, the written determination shall include the reasons for non-renewal.
      (1)   The financial and technical ability of the applicant.
      (2)   The legal ability of the applicant.
      (3)   The continuing capacity of the public ways to accommodate the
applicant’s existing facilities.
      (4)   The applicant’s compliance with the requirements of this chapter
and the license agreement.
      (5)   Applicable federal, state and local telecommunications laws, rules
and policies.
      (6)   Such other factors as may demonstrate that the continued grant to
use the public ways will serve the community interest.
   (p)   Obligation to cure as a condition of renewal.  No license shall be
renewed until any ongoing violations or defaults in the licensee’s performance
of the license agreement, or of the requirements of this chapter, have been
cured, or a plan detailing the corrective action to be taken by the grantee has
been approved by the municipality.
(Ord. 00-O-1838, passed 10-3-2000)
§ 872.12  TELECOMMUNICATIONS FRANCHISE.
   (a)   Telecommunications franchise.  A telecommunications franchise shall be
required of any telecommunications carrier who desires to occupy public ways of
the municipality and to provide telecommunications services to any person or
area in the municipality.
   (b)   Franchise application.  Any person that desires a telecommunications
franchise pursuant to this section shall file an application with the
municipality which shall include the following information:
      (1)   The identity of the franchise application, including all affiliates
of the applicant;
      (2)   A description of the telecommunications services that are or will
be offered or provided by the franchise applicant over its existing or proposed
facilities;
      (3)   A description of the transmission medium that will be used by the
franchisee to offer or provide such telecommunications services;
      (4)   Preliminary engineering plans, specifications and a network map of
the facilities to be located within the municipality, all in sufficient detail
to identify:
         A.   The location and route requested for applicant’s proposed
telecommunications facilities;
         B.   The location of all overhead and underground public utility,
telecommunication, cable, water, sewer drainage and other facilities in the
public way along the proposed route;
         C.   The location(s), if any, for interconnection with the
telecommunications facilities of other telecommunications carriers; and
         D.   The specific trees, structures, improvements, facilities and
obstructions, if any, that applicant proposes to temporarily or permanently
remove or relocate.
      (5)   If applicant is proposing to install overhead facilities, evidence
that surplus space is available for locating its telecommunications facilities
on existing utility poles along the proposed route;
      (6)   If applicant is proposing an underground installation in existing
ducts or conduits within the public ways, information in sufficient detail to
identify:
         A.   The excess capacity currently available in such ducts or conduits
before installation of applicant’s telecommunications facilities; and
         B.   The excess capacity, if any, that will exist in such ducts or
conduits after installation of applicant’s telecommunications facilities.
      (7)   If applicant is proposing an underground installation within new
ducts or conduits to be constructed within the public ways:
         A.   The location proposed for the new ducts or conduits; and
         B.   The excess capacity that will exist in such ducts or conduits
after installation of applicant’s telecommunications facilities.
      (8)   A preliminary construction schedule and completion dates;
      (9)   A preliminary traffic control plan in accordance with the ODOT
Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices;
      (10)   Financial statements prepared in accordance with generally
accepted accounting principles demonstrating the applicant’s financial ability
to construct, operate, maintain, relocate and remove the facilities;
      (11)   Information in sufficient detail to establish the applicant’s
technical qualifications, experience and expertise regarding the
telecommunications facilities and services described in the application;
      (12)   Information to establish that the applicant has obtained all other
governmental approvals and permits to construct and operate the facilities and
to offer or provide the telecommunications services;
      (13)   Whether the applicant intends to provide cable service, video
dialtone service or other video programming service, and sufficient information
to determine whether such service is subject to cable franchising.
      (14)   An accurate map showing the location of any existing
telecommunications facilities in the municipality that applicant intends to use
or lease;
      (15)   A description of the services or facilities that the applicant
will offer or make available to the municipality and other public, educational
and governmental institutions;
      (16)   A description of applicant’s access and line extension policies;
      (17)   The area or areas of the municipality the applicant desires to
serve and a schedule for build-out to the entire franchise area;
      (18)   All fees, deposits or charges required pursuant to §
872.13 of this chapter; and
      (19)   Such other and further information as may be requested by the
Municipal Manager.
   (c)   Determination by the municipality.  Within 150 days after receiving a
complete application under division (b) hereof, the Municipal Manager shall
issue a written determination granting or denying the application in whole or
in part, applying the following standards. If the application is denied, the
written determination shall include the reasons for denial.
      (1)   The financial and technical ability of the applicant.
      (2)   The legal ability of the applicant.
      (3)   The capacity of the public ways to accommodate the applicant’s
proposed facilities.
      (4)   The capacity of the public ways to accommodate additional utility
and telecommunications facilities if the franchise is granted.
      (5)   The damage or disruption, if any, of public or private facilities,
improvements, service, travel or landscaping if the franchise is granted.
      (6)   The public interest in minimizing the cost and disruption of
construction within the public ways.
      (7)   The service that applicant will provide to the community and
region.
      (8)   The effect, if any, on public health, safety and welfare if the
franchise requested is granted.
      (9)   The availability of alternate routes and/or locations for the
proposed facilities.
      (10)   Applicable federal and state telecommunications laws, regulations
and policies.
      (11)   Such other factors as may demonstrate that the grant to use the
public ways will serve the community interest.
   (d)   Agreement.  No franchise shall be granted hereunder unless the
applicant and the municipality have executed a written agreement setting forth
the particular terms and provisions under which the franchise to occupy and use
public ways of the municipality will be granted.
   (e)   Nonexclusive grant.  No franchise granted under this section shall
confer any exclusive right, privilege, license or franchise to occupy or use
the public ways of the municipality for delivery of telecommunications services
or any other purposes.
   (f)   Term of grant.  Unless otherwise specified in a franchise agreement, a
telecommunications franchise granted hereunder shall be valid for a term of ten
years.
   (g)   Rights granted.  No franchise granted under this section shall convey
any right, title or interest in the public ways, but shall be deemed a
franchise only to use and occupy the public ways for the limited purposes and
term stated in the grant. Further, no franchise shall be construed as any
warranty of title.
   (h)   Franchise territory.  A telecommunications franchise granted under
this section shall be limited to the specific geographic area of the
municipality to be served by the franchise grantee, and the specific public
ways necessary to serve such areas.
   (i)   Location of facilities.  Unless otherwise specified in a franchise
agreement, all facilities shall be constructed, installed and located in
accordance with the following terms and conditions.
      (1)   Telecommunications facilities shall be installed within an existing
underground duct or conduit whenever excess capacity exists within such utility
facility.
      (2)   A franchisee with permission to install overhead facilities shall
install its telecommunications facilities on pole attachments to existing
utility poles only, and then only if surplus space is available.
      (3)   Whenever any existing electric utilities, cable facilities or
telecommunications facilities are located underground within a public way of
the municipality, a franchisee with permission to occupy the same public way
must also locate its telecommunications facilities underground.
      (4)   Whenever any new or existing electric utilities, cable facilities
or telecommunications facilities are located or relocated underground within a
public way of the municipality, a grantee that currently occupies the same
public way shall relocate its facilities underground within a reasonable period
of time, which shall not be later than the end of the grant term. Absent
extraordinary circumstances or undue hardship as determined by the Municipal
Engineer, such relocation shall be made concurrently to minimize the disruption
of the public ways.
      (5)   Whenever new telecommunications facilities will exhaust the
capacity of a public street or utility easement to reasonably accommodate
future telecommunications carriers or facilities, the grantee shall provide
additional ducts, conduits, manholes and other facilities for nondiscriminatory
access to future carriers.
   (j)   Construction permits.  All franchisees are required to obtain
construction permits for telecommunications facilities as required in §
872.14 of this chapter provided, however, that nothing in this section shall
prohibit the municipality and a franchisee from agreeing to alternative plan
review, permit and construction procedures in a franchise agreement, provided
such alternative procedures provide substantially equivalent safeguards for
responsible construction practices.
   (k)   Compensation to municipality.  Each franchise granted under this
section is subject to the municipality’s right, which is expressly reserved, to
annually fix a fair and reasonable compensation to be paid for the property
rights granted to the franchisee; provided, nothing in this section shall
prohibit the municipality and a franchisee from agreeing to the compensation to
be paid.
   (l)   Nondiscrimination.  A franchisee shall make its telecommunications
services available to any customer within its franchise area who shall request
such service without discrimination as to the terms, conditions, rates or
charges for grantee’s services; provided, however, that nothing in this section
shall prohibit a franchisee from making any reasonable classifications among
differently situated customers.
   (m)   Service to the municipality.  A franchisee shall make its
telecommunications services available to the municipality at its most favorable
rate for similarly situated users, unless otherwise provided in a license or
franchise agreement.
   (n)   Amendment of grant.
      (1)   A new franchise application and grant shall be required of any
telecommunications carrier that desires to extend its franchise territory or to
locate its telecommunications facilities in public ways of the municipality
which are not included in a franchise previously granted under this chapter.
      (2)   If ordered by the municipality to locate or relocate its
telecommunications facilities in public ways not included in a previously
granted franchise, the municipality shall grant a franchise amendment without
further application.
   (o)   Renewal applications.  A grantee that desires to renew its franchise
under this chapter shall, not more than 240 days nor less than 150 days before
expiration of the current franchise, file an application with the municipality
for renewal of its franchise which shall include the following information:
      (1)   The information required pursuant to division (b) of this section;
and
      (2)   Any information required pursuant to the franchise agreement
between the municipality and the grantee.
   (p)   Renewal determinations.  Within 150 days after receiving a complete
application under division (o) hereof, the Municipal Manager shall issue a
written determination granting or denying the renewal application in whole or
in part, applying the following standards. If the renewal application is
denied, the written determination shall include the reasons for non-renewal.
      (1)   The financial and technical ability of the applicant.
      (2)   The legal ability of the applicant.
      (3)   The continuing capacity of the public ways to accommodate the
applicant’s existing facilities.
      (4)   The applicant’s compliance with the requirements of this chapter
and the franchise agreement.
      (5)   Applicable federal, state and local telecommunications laws, rules
and policies.
      (6)   Such other factors as may demonstrate that the continued grant to
use the public ways will serve the community interest.
   (q)   Obligation to cure as a condition of renewal.  No franchise shall be
renewed until any ongoing violations or defaults in the grantee’s performance
of the franchise agreement, or of the requirements of this chapter, have been
cured, or a plan detailing the corrective action to be taken by the grantee has
been approved by the municipality.
(Ord. 00-O-1838, passed 10-3-2000)
§ 872.13  FEES AND COMPENSATION.
   (a)   Purpose.  It is the purpose of this section to provide for the payment
and recovery of all direct and indirect costs and expenses of the municipality
related to the enforcement and administration of this chapter.
   (b)   Application and review fee.
      (1)   Any applicant for a license or franchise pursuant to §§
872.04 to
872.12 of this chapter shall advance an application and review fee of one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00).
      (2)   The application and review fee shall be deposited with the
municipality as part of the application filed pursuant to §§
872.04 to
872.12 of this chapter, and upon completion of the application, review and
determination of license or franchise approval by the municipality all
ascertainable costs and expenses incurred by the municipality in connection
with such application, review and determination process which are not covered
by the one thousand dollar ($1,000.00) fee shall be forthwith paid by the
applicant.
      (3)   An applicant whose license or franchise application has been
withdrawn, abandoned or denied shall, within 60 days of receipt of its written
refund request, be refunded the balance of its deposit under this section, less
all ascertainable costs and expenses incurred by the municipality in connection
with the application.
   (c)   Other municipality costs.  All license or franchise grantees shall,
within 30 days after written demand therefor, reimburse the municipality for
all direct and indirect costs and expenses incurred by the municipality in
connection with any modification, amendment, renewal or transfer of the license
or franchise or any license or franchise agreement.
   (d)   Reserved compensation for public ways.  The municipality reserves its
right to annually fix a fair and reasonable compensation to be paid for the
property rights granted to a telecommunications license or franchise grantee.
Nothing in this section shall prohibit the municipality and a grantee from
agreeing to the compensation to be paid for the granted property rights.
   (e)   Compensation for municipality property.  If the right is granted, by
lease, license, franchise or other manner, to use and occupy municipal property
for the installation of telecommunications facilities, the compensation to be
paid shall be fixed by the municipality.
   (f)   Construction permit fee.  Prior to issuance of a construction permit,
the permittee shall pay a permit fee equal to all of the direct and indirect
costs of the municipality arising from or incident to the enforcement and
administration of the provisions of this chapter as the same relate to the
location, construction and installation of telecommunication facilities by or
for the permitee.
   (g)   Annual fees.  Unless otherwise agreed in a license or franchise grant
agreement, each license or franchise grantee shall reimburse the municipality
for the municipality’s annual costs in connection with reviewing, inspecting
and supervising the use and occupancy of the public ways in behalf of the
public and existing or future users.
   (h)   Cable fees.  Cable television franchisees shall pay an annual
franchise fee of 5% of the franchisee’s annual gross revenue in accordance with
the terms of such franchisee’s cable television franchise agreement.
   (i)   Regulatory fees and compensation not a tax.  The regulatory fees and
costs provided for in this section, and any compensation charged and paid for
the public ways provided for in division (d) of this section, are separate
from, and additional to, any and all federal, state, local and municipal taxes
as may be levied, imposed or due from a telecommunications carrier or provider,
its customers or subscribers, or on account of the lease, sale, delivery or
transmission of telecommunications services.
(Ord. 00-O-1838, passed 10-3-2000)
§ 872.14  CONDITIONS OF GRANT.
   (a)   Location of facilities.  All facilities shall be constructed,
installed and located in accordance with the following terms and conditions,
unless otherwise specified in a license or franchise agreement.
      (1)   A grantee shall install its telecommunications facilities within an
existing underground duct or conduit whenever excess capacity exists within
such utility facility.
      (2)   A grantee with permission to install overhead facilities shall
install its telecommunications facilities on pole attachments to existing
utility poles only, and then only if surplus space is available.
      (3)   Whenever any existing electric utilities, cable facilities or
telecommunications facilities are located underground within a public way of
the municipality, a grantee with permission to occupy the same public way must
also locate its telecommunications facilities underground.
      (4)   Whenever any new or existing electric utilities, cable facilities
or telecommunications facilities are located or relocated underground within a
public way of the municipality, a grantee that currently occupies the same
public way shall relocate its facilities underground within a reasonable period
of time, which shall not be later than the end of the grant term. Absent
extraordinary circumstances or undue hardship as determined by the Municipal
Engineer, such relocation shall be made concurrently to minimize the disruption
of the public ways.
      (5)   Whenever new telecommunications facilities will exhaust the
capacity of a public street or utility easement to reasonably accommodate
future telecommunications carriers or facilities, the grantee shall provide
additional ducts, conduits, manholes and other facilities for nondiscriminatory
access to future carriers.
   (b)   Construction permits.  All license or franchise grantees are required
to obtain construction permits for telecommunications facilities as required in
§
872.15 of this chapter. However, nothing in this section shall prohibit the
municipality and a grantee from agreeing to alternative plan review, permit and
construction procedures in a license or franchise agreement, provided such
alternative procedures provide substantially equivalent safeguards for
responsible construction practices.
   (c)   Interference with the public ways.  No license or franchise grantee
may locate or maintain its telecommunications facilities so as to unreasonably
interfere with the use of the public ways by the municipality, by the general
public or by other persons authorized to use or be present in or upon the
public ways. All such facilities shall be moved by the grantee, temporarily or
permanently, as determined by the Municipal Engineer.
   (d)   Damage to property.  No license or franchise grantee nor any person
acting on a grantee’s behalf shall take any action or permit any action to be
done which may impair or damage any municipal property, public ways of the
municipality, other ways or other property located in, on or adjacent thereto.
   (e)   Notice of work.  Unless otherwise provided in a license or franchise
agreement, no license or franchise grantee, nor any person acting on the
grantee’s behalf, shall commence any non-emergency work in or about the public
ways of the municipality or other ways without ten working days advance notice
to the municipality.
   (f)   Repair and emergency work.  In the event of an unexpected repair or
emergency, a grantee may commence such repair and emergency response work as
required under the circumstances, provided the grantee shall notify the
municipality as promptly as possible, before such repair or emergency work or
as soon thereafter as possible if advance notice is not practicable.
   (g)   Maintenance of facilities.  Each license or franchise grantee shall
maintain its facilities in good and safe condition and in a manner that
complies with all applicable federal, state and local requirements.
   (h)   Relocation or removal of facilities.  Within 30 days following written
notice from the municipality, a license or franchise grantee shall, at its own
expense, temporarily or permanently remove, relocate, change or alter the
position of any telecommunications facilities within the public ways whenever
the Municipal Manager shall have determined it necessary that said facilities
be relocated.
   (i)   Removal of unauthorized facilities.  Within 30 days following written
notice from the city, any grantee, telecommunications carrier, or other person
that owns, controls or maintains any unauthorized telecommunications system,
facility or related appurtenances within the public ways of the city shall, at
its own expense, remove such facilities or appurtenances from the public ways
of the city. A telecommunications system or facility is unauthorized and
subject to removal in the following circumstances:
      (1)   Upon expiration or termination of the grantee’s telecommunications
license or franchise;
      (2)   Upon abandonment of a facility within the public ways of the city;
      (3)   If the system or facility was constructed or installed without the
prior grant of a telecommunications license or franchise;
      (4)   If the system or facility was constructed or installed without the
prior issuance of a required construction permit; or
      (5)   If the system or facility was constructed or installed at a
location not permitted by the grantee’s telecommunications license or
franchise.
   (j)   Emergency removal or relocation of facilities.  The city retains the
right and privilege to cut or move any telecommunications facilities located
within the public ways of the city, as the city may determine to be necessary,
appropriate or useful in response to any public health or safety emergency.
   (k)   Damage to grantee’s facilities.  Unless directly and proximately
caused by the willful, intentional or malicious acts by the city, the city
shall not be liable for any damage to or loss of any telecommunications
facility within the public ways of the city as a result of or in connection
with any public works, public improvements, construction, excavation, grading,
filling, or work of any kind in the public ways by or on behalf of the city.
   (l)   Restoration of public ways, other ways and municipality property.
      (1)   When a license or franchise grantee, or any person acting on its
behalf, does any work in or affecting any public ways, other ways or
municipality property, it shall, at its own expense, promptly remove any
obstructions therefrom and restore such ways or property to as good a condition
as existed before the work was undertaken, unless otherwise directed by the
municipality.
      (2)   If weather or other conditions do not permit the complete
restoration required by this section, the grantee shall temporarily restore the
affected ways or property. Such temporary restoration shall be at the
licensee’s sole expense and the licensee shall promptly undertake and complete
the required permanent restoration when the weather or other conditions no
longer prevent such permanent restoration.
      (3)   A grantee or other person acting in its behalf shall use suitable
barricades, flags, flagmen, lights, flares and other measures as required for
the safety of all members of the general public and to prevent injury or damage
to any person, vehicle or property by reason of such work in or affecting such
ways or property.
   (m)   Facilities maps.  Each license or franchise grantee shall provide the
municipality with an accurate map or maps certifying the location of all
telecommunications facilities within the public ways. Each grantee shall
provide updated maps annually.
   (n)   Duty to provide information.  Within ten days of a written request
from the Municipal Manager, each license or franchise grantee shall furnish the
municipality with information sufficient to demonstrate:
      (1)   The grantee has complied with all requirements of this chapter;
      (2)   All municipal sales, message and/or telecommunications taxes due
the municipality in connection with the telecommunications services and
facilities provided by the grantee have been properly collected and paid by the
grantee; and
      (3)   All books, records, maps and other documents, maintained by the
grantee with respect to its facilities within the public ways shall be made
available for inspection by the municipality at reasonable times and intervals.
   (o)   Leased capacity.  A license or franchise grantee shall have the right,
without prior municipality approval, to offer or provide capacity or bandwidth
to its customers; provided:
      (1)   The grantee shall furnish the municipality with a copy of any such
lease or agreement; and
      (2)   The customer or lessee has complied, to the extent applicable, with
the requirements of this chapter.
   (p)   Grantee insurance.  Unless otherwise provided in a license or
franchise agreement, each grantee shall, as a condition of the grant, secure
and maintain the following liability insurance policies insuring both the
grantee and the municipality, and its elected and appointed officers,
officials, agents and employees as coinsureds:
      (1)   Comprehensive general liability insurance with limits not less
than:
         A.   Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for bodily injury or death
to each person;
         B.   Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for property damage
resulting from any one accident; and
         C.   Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for all other types of
liability;
      (2)   Automobile liability for owned, non-owned and hired vehicles with a
limit of three million dollars ($3,000,000.00) for each person and three
million dollars ($3,000,000.00) for each accident;
      (3)   Worker’s compensation within statutory limits and employer’s
liability insurance with limits of not less than one million dollars
($1,000,000.00);
      (4)   Comprehensive form premises-operations, explosions and collapse
hazard, underground hazard and products completed hazard with limits of not
less than three million dollars ($3,000,000.00);
      (5)   The liability insurance policies required by this section shall be
maintained by the grantee throughout the term of the telecommunications license
or franchise, and such other period of time during which the grantee is
operating without a franchise or license here under, or is engaged in the
removal of its telecommunications facilities. Each such insurance policy shall
contain the following endorsement:
   “It is hereby understood and agreed that this policy may not be cancelled
nor the intention not to renew be stated until 90 days after receipt by the
municipality, by registered mail, of a written notice addressed to the
Municipal Manager of such intent to cancel or not to renew.”
      (6)   Within 60 days after receipt by the municipality of the notice, and
in no event later than 30 days prior to the cancellation, the grantee shall
obtain and furnish to the municipality replacement insurance policies meeting
the requirements of this section.
   (q)   General indemnification.  Each license or franchise agreement shall
include, to the extent permitted by law, grantee’s express undertaking to
defend, indemnify and hold the municipality and its officers, employees, agents
and representatives harmless from and against any and all claims, demands,
actions, causes of action, liability, damages, losses and expenses, including
reasonable attorney’s fees and costs of suit or defense, arising out of,
resulting from or alleged to arise out of or result from the negligent,
careless or wrongful acts, omissions, failures to act or misconduct of the
grantee or its affiliates, officers, employees, agents, contractors or
subcontractors in the construction, operation, maintenance, repair or removal
of its telecommunications facilities, and in providing or offering
telecommunications services over the facilities or network, whether such acts
or omissions are authorized, allowed or prohibited by this chapter or by a
grant agreement made or entered into pursuant to this chapter.
   (r)   Performance and construction surety.  Before a license or franchise
granted pursuant to this chapter is effective, and as necessary thereafter, the
grantee shall provide and deposit such monies, bonds, letters of credit or
other instruments in form and substance acceptable to the municipality as may
be required by this chapter or by an applicable license or franchise agreement.
   (s)   Security fund.  Each grantee shall establish a permanent security fund
with the municipality by depositing the amount of fifty thousand dollars
($50,000.00) with the municipality in cash, an unconditional letter of credit,
or other instrument acceptable to the municipality, which fund shall be
maintained at the sole expense of grantee so long as any of grantee’s
telecommunications facilities are located within the public ways of the
municipality.
      (1)   The fund shall serve as security for the full and complete
performance of this chapter, including any costs, expenses, damages or loss the
municipality pays or incurs because of any failure attributable to the grantee
to comply with the codes, ordinances, rule, regulations or permits of the
municipality.
      (2)   Before any sums are withdrawn from the security fund, the
municipality shall give written notice to the grantee:
         A.   Describing the act, default or failure to be remedied, or the
damages, cost or expenses which the municipality has incurred by reason of
grantee’s act or default;
         B.   Providing a reasonable opportunity for grantee to first remedy
the existing or ongoing default or failure, if applicable;
         C.   Providing a reasonable opportunity for grantee to pay any monies
due the municipality before the municipality withdraws the amount thereof from
the security fund, if applicable; and
         D.   The grantee will be given an opportunity to review the act,
default or failure described in the notice with the Municipal Manager or his or
her designee.
      (3)   Grantees shall replenish the security fund within 14 days after
written notice from the municipality that there is a deficiency in the amount
of the fund.
   (t)   Construction and completion bond.  Unless otherwise provided in a
license or franchise agreement, a performance bond written by a corporate
surety acceptable to the municipality equal to at least 100% of the estimated
cost of constructing grantee’s telecommunications facilities within the public
ways of the municipality shall be deposited before construction is commenced.
      (1)   The construction bond shall remain in force until 60 days after
substantial completion of the work, as determined by the Municipal Engineer,
including restoration of public ways and other property affected by the
construction.
      (2)   The construction bond shall guarantee, to the satisfaction of the
municipality:
         A.   Timely completion of construction;
         B.   Construction in compliance with applicable plans, permits,
technical codes and standards;
         C.   Proper location of the facilities as specified by the
municipality;
         D.   Restoration of the public ways and other property affected by the
construction;
         E.   The submission of “as-built” drawings after completion of the
work as required by this chapter; and
         F.   Timely payment and satisfaction of all claims, demands or liens
for labor, material or services provided in connection with the work.
   (u)   Coordination of construction activities.  All grantees are required to
cooperate with the municipality and with each other.
      (1)   By February 1 of each year, grantees shall provide the municipality
with a schedule of their proposed construction activities in, around or that
may affect the public ways.
      (2)   Each grantee shall meet with the municipality, other grantees and
users of the public ways annually or as determined by the municipality to
schedule and coordinate construction in the public ways.
      (3)   All construction locations, activities and schedules shall be
coordinated, as ordered by the Municipal Engineer, to minimize public
inconvenience, disruption or damages.
   (v)   Assignments or transfers of grant.  Ownership or control of a
telecommunications system, license or franchise may not, directly or
indirectly, be transferred, assigned or disposed of by sale, lease, merger,
consolidation or other act of the grantee, by operation of law or otherwise,
without the prior consent of the municipality, which consent shall not be
unreasonably withheld or delayed, as expressed by ordinance and then only on
such reasonable conditions as may be prescribed therein.
      (1)   No grant shall be assigned or transferred in any manner within 12
months after the initial grant of the license or franchise, unless otherwise
provided in a license or franchise agreement.
      (2)   Absent extraordinary and unforeseeable circumstances, no grant,
system or integral part of a system shall be assigned or transferred before
construction of the telecommunications system has been completed.
      (3)   Grantee and the proposed assignee or transferee of the grant or
system shall provide and certify the following information to the municipality
not less than 150 days prior to the proposed date of transfer:
         A.   Complete information setting forth the nature, terms and
condition of the proposed transfer or assignment;
         B.   All information required of a telecommunications license or
franchise applicant pursuant §§
872.11 or
872.12 of this chapter with respect to the proposed transferee or assignee; or
         C.   Any other information reasonably required by the municipality.
      (4)   No transfer shall be approved unless the assignee or transferee has
the legal, technical, financial and other requisite qualifications to own, hold
and operate the telecommunications system pursuant to this chapter.
      (5)   Unless otherwise provided in a license or franchise agreement, the
grantee shall reimburse the municipality for all direct and indirect fees,
costs, and expenses reasonably incurred by the municipality in considering a
request to transfer or assign a telecommunications license or franchise.
      (6)   Any transfer or assignment of a telecommunications grant, system or
integral part of a system without prior approval of the municipality under this
section or pursuant to a license or franchise agreement shall be void and is
cause for revocation of the grant.
   (w)   Transactions effecting control of grant.  Any transactions which
singularly or collectively result in a change of 10% or more of the ownership
or working control of the grantee, of the ownership or working control of a
telecommunications license or franchise, of the ownership or working control of
affiliated entities having ownership or working control of the grantee or of a
telecommunications system, or of control of the capacity or bandwidth of
grantee’s telecommunication system, facilities or substantial parts thereof,
shall be considered an assignment or transfer requiring municipality approval
pursuant to division (v) hereof. Transactions between affiliated entities are
not exempt from municipality approval.
   (x)   Revocation or termination of grant.  A license or franchise granted by
the municipality to use or occupy public ways of the municipality may be
revoked for the following reasons:
      (1)   Construction or operation in the municipality or in the public ways
of the municipality without a license or franchise grant of authorization;
      (2)   Construction or operation at an unauthorized location;
      (3)   Unauthorized substantial transfer of control of the grantee;
      (4)   Unauthorized assignment of a license or franchise;
      (5)   Unauthorized sale, assignment or transfer of grantee’s franchise or
license assets, or a substantial interest therein;
      (6)   Misrepresentation or lack of candor by or on behalf of a grantee in
any application to the municipality;
      (7)   Abandonment of telecommunications facilities in the public ways;
      (8)   Failure to relocate or remove facilities as required in this
chapter;
      (9)   Failure to pay taxes, compensation, fees or costs when and as due
the municipality;
      (10)   Insolvency or bankruptcy of the grantee;
      (11)   Violation of material provisions of this chapter; and
      (12)   Violation of the material terms of a license or franchise
agreement.
   (y)   Notice and duty to cure.  In the event that the Municipal Manager
believes that grounds exist for revocation of a license or franchise, he or she
shall give the grantee written notice of the apparent violation or
noncompliance, providing a short and concise statement of the nature and
general facts of the violation or noncompliance, and providing the grantee a
reasonable period of time not exceeding 30 days to furnish evidence:
      (1)   Corrective action has been, or is being actively and expeditiously
pursued, to remedy the violation or noncompliance;
      (2)   That rebuts the alleged violation or noncompliance; and
      (3)   It would be in the public interest to impose some penalty or
sanction less than revocation.
   (z)   Hearing.  In the event that a grantee fails to provide evidence
reasonably satisfactory to the Municipal Manager as provided in division (y)
hereof, the Manager shall refer the apparent violation or noncompliance to the
Municipal Council. The Municipal Council shall provide the grantee with notice
and a reasonable opportunity to be heard concerning the matter.
   (aa)   Standards for revocation or lesser sanctions.  If persuaded that the
grantee has violated or failed to comply with material provisions of this
chapter, or of a franchise or license agreement, the Municipal Council shall
determine whether to revoke the license or franchise, or to establish some
lesser sanction and cure, considering the nature, circumstances, extent and
gravity of the violation as reflected by one or more of the following factors:
      (1)   Whether the misconduct was egregious;
      (2)   Whether substantial harm resulted;
      (3)   Whether the violation was intentional;
      (4)   Whether there is a history of prior violations of the same or other
requirements;
      (5)   Whether there is a history of overall compliance; and
      (6)   Whether the violation was voluntarily disclosed, admitted or cured.
(Ord. 00-O-1838, passed 10-3-2000)
§ 872.15  CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS.
   (a)   General.  No person shall commence or continue with the construction,
installation or operation of telecommunications facilities within the
municipality except as provided in this chapter.
   (b)   Construction codes.  Telecommunications facilities shall be
constructed, installed, operated and maintained in accordance with all
applicable federal, state and local codes, rules and regulations including the
National Electrical Safety Code.
   (c)   Construction permits.  No person shall construct or install any
telecommunications facilities within the municipality without first obtaining a
construction permit therefor, provided, however:
      (1)   No permit shall be issued for the construction or installation of
telecommunications facilities within the municipality unless the
telecommunications carrier has filed a registration statement with the
municipality pursuant to §
872.03 of this chapter;
      (2)   No permit shall be issued for the construction or installation of
telecommunications facilities in the public ways unless the telecommunications
carrier has applied for and received a license or franchise pursuant to §§
872.11 or
872.12 of this chapter; and
      (3)   No permit shall be issued for the construction or installation of
telecommunications facilities without payment of the construction permit fee
established in §
872.13(f) of this chapter.
   (d)   Applications.  Applications for permits to construct
telecommunications facilities shall be submitted upon forms to be provided by
the municipality and shall be accompanied by drawings, plans and specifications
in sufficient detail to demonstrate:
      (1)   The facilities will be constructed in accordance with all
applicable codes, rules and regulations;
      (2)   The location and route of all facilities to be installed on
existing utility poles;
      (3)   The location and route of all facilities to be located under the
surface of the ground, including the line and grade proposed for the burial at
all points along the route which are within the public ways;
      (4)   The location of all existing underground utilities, conduits,
ducts, pipes, mains and installations which are within the public ways along
the underground, route proposed by the applicant;
      (5)   The location of all other facilities to be constructed within the
municipality, but not within the public ways;
      (6)   The construction methods to be employed for protection of existing
structures, fixtures, and facilities within or adjacent to the public ways; and
      (7)   The location, dimension and types of all trees within or adjacent
to the public ways along the route proposed by the applicant, together with a
landscape plan for protecting, trimming, removing, replacing and restoring any
trees or areas to be disturbed during construction.
   (e)   Engineer’s certification.  All permit applications shall be
accompanied by the certification of a registered professional engineer that the
drawings, plans and specifications submitted with the application comply with
applicable technical codes, rules and regulations.
   (f)   Traffic control plan.  All permit applications which involve work on,
in, under, across or along any public ways shall be accompanied by a traffic
control plan demonstrating the protective measures and devices that will be
employed, consistent with Uniform Manual of Traffic Control Devices, to prevent
injury or damage to persons or property and to minimize disruptions to
efficient pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
   (g)   Issuance of permit.  Within 45 days after submission of all plans and
documents required of the applicant and payment of the permit fees required by
this chapter, the Municipal Engineer, if satisfied that the applications, plans
and documents comply with all requirements of this chapter, shall issue a
permit authorizing construction of the facilities, subject to such further
conditions, restrictions or regulations affecting the time, place and manner of
performing the work as he or she may deem necessary or appropriate.
   (h)   Construction schedule.  The permitee shall submit a written
construction schedule to the Municipal Engineer ten working days before
commencing any work in or about the public ways. The permittee shall further
notify the Municipal Engineer not less than two working days in advance of any
excavation or work in the public ways.
   (i)   Compliance with permit.  All construction practices and activities
shall be in accordance with the permit and approved final plans and
specifications for the facilities. The Municipal Engineer and his or her
representatives shall be provided access to the work and such further
information as he or she may require to ensure compliance with such
requirements.
   (j)   Display of permit.  The permitee shall maintain a copy of the
construction permit and approved plans at the construction site, which shall be
displayed and made available for inspection by the Municipal Engineer or his or
her representatives at all times when construction work is occurring.
   (k)   Survey of underground facilities.  If the construction permit
specifies the location of facilities by depth, line, grade, proximity to other
facilities or other standard, the permittee shall cause the location of such
facilities to be verified by a registered Ohio land surveyor. The permittee
shall relocate any facilities which are not located in compliance with permit
requirements.
   (l)   Noncomplying work.  Upon order of the Municipal Engineer, all work
which does not comply with the permit, the approved plans and specifications
for the work, or the requirements of this chapter, shall be removed.
   (m)   Completion of construction.  The permitee shall promptly complete all
construction activities so as to minimize disruption of municipal ways and
other public and private property. All construction work authorized by a permit
within municipal ways, including restoration, must be completed within 120 days
of the date of issuance.
   (n)   As-built drawings.  Within 60 days after completion of construction
the permittee shall furnish the municipality with two complete sets of plans,
drawn to scale and certified to the municipality as accurately depicting the
location of all telecommunications facilities constructed pursuant to the
permit.
   (o)   Restoration of improvements.  Upon completion of any construction
work, the permittee shall promptly repair any and all public property and
provide property improvements, fixtures, structures and facilities in the
public ways or otherwise damaged during the course of construction, restoring
the same as nearly as practicable to its condition before the start of
construction.
   (p)   Landscape restoration
      (1)   All trees, landscaping and grounds removed, damaged or disturbed as
a result of the construction, installation maintenance, repair or replacement
of telecommunications facilities, whether such work is done pursuant to a
franchise, license, permit replaced or restored as nearly as may be
practicable, to the condition existing prior to performance of work.
      (2)   All restoration work within the public ways shall be done in
accordance with landscape plans approved by the Municipal Manager.
   (q)   Construction surety.  Prior to issuance of a construction permit, the
permittee shall provide a performance bond, as provided in §
872.14(t) of this chapter.
   (r)   Exceptions.  Unless otherwise provided in a license or franchise
agreement, all telecommunications carriers are subject to the requirements of
this section.
   (s)   Responsibility of owner.  The owner of the facilities to be
constructed and, if different, the license or franchise grantee, are
responsible for performance of and compliance with all provisions of this
section.
(Ord. 00-O-1838, passed 10-3-2000)
§ 872.16  SEVERABILITY.
   If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or other portion of
this chapter, or its application to any person, is, for any reason, declared
invalid in whole or in part by any court or agency of competent jurisdiction,
the decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof.
(Ord. 00-O-1838, passed 10-3-2000)
§ 872.99  PENALTY.
   (a)   Generally.  Any person found guilty of violating, disobeying,
omitting, neglecting or refusing to comply with any of the provisions of this
chapter shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more
than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each offense. A separate and distinct
offense shall be deemed committed each day on which a violation occurs or
continues.
   (b)   Other remedies.  Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as
limiting any judicial remedies that the municipality may have, at law or in
equity, for enforcement of this chapter.
(Ord. 00-O-1838, passed 10-3-2000)
TITLE FOUR:  TAXATION
CHAPTER 880:  EARNED INCOME TAX REGULATIONS EFFECTIVE THROUGH DECEMBER 31, 2015
Section
880.01   Purpose.
880.02   Definitions.
880.03   Imposition of tax.
880.04   Effective period.
880.05   Return and payment of tax.
880.06   Collection at source.
880.07   Declarations.
880.08   Duties of the Administrator.
880.09   Investigative powers of the Administrator; divulging confidential
information.
880.10   Interest and penalties.
880.11   Collection of unpaid taxes and refunds of overpayments.
880.12   Violations.
880.13   Board of Review.
880.14   Allocations of funds.
880.15   Credit for tax paid to another municipality.
880.16   Collection of tax after effective period of chapter.
880.17   Check charges.
880.18   Saving clause.
880.19   Repeal clause.
880.99   Penalty.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Power to levy income tax - see Ohio Const., Art. XVIII, § 3
   Payroll deductions - see Ohio R.C. 9.42
   Municipal income taxes - see Ohio R.C. Ch. 718
   Earned income tax regulations effective beginning January 1, 2016 - see B.R.
& T.
Ch. 881
§ 880.01  PURPOSE.
   To provide funds for the purposes of general municipal operations,
maintenance, new equipment, extension and enlargement of municipal services and
facilities and capital improvements of this municipality, there shall be, and
is hereby levied, a tax on salaries, wages, commissions and other compensation,
and on net profits as hereinafter provided.
(Ord. 73-O-66, passed 11-20-1973; Ord. 04-O-2146, passed 7-6-2004)
§ 880.02  DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this chapter, the following words shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section, except as and if the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.  The singular shall include the
plural, and the masculine shall include the feminine and the neuter.
   (a)   “Administrator” means the individual designated by this chapter,
whether appointed or elected, to administer and enforce the provisions of this
chapter.
   (b)   “Association” means a partnership, limited partnership or any other
form of unincorporated enterprise, owned by two or more persons.
   (c)   “Board of Review” means the Board created by and constituted as
provided in §
880.13.
   (d)   “Business” means an enterprise, activity, profession or undertaking of
any nature conducted for profit or ordinarily conducted for profit, whether by
an individual, partnership, limited partnership, fiduciary, trust, limited
liability company, association, corporation or any other entity, including, but
not limited to, the renting or leasing of property, real, personal or mixed.
   (e)   “Corporation” means a corporation or joint stock association organized
under the laws of the United States, the State of Ohio, or any other state,
territory, or foreign country or dependency.  “S” corporation means a
corporation that has made an election under Subchapter S of Chapter 1 of
Subtitle A of the Internal Revenue Code for its taxable year.
   (f)   “Domicile” means a place where a person has his true and permanent
residence to which whenever absent from he intends to return.  Actually or
legally a person’s permanent and principal home.
   (g)   “Employee” means one who works for wages, salary, commission or other
type of compensation in the service of an employer.  Any person upon whom an
aemployer is required to withhold for either Federal Income Tax or Social
Security, PERS or on whose account payments are made under the Workers’
Compensation Law shall be an employee.
   (h)   “Employer” means an individual, partnership, association, corporation,
governmental body, unit or agency, or any other entity, whether or not
organized for profit, who or that employs one or more persons on a salary,
wage, commission or other compensation basis.
   (i)   “Fiscal year” means an accounting period of 12 months or less ending
on any day other than December 31.
   (j)   “Gross receipts” means the total income from any source whatsoever.
   (k)   “Income from a pass-through entity” means partnership income of
partners, distributive shares of shareholders of an “S” corporation, membership
interests of members of a limited liability company or other distributive
shares of pass-through entities.
   (l)   “Limited liability company” means a limited liability company formed
under the Ohio Revised Code or under the laws of another state.
   (m)   “Net profits” means a net gain from the operation of a business,
profession, enterprise or other activity after provision for all ordinary,
reasonable and necessary expenses either paid or accrued in accordance with the
accounting system used by the taxpayer for federal income tax purposes, without
deduction of taxes imposed by this chapter, federal, state and other taxes
based on income, exclusive of the amount of Ohio franchise tax computed on the
net worth basis; and, in the case of an association, without deduction of
salaries paid to partners and other owners, and otherwise adjusted to the
requirements of this chapter.
   (n)   “Nonresident” means an individual domiciled outside the municipality.
   (o)   “Nonresident unincorporated business entity” means an unincorporated
business entity not having an office or place of business within the
municipality.
   (p)   “Other compensation” means compensation which includes, but is not
limited to, tips, gratuities, fees, bonuses, incentive payments, prizes and
lottery winnings in excess of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) and awards.
   (q)   “Owner” means a partner of a partnership, a shareholder of an “S”
corporation, a member of a limited liability company or other person with an
ownership interest corporation, a member of a limited liability company or
other person with an ownership interest in a pass-through entity.
   (r)   “Pass-Through Entity” means a partnership, “S” corporation, limited
liability company or any other class of entity the income or profits from which
are given pass-through treatment under the Internal Revenue Code.
   (s)   “Person” means every natural person, partnership, fiduciary,
association or corporation. Whenever used in any clause prescribing and
imposing a penalty, the term “person,” as applied to any unincorporated entity,
means the partners or members thereof, and, as applied to corporations, the
officers thereof.
   (t)   “Place of business” means any bona fide office (other than a mere
statutory office), factory, warehouse or other space which is occupied and used
by the taxpayer in carrying on any business activity individually or through
one or more of his or her regular employees regularly in attendance.
   (u)   “Resident” means an individual domiciled in the municipality.
   (v)   “Resident unincorporated business entity” means an unincorporated
business entity having an office or place of business within the municipality.
   (w)   “‘S’ corporation” means a corporation that has made an election under
Subchapter S of Chapter 1 of Subtitle A of the Internal Revenue Code for its
taxable year.
   (x)   “Taxable income” means wages, salaries and other compensation paid by
an employer or employers before any deductions and/or the net profits from the
operation of a business, profession or other enterprise or activity, adjusted
in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
   (y)   “Taxable year” means the calendar year, or the fiscal year upon the
basis of which net profits are to be computed under this chapter and, in the
case of a return for a fractional part of a year, the period for which such
return is required to be made.
   (z)   “Taxpayer” means a person, whether an individual, partnership,
association, or any corporation or other entity, required hereunder to file a
return or pay a tax.
(Ord. 73-O-66, passed 11-20-1973; Ord. 04-O-2146, passed 7-6-2004)
§ 880.03  IMPOSITION OF TAX.
   (a)   Applicability of tax.  An annual tax for the purposes specified in §
880.01 shall be imposed on and after January 1, 1974, at the rate of 1% per
year upon the following:
      (1)   On all salaries, wages, commissions and other compensation earned
during the effective period of this chapter by residents of the municipality.
      (2)   On all salaries, wages, commissions and other compensation earned
during the effective period of this chapter by nonresidents for work done or
services performed or rendered in the municipality.
      (3)   A.   On the portion attributable to the municipality of the net
profits earned during the effective period of this chapter of all resident
unincorporated businesses, professions or other entities, derived from sales
made, work done, services performed or rendered and business or other
activities conducted in the municipality.
         B.   On the portion of the distributive share of the net profits
earned during the effective period of this chapter of a resident partner or
owner of a resident unincorporated business entity not attributable to the
municipality and not levied against such unincorporated business entity by the
municipality.
      (4)   On earnings, payments, bonuses, commissions and/or fees received by
professional, brokers and others who are independent contractors and not
employees.
      (5)   A.   On the portion attributable to the municipality of the net
profits earned during the effective period of this chapter of all nonresident
unincorporated businesses, professions or other entities, derived from sales
made, work done, or services performed or rendered and business or other
activities conducted in the municipality, whether or not such incorporated
business entity has an office or place of business in the municipality.
         B.   On the portion of the distributive share of the net profits
earned during the effective period of this chapter of a resident partner or
owner of a nonresident unincorporated business entity not attributable to the
municipality and not levied against such unincorporated business entity by the
municipality.
      (6)   On the portion attributable to the municipality, of the net profits
earned during the effective period of this chapter of all corporations derived
from sales made, work done, services performed or rendered and business or
other activities conducted in the municipality, whether or not such
corporations have an office or place of business in the municipality.
   (b)   The portion of the net profits attributable to this municipality of a
taxpayer conducting a business, profession or other activity both within and
without the boundaries of this municipality shall be determined as provided in
the Revised Code of Ohio and in accordance with the rules and regulations
adopted by the Finance Director pursuant to this chapter.
   (c)   In the computation of any tax due under this chapter, a business loss
of a previous tax year shall not be allowed or carried forward to reduce the
tax due in any subsequent tax year.
   (d)   For no reason may a business loss be offset against salaries, wages,
commissions or other personal service compensation.
   (e)   Determination of taxable income.  The portion of the net profits
attributable to the municipality of a taxpayer conducting a business,
profession or other activity both within and without the boundaries of the
municipality shall be determined as provided in Ohio R.C. 718.02 and in
accordance with the rules and regulations adopted by the Administrator pursuant
to this chapter.
   (f)   Consolidated returns.
      (1)   Filing of consolidated returns may be permitted, required or denied
in accordance with the rules and regulations prescribed by the Administrator. 
However, an affiliated group of corporations shall, subject to the provisions
of this chapter, have the privilege of making a consolidated return with 
respect to the income tax imposed for the taxable year in lieu of separate
returns. The making of a consolidated return shall be upon the conditions that
a consolidated return for the affiliated group is filed with the Internal
Revenue Service, and that all corporations which at any time during the taxable
year have been members of the affiliated group consent to all the consolidated
return regulations prescribed by the laws prior to the last day prescribed by
law for the filing of such return, the making of a consolidated return shall be
considered as such consent.  In the case of a corporation which is a member of
the affiliated group for a fractional part of the year, the consolidated return
shall include the income of such corporation for such part of the year as it is
a member of the affiliated group.
      (2)   In the case of a corporation that carries on transactions with its
stockholders or with other corporations related by stock ownership,
interlocking directorates or some other method, or in case any person operates
a division, branch, factory, office, laboratory or activity within the
municipality constituting a portion only of its total business, the
Administrator shall require such additional information as he or she may deem
necessary to ascertain whether net profits are properly allocated to the
municipality. If the Administrator finds net profits are not properly allocated
to the municipality by reason of transactions with stockholders or with other
corporations related by stock ownership, interlocking directorates or
transactions with such division, branch, factory, office laboratory or activity
or by some other method, he or she shall make such allocation as he or she
deems appropriate to produce a fair and proper allocation of net profits to the
municipality.
   (g)   Other taxable income.
      (1)   Contributions to an IRA, SEP IRA, H.R. 10 plan or any other
deferred compensation program are taxable.
      (2)   Income from Subchapter S corporations, limited liability companies
and other pass-through entities are taxable to a resident shareholder to the
extent not subject to Columbiana Corporate Income Tax. A shareholder or member
in such an entity must include in their income their share of the corporation’s
taxable income whether or not the amount was actually distributed to them.
      (3)   The premium value of group term life insurance coverage in excess
of fifty thousand dollar ($50,000.00) which is purchased with employer
contributions is taxable.  This income is referred to as “imputed income”.
      (4)   The ordinary income portion of a stock option or employee stock
purchase plan is subject to the tax.
      (5)   Supplemental Unemployment Benefit payments (SUB Payments) are
subject to the tax.
      (6)   Winnings over five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) earned or derived
from gaming, wagering, lotteries (including, but not limited to, Ohio State
Lottery) or games of chance.
      (7)   Early retirement incentives and wage continuation plans are
taxable.
      (8)   Executor, administrator and trustee fees are taxable.
      (9)   Royalties are taxable.
   (h)   Exemptions.  The provisions of this chapter shall not be construed as
levying a tax upon the following:
      (1)   Funds received from local, state, or federal governments because of
service in the forces of the United States by the person rendering such service
or as a result of another person rendering such service.
      (2)   Alimony payments, child support, poor relief, pensions, social
security, unemployment compensation (but not including Supplemental
Unemployment Benefits) and disability benefits received from private industry
or local, state or federal governments or from charitable, religious or
educational organizations.
      (3)   Dues, contributions and similar payment received by charitable,
religious, educational, or literary organizations or labor unions, lodges, and
similar organizations.
      (4)   Receipts from casual entertainment, amusements, sports events, and
health and welfare activities conducted by bona fide charitable, religious and
educational organizations and associations.
      (5)   Any association, organization, corporation, club or trust, which is
exempt from federal taxes on income by reason of its charitable, religious and
educational organizations and associations.
      (6)   Gains from involuntary conversions, cancellation of indebtedness,
interest on federal obligations and income of a decedent’s estate during the
period of administration (except such income from the operation of a business).
      (7)   Earnings and income of all persons under 18 years of age, whether
residents or non- residents.
      (8)   On or after January 1, 2001, compensation paid to an individual for
personal services performed in this municipality.
         A.   If the individual does not reside in this municipality; and
         B.   If they perform such.
         C.   If this individual is an employee and the principal place of
business of the individual’s employer is located outside this municipal
corporation, and the individual pays taxes on this compensation to the
municipal corporation in which the employers’ principal place of business is
located and that no portion of that tax is refunded to this individual.
      (9)   The rental value of a home furnished to a minister of the gospel as
part of his or her compensation or the rental allowance paid to him or her as
compensation to the extent used by the minister to rent or provide a home.
(Ord. 73-O-66, passed 11-20-1973; Ord. 04-O-2146, passed 7-6-2004)
§ 880.04  EFFECTIVE PERIOD.
   Such tax shall be levied, collected and paid with respect to the salaries,
wages, commissions and other compensation, and with respect to the net profits
of businesses, professions or other activities, earned on and after January 1,
1974.
(Ord. 73-O-66, passed 11-20-1973; Ord. 04-O-2146, passed 7-6-2004)
§ 880.05  RETURN AND PAYMENT OF TAX.
   (a)   Each taxpayer, except as herein provided, shall, whether or not a tax
be due thereon, make and file a return on or before April 15, 1975, and on or
before April 15 of each year thereafter. When the return is made for a fiscal
year or other period different from the calendar year, the return shall be
filed within four months from the end of such fiscal year or period. The
Administrator is hereby authorized to provide by regulation that the return of
an employer or employers, showing the amount of tax deducted by such employer
or employers from the salaries, wages, commissions or other compensation of an
employee, and paid by him or her or them to the Administrator shall be accepted
unless otherwise specified as the return required of any employee whose sole
income, subject to tax under this chapter, is such salary, wages, commissions
or other compensation.
   (b)   The return shall be filed with the Administrator on a form or forms
furnished by or obtainable upon request from such Administrator setting forth:
      (1)   The aggregate amounts of salaries, wages, commissions and other
compensation earned and gross income from business, profession or other
activity, less allowable ordinary, reasonable, and necessary expenses incurred
in the acquisition of such gross income, earned during the preceding year and
subject to the tax;
      (2)   The amount of the tax imposed by this chapter on such earnings and
profits; and
      (3)   Such other pertinent statements, information returns or other
information as the Administrator may require.
   (c)   The Administrator may extend the time for filing of the annual return
upon the request of the taxpayer for a period of not to exceed six months, or
one month beyond any extension requested of or granted by the Internal Revenue
Service for the filing of the federal income tax return. The Administrator may
require a tentative return, accompanied by payment of the amount of tax shown
to be due thereon by the date the return is normally due. No penalty shall be
assessed in those cases in which the return is filed and the final tax paid
within the period as extended.
   (d)   (1)   The taxpayer making a return shall, at the time of the filing
thereof, pay to the Administrator the amount of taxes shown as due thereon,
provided, however, that where any portion of the tax so due has been deducted
at the source pursuant to the provisions of §
880.06, or where any portion of the tax has been paid by the taxpayer pursuant
to the provisions of §
880.07, or where an income tax has been paid to another municipality, credit
for the amount so paid in accordance with §
880.15, shall be deducted from the amount shown to be due and only the balance,
if any, shall be due and payable at the time of filing the return.
      (2)   A taxpayer who has overpaid the amount of tax to which the
municipality is entitled under the provisions of this chapter may have such
overpayment applied against any subsequent liability hereunder or, at his or
her election indicated on the return, such overpayment, or part thereof, shall
be refunded, provided that no additional taxes or refunds of less than one
dollar ($1.00) shall be collected or refunded.
   (e)   (1)   Where necessary, an amended return shall be filed in order to
report additional income and pay any additional tax due, or claim a refund of
tax overpaid, subject to the requirements and/or limitations contained in §§
880.11 and
880.15. Such amended returns shall be on a form obtainable on request from the
Administrator. A taxpayer may not change the method of accounting or
apportionment of net profits after the due date for filing the original return.
      (2)   Within three months from the final determination of any federal tax
liability affecting the taxpayer’s tax liability to the municipality, such
taxpayer shall make and file an amended return showing income subject to the
income tax of the municipality based upon such final determination of federal
tax liability, and pay any additional tax shown due thereon or make claim for a
refund of any overpayment. 
(Ord. 73-O-66, passed 11-20-1973; Ord. 04-O-2146, passed 7-6-2004)
§ 880.06  COLLECTION AT SOURCE.
   (a)   In accordance with the rules and regulations prescribed by the
Administrator, each employer within or doing business within the municipality
shall deduct at the time of the payment of such salary, wage, commission or
other compensation, the tax of 1% of the gross salaries, wages, commissions or
other compensation due by the employer to the employee and shall, on or before
the last day of the month following the close of each calendar quarter, make a
return and pay to the Administrator the amount of taxes so deducted. Returns
shall be on a form or forms prescribed by or acceptable to the Administrator
and shall be subject to the rules and regulations prescribed therefor by the
Administrator. Such employer shall be liable for the payment of the tax
required to be deducted and withheld, whether or not such taxes have in fact
been withheld.
   (b)   Such employer, in collecting the tax, shall be deemed to hold the
same, until payment is made by such employer to the municipality, as a trustee
for the benefit of the municipality and any such tax collected by such employer
from his or her employees, shall, until the same is paid to the municipality,
be deemed a trust fund in the hands of such employer.
   (c)   On or before January 31 of each year beginning with the year 1975,
each employer shall file a withholding return setting forth the names and
addresses of all employees from whose compensation the tax was withheld during
the preceding calendar year and the amount of tax withheld from his or her
employees and such other information as may be required by the Administrator.
All payments not subject to withholding shall be reported on a form required by
the Administrator.
   (d)   The Administrator, for good cause, may require immediate returns and
payments to be submitted to his or her office.
(Ord. 73-O-66, passed 11-20-1973; Ord. 04-O-2146, passed 7-6-2004)
§ 880.07  DECLARATIONS.
   (a)   Every person who anticipates any taxable income which is not subject
to §
880.06, or who engages in any business, profession, enterprise or activity
subject to the tax imposed by §
880.03, shall file a declaration setting forth such estimated income or the
estimated profit or loss from such business activity, together, with the
estimated tax due thereon, if any, provided, however, if a person’s income is
wholly from wages from which the tax will be withheld and remitted to this
municipality in accordance with §
880.06, such person need not file a declaration.
   (b)   (1)   Such declaration shall be filed on or before April 15 of each
year during the life of this chapter, or within four months of the date the
taxpayer becomes subject to tax for the first time.
      (2)   Those taxpayers reporting on a fiscal year basis shall file a
declaration within four months after the beginning of each fiscal year or
period.
   (c)   (1)   Such declaration shall be filed upon a form furnished by, or
obtainable from the Administrator, provided, however, credit shall be taken for
the municipality’s income tax to be withheld from any portion of such income.
In accordance with the provisions of §
880.15, credit may be taken for tax to be paid to or to be withheld and
remitted to another taxing municipality.
      (2)   The original declaration, or any subsequent amendment thereof, may
be increased or decreased on or before any subsequent quarterly payment date
and provided for herein.
   (d)   An amended declaration must be made by January 31 for individuals and
December 15 for all other taxpayers if it appears that the original declaration
underestimated the income for the year by more than 10% or if the original
declaration is not equal to the taxpayer’s prior year tax liability.
   (e)   For individuals, such declaration of estimated tax to be paid this
municipality shall be accompanied by a payment of at least one-fourth of the
estimated annual tax on or before April 30, July 31, and October 31 of the
taxable year, and January 31 of the next year.  For all other taxpayers, such
declaration of estimated tax to be paid to this municipality shall be
accompanied by a payment of at least one-fourth of the estimated annual tax on
or before April 30 and at least a similar amount shall be paid on or before
June 15, September 15 and December 15.  A taxpayer reporting on a fiscal year
shall make a payment of at least one-fourth of the estimated tax on or before
the fifteenth day of the fourth month of the taxpayer’s taxable year and the
fifteenth day of the sixth, ninth and twelfth months of the taxpayer’s taxable
year, provided, however, that in the case of an amended declaration having been
filed, the unpaid balance shown due thereon shall be paid in equal installments
on or before the remaining payment dates.
   (f)   On or before the last day of the fourth month of the year following
that for which such declaration or amended declaration was filed, an annual
return shall be filed and any balance which may be due the municipality shall
be paid therewith in accordance with the provisions of §
880.05.
(Ord. 73-O-66, passed 11-20-1973; Ord. 04-O-2146, passed 7-6-2004)
§ 880.08  DUTIES OF THE ADMINISTRATOR.
   (a)   (1)   It shall be the duty of the Manager, herein designated as the
Administrator, and the Deputy Administrator, to be appointed by him or her, to
receive the tax imposed by this chapter in the manner prescribed herein from
the taxpayers; to keep an accurate record thereof; and to report all monies so
received.
      (2)   It shall be the duty of the Administrator to enforce payment of all
taxes owing the municipality, to keep accurate records for a minimum of five
years showing the amount due from each taxpayer required to file a declaration
and/or to make any return, including taxes withheld, and to show the dates and
amounts of payments thereof.
   (b)   The Administrator is hereby charged with the enforcement of the
provisions of this chapter, and is hereby empowered, subject to the approval of
the Board of Review, to adopt and promulgate and to enforce rules and
regulations relating to any matter or thing pertaining to the collection of
taxes and the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this chapter,
including provisions for the re-examination and correction of returns. The
Administrator is authorized to arrange for the payment of unpaid taxes,
interest and penalties on a schedule of installment payments, when the taxpayer
has proved to the Administrator that, due to certain hardship conditions, he or
she is unable to pay the full amount of the tax due. Such authorization shall
not be granted until proper returns are filed by the taxpayer for all amounts
owed by him or her under this chapter. Failure to make any deferred payment
when due, shall cause the total unpaid amount, including penalty and interest,
to become payable on demand and the provisions of §§
880.11 and
880.12 shall apply.
   (c)   In any case where a taxpayer has failed to file a return or has filed
a return which does not show the proper amount of tax due, the Administrator
may determine the amount of tax appearing to be due the municipality from the
taxpayer and shall send to such taxpayer a written statement showing the amount
of tax so determined, together with interest and penalties thereon, if any.
   (d)   Subject to the consent of the Board of Review or pursuant to
regulation approved by such Board, the Administrator shall have the power to
compromise any interest or penalty, or both, imposed by §
880.10.
(Ord. 73-O-66, passed 11-20-1973; Ord. 04-O-2146, passed 7-6-2004)
§ 880.09  INVESTIGATIVE POWERS OF THE ADMINISTRATOR; DIVULGING CONFIDENTIAL
INFORMATION.
   (a)   The Administrator, or any authorized employee, is hereby authorized to
examine the books, papers, records and federal income tax returns of any
employer or of any taxpayer or person subject to, or whom the Administrator
believes is subject to, the provisions of this chapter, for the purpose of
verifying the accuracy of any return made, or, if no return was made, to
ascertain the tax due under this chapter. Every such employer, supposed
employer, taxpayer or supposed taxpayer is hereby directed and required to
furnish upon written request by the Administrator, or his or her duly
authorized agent or employee, the means, facilities and opportunity for making
such examinations and investigations as are hereby authorized.
   (b)   The Administrator is hereby authorized to order any person presumed to
have knowledge of the facts to appear before him or her and may examine such
person, under oath, concerning any income which was or should have been
reported for taxation or any transaction tending to affect such income, and for
this purpose may compel the production of books, papers, records and federal
income tax returns and the attendance of all persons before him or her, whether
as parties or witnesses, whenever he or she believes such persons have
knowledge of such income or information pertinent to such inquiry.
   (c)   The refusal to produce books, papers, records and federal income tax
returns, or the refusal to submit to such examination by any employer or person
subject or presumed to be subject to the tax, or by any officer, agent or
employee of a person subject to the tax or required to withhold tax or the
failure of any person to comply with the provisions of this section or with an
order or subpoena of the Administrator authorized hereby, shall be deemed a
violation of this chapter, punishable as provided in §
880.99.
   (d)   Any information gained as a result of any returns, investigations,
verifications or hearings before the Administrator, required by this chapter or
authorized by the rules and regulations, shall be confidential and no
disclosure thereof shall be made except for official purposes or as ordered by
a court of competent jurisdiction. No person shall divulge such information.
   (e)   Every taxpayer shall retain all records necessary to compute his or
her tax liability for a period of five years from the date his or her return is
filed, or the withholding taxes are paid.
(Ord. 73-O-66, passed 11-20-1973; Ord. 04-O-2146, passed 7-6-2004)
§ 880.10  INTEREST AND PENALTIES.
   (a)   All taxes imposed and all monies withheld or required to be withheld
by employers under the provisions of this chapter and remaining unpaid after
they become due shall bear interest at the rate of one-half of 1% per month or
fraction thereof.
   (b)   In addition to interest as provided in division (a) hereof, penalties
based on the unpaid tax are hereby imposed as follows:
      (1)   For failure to pay taxes due other than taxes withheld:  1-1/2% per
month or fraction thereof.
      (2)   For failure to remit taxes withheld from employees:  5% per month
or fraction thereof.
   (c)   A penalty shall not be assessed on an additional tax assessment made
by the Administrator when a return has been filed in good faith and the tax
paid thereon within the time prescribed by the Administrator, and, provided,
further, that, in the absence of fraud, neither penalty nor interest shall be
assessed on any additional tax assessment resulting from a federal audit,
provided that an amended return is filed and the additional tax is paid within
three months after final determination of the federal tax liability.  Interest,
penalty or other similar assessment or charge against a taxpayer for the late
payment or nonpayment of estimated tax liability shall not be imposed in either
of the following circumstances.
      (1)   The taxpayer is an individual who resides in the municipal
corporation but was not domiciled there on the first day of January of the
current calendar year;
      (2)   The taxpayer has remitted an amount at least equal to 100% of the
taxpayer’s liability for the preceding year provided that the return for the
preceding year reflected a 12-month period and the taxpayer filed a return for
the preceding year.
   (d)   Upon recommendation of the Administrator, the Board of Review may
abate penalty or interest, or both, or upon an appeal from the refusal of the
Administrator to recommend abatement of penalty and/or interest, the Board may
nevertheless abate penalty or interest, or both.
(Ord. 73-O-66, passed 11-20-1973; Ord. 04-O-2146, passed 7-6-2004)
§ 880.11  COLLECTION OF UNPAID TAXES AND REFUNDS OF OVERPAYMENTS.
   (a)   All taxes imposed by this chapter shall be collectible, together with
any interest and penalties thereon, by a civil action at law. All additional
assessments shall be made and all civil actions to recover municipal income
taxes and penalties and interest thereon shall be brought within three years
after the tax was due or the return was filed, whichever is later.
   (b)   Taxes erroneously paid shall not be refunded unless a claim for a
refund is made. Claims for refund of municipal income taxes must be brought
within the time limitation provided in division (a) hereof.
   (c)   Amounts of less than one dollar ($1.00) shall not be collected or
refunded.
(Ord. 73-O-66, passed 11-20-1973; Ord. 04-O-2146, passed 7-6-2004)
§ 880.12  VIOLATIONS.
   (a)   No person, firm, corporation or other entity subject to the provisions
of this
Chapter 880 shall:
      (1)   Fail, neglect or refuse to make any return or declaration required
by this chapter;
      (2)   Make any incomplete, false or fraudulent return;
      (3)   Willfully fail, neglect or refuse to pay the tax, penalties or
interest imposed by this chapter;
      (4)   Willfully fail, neglect or refuse to withhold the tax from his or
her employees or remit such withholding to the Administrator;
      (5)   Refuse to permit the Administrator or any duly authorized agent or
employee to examine his or her books, records, papers and federal income tax
returns relating to the income or net profits of a taxpayer;
      (6)   Fail to appear before the Administrator and to produce his or her
books, records, papers or federal income tax returns relating to the income or
net profits of a taxpayer upon order or subpoena of the Administrator;
      (7)   Refuse to disclose to the Administrator any information with
respect to the income or net profits of a taxpayer;
      (8)   Fail to comply with the provisions of this chapter or any order or
subpoena of the Administrator authorized hereby;
      (9)   Give to an employer false information as to his or her true name,
correct Social Security number and residence address, or fail to promptly
notify an employer of any change in residence address and the date thereof;
      (10)   Fail to use ordinary diligence in maintaining proper records of
employees’ residence addresses, total wages paid and the municipality’s income
tax withheld, or to knowingly give the Administrator false information; or
      (11)   Attempt to do anything whatsoever to avoid the payment of the
whole or any part of the tax, penalties or interest imposed by this chapter.
   (b)   Prosecutions for an offense made punishable under this section or any
other provision of this chapter shall be commenced within three years after the
commission of the offense, provided that in the case of fraud, failure to file
a return, or the omission of 25% or more of income required to be reported,
prosecutions may be commenced within six years after the commission of the
offense.
   (c)   The failure of any employer or person to receive or procure a return,
declaration or other required form shall not excuse him or her from making any
information return, return or declaration, from filing such form or from paying
the tax.
(Ord. 73-O-66, passed 11-20-1973; Ord. 04-O-2146, passed 7-6-2004)
§ 880.13  BOARD OF REVIEW.
   (a)   A Board of Review, consisting of a Chairperson and two other
individuals to be appointed by Council, is hereby created. A majority of the
members of the Board shall constitute a quorum. The Board shall adopt its own
procedural rules and shall keep a record of its transactions. Any hearing by
the Board may be conducted privately, and the provisions of §
880.09 with reference to the confidential character of information required to
be disclosed by this chapter shall apply to such matters as may be heard before
the Board on appeal.
   (b)   All rules and regulations and amendments or changes thereto, which are
adopted by the Administrator under the authority conferred by this chapter,
must be approved by the Board of Review before the same become effective. The
Board shall hear and pass on appeals from any ruling or decision of the
Administrator, and, at the request of the taxpayer or Administrator, is
empowered to substitute alternate methods of allocation.
   (c)   Whenever the Administrator issues a decision regarding a municipal
income tax obligation that is subject to appeals provided in this section or in
an ordinance or regulation of this municipality, the Administrator shall notify
the taxpayer at the same time of the taxpayer’s right to appeal the decision
and of the manner in which the taxpayer may appeal the action. Any person who
is aggrieved by a decision by the Administrator and who has filed with this
municipality the required returns or other documents pertaining to this
municipal income tax obligation at issue in the decision, may appeal the
decision to the Board created pursuant to this section by filing a request with
the Board.  The request shall be in writing, shall state why the decision
should be deemed incorrect or unlawful and shall be filed within 30 days after
the Administrator issues the decision complained of.  The Board shall schedule
a hearing within 45 days after receiving the request unless the taxpayer waives
a hearing.  If the taxpayer does not waive a hearing, the taxpayer may appear
before the Board and may be represented by an attorney-at-law, certified public
accountant or other representative.
   (d)   The Board may affirm, reverse or modify the Administrator’s decision
or any part of that decision. The Board shall issue a decision on the appeal
within 90 days after the Board’s final hearing on the appeal and send notice of
its decision by ordinary mail to the taxpayer within 15 days after issuing the
decision.
(Ord. 73-O-66, passed 11-20-1973; Ord. 04-O-2146, passed 7-6-2004)
§ 880.14  ALLOCATIONS OF FUNDS.
   The funds collected under the provisions of this chapter shall be deposited
in the Income Tax Fund and such funds collected for the tax period beginning
January 1, 2003, and for an indefinite number of tax periods thereafter shall
be disbursed in the following order, to-wit:
   (a)   Such part thereof as shall be necessary to defray all costs of
collecting the taxes and the costs of administering and enforcing the
provisions thereof; then
   (b)   Not more than 50% of the net available income tax receipts received
annually may be used to defray operating expenses of the municipality; and
   (c)   At least  50% of net available income tax receipts received annually
shall be set aside and used for capital improvements for the municipality
including, but not limited to, development and construction of storm sewers and
street improvements; for public buildings, parks and playgrounds; and for
equipment necessary for the Police, Fire, Street, Traffic and Safety
Departments.
(Ord. 96-O-1533,  passed 3-19-1996; Ord.  03-O-2016,  passed 3-18-2003; Ord.
04-O-2146,  passed 7-6-2004)
§ 880.15  CREDIT FOR TAX PAID TO ANOTHER MUNICIPALITY.
   (a)   Where a resident of the municipality is subject to a municipal income
tax in another municipality, he or she shall be entitled to a credit as
hereinafter set forth.
   (b)   Every individual taxpayer who resides in the municipality who receives
net profits, salaries, commissions or other personal compensation for work done
or services performed or rendered outside of the municipality, if it be made to
appear that he or she has paid a municipal income tax on the same income
taxable under this chapter to another municipality, shall be allowed a credit
against the tax imposed by this chapter of an amount not to exceed one-half of
1%  so paid by him or her or in his or her behalf to such other municipality.
The credit shall not exceed one-half of 1% of the tax assessed by this chapter
on such income earned in such other municipality or municipalities where such
tax is paid.
   (c)   A claim for refund or credit under this section shall be made in such
manner as the Administrator may by regulation provide.
(Ord. 93-O-1345, passed 3-16-1993; Ord. 04-O-2146, passed 7-6-2004)
§ 880.16  COLLECTION OF TAX AFTER EFFECTIVE PERIOD OF CHAPTER.
   (a)   This chapter shall continue effective insofar as the levy of taxes is
concerned until repealed, and insofar as the collection of taxes levied
hereunder and actions or proceedings for collecting any tax so levied or
enforcing any provisions of this chapter are concerned, it shall continue
effective until all of the taxes levied hereunder are fully paid and any and
all suits and prosecutions for the collection of such taxes or for the
punishment of violations of this chapter shall have been fully terminated,
subject to the limitations contained in §§
880.11 and
880.12.
   (b)   Annual returns due for all or any part of the last effective year of
this chapter shall be due on the date provided in §
880.05 and
880.06 as though the same were continuing.
(Ord. 73-O-66, passed 11-20-1973; Ord. 04-O-2146, passed 7-6-2004)
§ 880.17  CHECK CHARGES.
   A charge of twenty dollars ($20.00) shall be added to any tax due when any
check in payment of taxes, penalties or interest is returned unpaid by the bank
or respective financial institution.  Such charge shall offset the cost of
additional bookkeeping and processing and shall be levied regardless of any
charge which may be levied against the maker by his or her bank or respective
financial institution. Notice by the Administrator of his or her duly
authorized employee to the taxpayer that a check has been returned unpaid is
not required nor is notice of the above charge required.  The tender of payment
of tax, penalties, fees, charges or interest shall not be considered as
received so long as such remains unpaid.
(Ord. 04-O-2146, passed 7-6-2004)
§ 880.18  SAVING CLAUSE.
   If any sentence, clause, section or part of this chapter, or any tax against
any individual or any of the several groups specified herein, is found to be
unconstitutional, illegal or invalid, such unconstitutionality, illegality or
invalidity shall affect only such clause, sentence, section or part of this
chapter and shall not affect or impair any of the remaining provisions,
sentences, clauses, sections or other parts of this chapter.  It is hereby
declared to be the intention of the Council of the municipality that this
chapter would have been adopted had such unconstitutional, illegal or invalid
sentence, clause, section or part thereof had not been included herein.
(Ord. 04-O-2146, passed 7-6-2004)
§ 880.19  REPEAL CLAUSE.
   This chapter hereby repeals all past income tax ordinances but shall not
affect collection of taxes due as a result of said ordinances.
(Ord. 04-O-2146, passed 7-6-2004)
§ 880.99  PENALTY.
   (a)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter, for which no
penalty is otherwise provided, is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree
and shall be fined not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisoned
not more than six months, or both, for each offense.  A separate offense shall
be deemed committed each day during or on which a violation occurs or
continues.
   (b)   In addition to the penalty set forth in division (a) hereof, whoever
violates §
880.09(d) shall be guilty of an offense punishable by immediate dismissal.
(Ord. 04-O-2146, passed 7-6-2004)
CHAPTER 881:  EARNED INCOME TAX REGULATIONS EFFECTIVE BEGINNING JANUARY 1, 2016
Section
881.01   Authority to levy tax; purposes of tax; rate.
881.02   Effective date.
881.03   Definitions.
881.04   Income subject to tax for individuals.
881.05   Collection at source.
881.06   Income subject to net profit tax.
881.07   Declaration of estimated tax.
881.08   Credit  for tax paid.
881.09   Annual return.
881.10   Interest, fees and charges.
881.11   Audit.
881.12   Rounding.
881.13   Authority and powers of the Tax Administrator.
881.14   Confidentiality.
881.15   Fraud.
881.16   Opinion of the Tax Administrator.
881.17   Assessment; appeal based on presumption of delivery.
881.18   Local Board of Tax Review; appeal to Local Board of Tax Review.
881.19   Actions to recover; statute of limitations.
881.97   Collection of tax after termination of chapter.
881.98   Savings clause.
881.99   Penalty.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Earned income tax regulations effective through December 31, 2015 - see B.R.
& T.
Ch. 880
§ 881.01  AUTHORITY TO LEVY TAX; PURPOSES OF TAX; RATE.
   (a)   Authority to levy tax.
      (1)   The tax on income and the withholding tax established by this
Chapter 881 are authorized by Article XVIII, Section 3 of the Ohio
Constitution. The tax on income and the withholding tax established by this
Chapter 881 are deemed to be levied in accordance with, and to be consistent
with, the provisions and limitations of Ohio Revised Code 718 (ORC 718). This
chapter is deemed to incorporate the provisions of ORC 718.
      (2)   The tax is an annual tax levied on the income of every person
residing in or earning or receiving income in the municipal corporation, and
shall be measured by municipal taxable income. The municipality shall tax
income at a uniform rate. The tax is levied on municipal taxable income, as
defined herein.
   (b)   Purposes of tax; rate.  A tax of 1% to provide funds for the purposes
of general municipal operations, maintenance, new equipment, extension and
enlargement of municipal services and facilities and capital improvements of
this municipality, there shall be, and is hereby levied, a tax on salaries,
wages, commissions and other compensation, and on net profits as hereinafter
provided.
   (c)   Allocation of funds. The funds collected under the provisions of this
chapter shall be deposited in the income tax fund, and such funds collected for
the tax period beginning January 1, 2003, and for an indefinite number of tax
periods thereafter shall be disbursed in the following order, to-wit:
      (1)   Such part thereof as shall be necessary to defray all costs of
collecting the taxes and the costs of administering and enforcing the
provisions thereof;
      (2)   Not more than 50% of the net available income tax receipts received
annually may be used to defray operating expenses of the municipality.
      (3)   At least 50% of the net available income tax receipts received
annually shall be set aside and used for capital improvements for the
municipality, including, but not limited to, development and construction of
storm sewers and street improvements; for public buildings, parks and
playgrounds; and for equipment necessary for the Police, Fire, Street, and
Public Safety Departments.
   (d)   Statement of procedural history; state mandated changes to municipal
income tax.
      (1)   Significant and wide-ranging amendments to Ohio R.C. Chapter 718
were enacted by Am Sub HB 5, passed by the 130th General Assembly, and signed
by Governor Kasich on December 19, 2014, and H.B. 5 required municipal
corporations to conform to and adopt the provisions of Ohio R.C. Chapter 718 in
order to have the authority to impose, enforce, administer, and collect a
municipal income tax.
      (2)   As mandated by H.B. 5, municipal income tax Ordinance 15-O-2839,
effective January 1, 2016, comprehensively amends
Chapter 880 as hereinafter set forth in accordance with the provisions of Ohio
R.C. Chapter 718 to allow the municipality to continue the income tax and
withholding tax administration and collection efforts on behalf of the
municipality.
(Ord. 15-O-2839, passed 11-17-2015)
§ 881.02  EFFECTIVE DATE.
   (a)   Ordinance 15-O-2839, effective January 1, 2016, and corresponding
changes to Ohio R.C. Chapter 718, apply to municipal taxable years beginning on
or after January 1, 2016. All provisions of this
Chapter 881 apply to taxable years beginning 2016 and succeeding taxable years.
   (b)   Ordinance 15-O-2839 does not repeal the existing sections of
Chapter 880 for any taxable year prior to 2016, but rather amends
Chapter 880 (herein designated as
Chapter 881) effective January 1, 2016. For municipal taxable years beginning
before January 1, 2016, the municipality shall continue to administer, audit,
and enforce the income tax of the municipality under Ohio R.C. Chapter 718 and
ordinances and resolutions of the municipality as that chapter and those
ordinances and resolutions existed before January 1, 2016.
(Ord. 15-O-2839, passed 11-17-2015)
§ 881.03  DEFINITIONS.
   (a)   Any term used in this chapter that is not otherwise defined in this
chapter has the same meaning as when used in a comparable context in laws of
the United States relating to federal income taxation or in Title LVII of the
Ohio Revised Code, unless a different meaning is clearly required. If a term
used in this chapter that is not otherwise defined in this chapter is used in a
comparable context in both the laws of the United States relating to federal
income tax and in Title LVII of the Ohio Revised Code and the use is not
consistent, then the use of the term in the laws of the United States relating
to federal income tax shall control over the use of the term in Title LVII of
the Ohio Revised Code.
   (b)   For purposes of this section, the singular shall include the plural,
and the masculine shall include the feminine and the gender-neutral.
   (c)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   “Adjusted federal taxable income,” for a person required to file as
a C corporation, or for a person that has elected to be taxed as a C
corporation under division (c)(23)D. of this section, means a C corporation’s
federal taxable income before net operating losses and special deductions as
determined under the Internal Revenue Code, adjusted as follows:
         A.   Deduct intangible income to the extent included in federal
taxable income. The deduction shall be allowed regardless of whether the
intangible income relates to assets used in a trade or business or assets held
for the production of income;
         B.   Add an amount equal to 5% of intangible income deducted under
division (c)(1)A. of this section, but excluding that portion of intangible
income directly related to the sale, exchange, or other disposition of property
described in Section 1221 of the Internal Revenue Code;
         C.   Add any losses allowed as a deduction in the computation of
federal taxable income if the losses directly relate to the sale, exchange, or
other disposition of an asset described in Section 1221 or 1231 of the Internal
Revenue Code;
         D.   1.   Except as provided in division (c)(1)D.2. of this section,
deduct income and gain included in federal taxable income to the extent the
income and gain directly relate to the sale, exchange, or other disposition of
an asset described in Section 1221 or 1231 of the Internal Revenue Code;
            2.   Division (c)(1)D.1. of this section does not apply to the
extent the income or gain is income or gain described in Section 1245 or 1250
of the Internal Revenue Code.
         E.   Add taxes on or measured by net income allowed as a deduction in
the computation of federal taxable income;
         F.   In the case of a real estate investment trust or regulated
investment company, add all amounts with respect to dividends to, distributions
to, or amounts set aside for or credited to the benefit of investors and
allowed as a deduction in the computation of federal taxable income;
         G.   Deduct, to the extent not otherwise deducted or excluded in
computing federal taxable income, any income derived from a transfer agreement
or from the enterprise transferred under that agreement under Ohio R.C.
4313.02;
         H.   1.   Except as limited by divisions (c)(1)H.2., 3., and 4. of
this section, deduct any net operating loss incurred by the person in a taxable
year beginning on or after January 1, 2017. The amount of such net operating
loss shall be deducted from net profit that is reduced by exempt income to the
extent necessary to reduce municipal taxable income to zero, with any remaining
unused portion of the net operating loss carried forward to not more than five
consecutive taxable years following the taxable year in which the loss was
incurred, but in no case for more years than necessary for the deduction to be
fully utilized.
            2.   No person shall use the deduction allowed by division (c)(1)H.
of this section to offset qualifying wages.
            3.   a.   For taxable years beginning in 2018, 2019, 2020, 2021, or
2022, a person may not deduct, for purposes of an income tax levied by a
municipal corporation that levies an income tax before January 1, 2016, more
than 50% of the amount of the deduction otherwise allowed by division
(c)(1)H.1. of this section.
               b.   For taxable years beginning in 2023 or thereafter, a person
may deduct, for purposes of an income tax levied by a municipal corporation
that levies an income tax before January 1, 2016, the full amount allowed by
division (c)(1)H.1. of this section.
            4.   Any pre-2017 net operating loss carryforward deduction that is
available must be utilized before a taxpayer may deduct any amount pursuant to
division (c)(1)H. of this section.
            5.   Nothing in division (c)(1)H.1.a. of this section precludes a
person from carrying forward, for use with respect to any return filed for a
taxable year beginning after 2018, any amount of net operating loss that was
not fully utilized by operation of division (c)(1)H.3.a. of this section. To
the extent that an amount of net operating loss that was not fully utilized in
one or more taxable years by operation of division (c)(1)H.3.a. of this section
is carried forward for use with respect to a return filed for a taxable year
beginning in 2019, 2020, 2021, or 2022, the limitation described in division
(c)(1)H.3.a. of this section shall apply to the amount carried forward.
         I.   Deduct any net profit of a pass-through entity owned directly or
indirectly by the taxpayer and included in the taxpayer’s federal taxable
income unless an affiliated group of corporations includes that net profit in
the group’s federal taxable income in accordance with §
881.06(c)(5)C.2. of this chapter.
         J.   Add any loss incurred by a pass-through entity owned directly or
indirectly by the taxpayer and included in the taxpayer’s federal taxable
income unless an affiliated group of corporations includes that loss in the
group’s federal taxable income in accordance with §
881.06(c)(5)C.2. of this chapter.
         K.   If the taxpayer is not a C corporation, is not a disregarded
entity that has made the election described in division (c)(47)B. of this
section, is not a publicly traded partnership that has made the election
described in division (c)(23)D. of this section, and is not an individual, the
taxpayer shall compute adjusted federal taxable income under this section as if
the taxpayer were a C corporation, except guaranteed payments and other similar
amounts paid or accrued to a partner, former partner, shareholder, former
shareholder, member, or former member shall not be allowed as a deductible
expense unless such payments are in consideration for the use of capital and
treated as payment of interest under Section 469 of the Internal Revenue Code
or United States treasury regulations. Amounts paid or accrued to a qualified
self-employed retirement plan with respect to a partner, former partner,
shareholder, former shareholder, member, or former member of the taxpayer,
amounts paid or accrued to or for health insurance for a partner, former
partner, shareholder, former shareholder, member, or former member, and amounts
paid or accrued to or for life insurance for a partner, former partner,
shareholder, former shareholder, member, or former member shall not be allowed
as a deduction.
         L.   Nothing in division (c)(1) of this section shall be construed as
allowing the taxpayer to add or deduct any amount more than once or shall be
construed as allowing any taxpayer to deduct any amount paid to or accrued for
purposes of federal self-employment tax.
      (2)   “Assessment.”
         A.   Means any of the following:
            1.   A written finding by the Tax Administrator that a person has
underpaid municipal income tax, or owes penalty and interest, or any
combination of tax, penalty, or interest, to the municipal corporation;
            2.   A full or partial denial of a refund request issued under §
881.09(f)(2)B. of this chapter;
            3.   A Tax Administrator’s denial of a taxpayer’s request for use
of an alternative apportionment method, issued under §
881.06(b)(2)B. of this chapter; or
            4.   A Tax Administrator’s requirement for a taxpayer to use an
alternative apportionment method, issued under §
881.06(b)(2)c. of this chapter.
            5.   For purposes of division (c)(2)A.1., 2., 3., and 4. of this
section, an assessment shall commence the person’s time limitation for making
an appeal to the Local Board of Tax Review pursuant to §
881.18 of this chapter, and shall have “ASSESSMENT” written in all capital
letters at the top of such finding.
         B.   “Assessment” does not include notice(s) denying a request for
refund issued under §
881.09(f)(2)C. of this chapter, a billing statement notifying a taxpayer of
current or past-due balances owed to the municipal corporation, a Tax
Administrator’s request for additional information, a notification to the
taxpayer of mathematical errors, or a Tax Administrator’s other written
correspondence to a person or taxpayer that does not meet the criteria
prescribed by division (c)(2)A. of this section.
      (3)   “Audit” means the examination of a person or the inspection of the
books, records, memoranda, or accounts of a person, ordered to appear before
the Tax Administrator, for the purpose of determining liability for a municipal
income tax.
      (4)   “Board of Review” has same meaning as “Local Board of Tax Review.”
      (5)   “Calendar quarter” means the three-month period ending on the last
day of March, June, September, or December.
      (6)   “Casino operator” and “casino facility” have the same meanings as
in Ohio R.C. 3772.01.
      (7)   “Certified mail,” “express mail,” “United States mail,” “postal
service,” and similar terms include any delivery service authorized pursuant to
Ohio R.C. 5703.056.
      (8)   “Compensation” means any form of remuneration paid to an employee
for personal services.
      (9)   “Disregarded entity” means a single member limited liability
company, a qualifying subchapter S subsidiary, or another entity if the
company, subsidiary, or entity is a disregarded entity for federal income tax
purposes.
      (10)   “Domicile” means the true, fixed and permanent home of the
taxpayer to which, whenever absent, the taxpayer intends to return.
      (11)   “Exempt income” means all of the following:
         A.   The military pay or allowances of members of the armed forces of
the United States or members of their reserve components, including the
national guard of any state;
         B.   1.   Except as provided in division (c)(11)B.2. of this section,
intangible income;
            2.   A municipal corporation that taxed any type of intangible
income on March 29, 1988, pursuant to Section 3 of S.B. 238 of the 116th
General Assembly, may continue to tax that type of income if a majority of the
electors of the municipal corporation voting on the question of whether to
permit the taxation of that type of intangible income after 1988 voted in favor
thereof at an election held on November 8, 1988.
         C.   Social security benefits, railroad retirement benefits,
unemployment compensation, pensions, retirement benefit payments, payments from
annuities, and similar payments made to an employee or to the beneficiary of an
employee under a retirement program or plan, disability payments received from
private industry or local, state, or federal governments or from charitable,
religious, or educational organizations, and the proceeds of sickness,
accident, or liability insurance policies. As used in division (c)(11)C. of
this section, “unemployment compensation” does not include supplemental
unemployment compensation described in Section 3402(o)(2) of the Internal
Revenue Code.
         D.   The income of religious, fraternal, charitable, scientific,
literary, or educational institutions to the extent such income is derived from
tax-exempt real estate, tax-exempt tangible or intangible property, or tax-
exempt activities.
         E.   Compensation paid under Ohio R.C. 3501.28 or 3501.36 to a person
serving as a precinct election official to the extent that such compensation
does not exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for the taxable year. Such
compensation in excess of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for the taxable year
may be subject to taxation by a municipal corporation. A municipal corporation
shall not require the payer of such compensation to withhold any tax from that
compensation.
         F.   Dues, contributions, and similar payments received by charitable,
religious, educational, or literary organizations or labor unions, lodges, and
similar organizations;
         G.   Alimony and child support received;
         H.   Awards for personal injuries or for damages to property from
insurance proceeds or otherwise, excluding compensation paid for lost salaries
or wages or awards for punitive damages;
         I.   Income of a public utility when that public utility is subject to
the tax levied under
Ohio R.C. 5727.24 or 5727.30. Division (c)(11)I. of this section does not apply
for purposes of Ohio R.C. Chapter 5745.
         J.   Gains from involuntary conversions, interest on federal
obligations, items of income subject to a tax levied by the state and that a
municipal corporation is specifically prohibited by law from taxing, and income
of a decedent’s estate during the period of administration except such income
from the operation of a trade or business;
         K.   Compensation or allowances excluded from federal gross income
under Section 107 of the Internal Revenue Code;
         L.   Employee compensation that is not qualifying wages as defined in
division (c)(34) of this section;
         M.   Compensation paid to a person employed within the boundaries of a
United States Air Force base under the jurisdiction of the United States Air
Force that is used for the housing of members of the United States Air Force
and is a center for Air Force operations, unless the person is subject to
taxation because of residence or domicile. If the compensation is subject to
taxation because of residence or domicile, tax on such income shall be payable
only to the municipal corporation of residence or domicile.
         N.   All of the municipal taxable income earned by individuals under
18 years of age.
         O.   1.   Except as provided in divisions (c)(11)O.2., 3., and 4. of
this section, qualifying wages described in §
881.05(b)(2)A. or (b)(5) of this chapter to the extent the qualifying wages are
not subject to withholding for the municipality under either of those
divisions.
            2.   The exemption provided in division (c)(11)O.1. of this section
does not apply with respect to the municipal corporation in which the employee
resided at the time the employee earned the qualifying wages.
            3.   The exemption provided in division (c)(11)O.1. of this section
does not apply to qualifying wages that an employer elects to withhold under §
881.05(b)(4)B. of this chapter.
            4.   The exemption provided in division (c)(11)O.1. of this section
does not apply to qualifying wages if both of the following conditions apply:
               a.   For qualifying wages described in §
881.05(b)(2)A. of this chapter, the employee’s employer withholds and remits
tax on the qualifying wages to the municipal corporation in which the
employee’s principal place of work is situated, or, for qualifying wages
described in §
881.05(b)(5) of this chapter, the employee’s employer withholds and remits tax
on the qualifying wages to the municipal corporation in which the employer’s
fixed location is located;
               b.   The employee receives a refund of the tax described in
division (c)(11)O.4.a. of this section on the basis of the employee not
performing services in that municipal corporation.
         P.   1.   Except as provided in division (c)(11)P.2. or 3. of this
section, compensation that is not qualifying wages paid to a nonresident
individual for personal services performed in the municipality on not more than
20 days in a taxable year.
            2.   The exemption provided in division (c)(11)P.1. of this section
does not apply under either of the following circumstances:
               a.   The individual’s base of operation is located in the
municipality.
               b.   The individual is a professional athlete, professional
entertainer, or public figure, and the compensation is paid for the performance
of services in the individual’s capacity as a professional athlete,
professional entertainer, or public figure. For purposes of division (c)
(11)P.2.b. of this section, “professional athlete,” “professional entertainer,”
and “public figure” have the same meanings as in §
881.05(b) of this chapter.
            3.   Compensation to which division (c)(11)P. of this section
applies shall be treated as earned or received at the individual’s base of
operation. If the individual does not have a base of operation, the
compensation shall be treated as earned or received where the individual is
domiciled.
            4.   For purposes of division (c)(11)P. of this section, “base of
operation” means the location where an individual owns or rents an office,
storefront, or similar facility to which the individual regularly reports and
at which the individual regularly performs personal services for compensation.
         Q.   Compensation paid to a person for personal services performed for
a political subdivision on property owned by the political subdivision,
regardless of whether the compensation is received by an employee of the
subdivision or another person performing services for the subdivision under a
contract with the subdivision, if the property on which services are performed
is annexed to a municipal corporation pursuant to Ohio R.C. 709.023 on or after
March 27, 2013, unless the person is subject to such taxation because of
residence. If the compensation is subject to taxation because of residence,
municipal income tax shall be payable only to the municipal corporation of
residence.
         R.   Income the taxation of which is prohibited by the constitution or
laws of the United States.
         S.   Any item of income that is exempt income of a pass-through entity
under division (c)(11) of this section is exempt income of each owner of the
pass-through entity to the extent of that owner’s distributive or proportionate
share of that item of the entity’s income.
      (12)   “Form 2106” means Internal Revenue Service form 2106 filed by a
taxpayer pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code.
      (13)   “Generic form” means an electronic or paper form that is not
prescribed by a particular municipal corporation and that is designed for
reporting taxes withheld by an employer, agent of an employer, or other payer,
estimated municipal income taxes, or annual municipal income tax liability,
including a request for refund.
      (14)   “Income” means the following:
         A.   1.   For residents, all income, salaries, qualifying wages,
commissions, and other compensation from whatever source earned or received by
the resident, including the resident’s distributive share of the net profit of
pass-through entities owned directly or indirectly by the resident and any net
profit of the resident, except as provided in division (c)(23)D. of this
section.
            2.   For the purposes of division (c)(14)A.1. of this section:
               a.   Any net operating loss of the resident incurred in the
taxable year and the resident’s distributive share of any net operating loss
generated in the same taxable year and attributable to the resident’s ownership
interest in a pass-through entity shall be allowed as a deduction, for that
taxable year and the following five taxable years, against any other net profit
of the resident or the resident’s distributive share of any net profit
attributable to the resident’s ownership interest in a pass-through entity
until fully utilized, subject to division (c)(14)A.4. of this section;
               b.   The resident’s distributive share of the net profit of each
pass-through entity owned directly or indirectly by the resident shall be
calculated without regard to any net operating loss that is carried forward by
that entity from a prior taxable year and applied to reduce the entity’s net
profit for the current taxable year.
            3.   Division (c)(14)A.2. of this section does not apply with
respect to any net profit or net operating loss attributable to an ownership
interest in an S corporation unless shareholders’ distributive shares of net
profits from S corporations are subject to tax in the municipal corporation as
provided in division (c)(14)E. of this section.
            4.   Any amount of a net operating loss used to reduce a taxpayer’s
net profit for a taxable year shall reduce the amount of net operating loss
that may be carried forward to any subsequent year for use by that taxpayer. In
no event shall the cumulative deductions for all taxable years with respect to
a taxpayer’s net operating loss exceed the original amount of that net
operating loss available to that taxpayer.
         B.   In the case of nonresidents, all income, salaries, qualifying
wages, commissions, and other compensation from whatever source earned or
received by the nonresident for work done, services performed or rendered, or
activities conducted in the municipality, including any net profit of the
nonresident, but excluding the nonresident’s distributive share of the net
profit or loss of only pass-through entities owned directly or indirectly by
the nonresident.
         C.   For taxpayers that are not individuals, net profit of the
taxpayer;
         D.   Lottery, sweepstakes, gambling and sports winnings, winnings from
games of chance, and prizes and awards. If the taxpayer is a professional
gambler for federal income tax purposes, the taxpayer may deduct related
wagering losses and expenses to the extent authorized under the Internal
Revenue Code and claimed against such winnings. Credit for tax withheld or paid
to another municipal corporation on such winnings paid to the municipal
corporation where winnings occur is limited to the credit as specified in §
881.08(a) of this chapter.
         E.   For residents, an S corporation shareholder’s distributive share
of net profits of the S corporation to the extent the distributive share would
be allocated or apportioned to this state under  Ohio R.C. 5733.05(B)(1) and
(2) if the S corporation were a corporation subject to taxes imposed under R.C.
Chapter 5733, and the tax shall apply to the distributive share of a
shareholder of an S corporation in the hands of the shareholder of the S
corporation.
      (15)   “Intangible income” means income of any of the following types:
income yield, interest, capital gains, dividends, or other income arising from
the ownership, sale, exchange, or other disposition of intangible property
including, but not limited to, investments, deposits, money, or credits as
those terms are defined in Ohio R.C. Chapter 5701, and patents, copyrights,
trademarks, trade names, investments in real estate investment trusts,
investments in regulated investment companies, and appreciation on deferred
compensation. “Intangible income” does not include prizes, awards, or other
income associated with any lottery winnings, gambling winnings, or other
similar games of chance.
      (16)   “Internal Revenue Code” means the “Internal Revenue Code of 1986,”
100 Sta. 2085, 26 U.S.C.A. 1, as amended.
      (17)   “Limited liability company” means a limited liability company
formed under Ohio R.C. Chapter 1705 or under the laws of another state.
      (18)   “Local Board of Tax Review” and “Board of Tax Review” means the
entity created under §
881.18 of this chapter.
      (19)   “Municipal corporation” means, in general terms, a status
conferred upon a local government unit, by state law giving the unit certain
autonomous operating authority such as the power of taxation, power of eminent
domain, police power and regulatory power, and includes a joint economic
development district or joint economic development zone that levies an income
tax under Ohio R.C. 715.691, 715.70, 715.71, or 715.74.
      (20)   “Municipal taxable income.”
         A.   Means the following:
            1.   For a person other than an individual, income reduced by
exempt income to the extent otherwise included in income and then, as
applicable, apportioned or sitused to the municipality under §
881.06(b) of this chapter, and further reduced by any pre-2017 net operating
loss carryforward available to the person for the municipality.
            2.   a.   For an individual who is a resident of a municipality
other than a qualified municipal corporation, income reduced by exempt income
to the extent otherwise included in income, then reduced as provided in
division (c)(20)B. of this section, and further reduced by any pre-2017 net
operating loss carryforward available to the individual for the municipality.
               b.   For an individual who is a resident of a qualified
municipal corporation, Ohio adjusted gross income reduced by income exempted,
and increased by deductions excluded, by the qualified municipal corporation
from the qualified municipal corporation’s tax on or before December 31, 2013.
If a qualified municipal corporation, on or before December 31, 2013, exempts
income earned by individuals who are not residents of the qualified municipal
corporation and net profit of persons that are not wholly located within the
qualified municipal corporation, such individual or person shall have no
municipal taxable income for the purposes of the tax levied by the qualified
municipal corporation and may be exempted by the qualified municipal
corporation from the requirements of Ohio R.C. 718.03.
            3.   For an individual who is a nonresident of the municipality,
income reduced by exempt income to the extent otherwise included in income and
then, as applicable, apportioned or sitused to the municipality under §
881.06(b) of this chapter, then reduced as provided in division (c)(20)B. of
this section, and further reduced by any pre-2017 net operating loss
carryforward available to the individual for the municipality.
         B.   In computing the municipal taxable income of a taxpayer who is an
individual, the taxpayer may subtract, as provided in division (c)(20)A.2.a. or
(c)(20)A.3. of this section, the amount of the individual’s employee business
expenses reported on the individual’s form 2106 that the individual deducted
for federal income tax purposes for the taxable year, subject to the limitation
imposed by Section 67 of the Internal Revenue Code. For the municipal
corporation in which the taxpayer is a resident, the taxpayer may deduct all
such expenses allowed for federal income tax purposes. For a municipal
corporation in which the taxpayer is not a resident, the taxpayer may deduct
such expenses only to the extent the expenses are related to the taxpayer’s
performance of personal services in that nonresident municipal corporation.
      (21)   “Municipality” means the City of Columbiana.
      (22)   “Net operating loss” means a loss incurred by a person in the
operation of a trade or business. “Net operating loss” does not include
unutilized losses resulting from basis limitations, at-risk limitations, or
passive activity loss limitations.
      (23)   “Net profit.”
         A.   For a person other than an individual means adjusted federal
taxable income.
         B.   “Net profit” for a person who is an individual means the
individual’s net profit required to be reported on schedule C, schedule E, or
schedule F reduced by any net operating loss carried forward. For the purposes
of this division the net operating loss carried forward shall be calculated and
deducted in the same manner as provided in division (c)(1)H. of this section.
         C.   For the purposes of this chapter, and notwithstanding division
(c)(23)A. of this section, net profit of a disregarded entity shall not be
taxable as against that disregarded entity, but shall instead be included in
the net profit of the owner of the disregarded entity.
         D   1.   For purposes of this chapter, “publicly traded partnership”
means any partnership, an interest in which is regularly traded on an
established securities market. A “publicly traded partnership” may have any
number of partners.
            2.   For the purposes of this chapter, and not withstanding any
other provision of this chapter, the net profit of a publicly traded
partnership that makes the election described in division (c)(23)D. of this
section shall be taxed as if the partnership were a C corporation, and shall
not be treated as the net profit or income of any owner of the partnership.
            3.   A publicly traded partnership that is treated as a partnership
for federal income tax purposes and that is subject to tax on its net profits
in one or more municipal corporations in this state may elect to be treated as
a C corporation for municipal income tax purposes. The publicly traded
partnership shall make the election in every municipal corporation in which the
partnership is subject to taxation on its net profits. The election shall be
made on the annual tax return filed in each such municipal corporation. Once
the election is made, the election is binding for a five-year period beginning
with the first taxable year of the initial election. The election continues to
be binding for each subsequent five-year period unless the taxpayer elects to
discontinue filing municipal income tax returns as a C corporation for
municipal purposes under division (c)(23)D.4. of this section.
            4.   An election to discontinue filing as a C corporation must be
made in the first year following the last year of a five-year election period
in effect under division (c)(23)D.3. of this section. The election to
discontinue filing as a C corporation is binding for a five-year period
beginning with the first taxable year of the election and continues to be
binding for each subsequent five-year period unless the taxpayer elects to
discontinue filing municipal income tax returns as a partnership for municipal
purposes. An election to discontinue filing as a partnership must be made in
the first year following the last year of a five-year election period.
            5.   The publicly traded partnership shall not be required to file
the election with any municipal corporation in which the partnership is not
subject to taxation on its net profits, but division (c)(23)D. of this section
applies to all municipal corporations in which an individual owner of the
partnership resides.
            6.   The individual owners of the partnership not filing as a C
Corporation shall be required to file with their municipal corporation of
residence, and report partnership distribution of net profit.
      (24)   “Nonresident” means an individual that is not a resident of the
municipality.
      (25)   “Ohio Business Gateway” means the online computer network system,
created under Ohio R.C. 125.30, that allows persons to electronically file
business reply forms with state agencies and includes any successor electronic
filing and payment system.
      (26)   “Other payer” means any person, other than an individual’s
employer or the employer’s agent, that pays an individual any amount included
in the federal gross income of the individual. “Other payer” includes casino
operators and video lottery terminal sales agents.
      (27)   “Pass-through entity” means a partnership not treated as an
association taxable as a C corporation for federal income tax purposes, a
limited liability company not treated as an association taxable as a C
corporation for federal income tax purposes, an S corporation, or any other
class of entity from which the income or profits of the entity are given pass-
through treatment for federal income tax purposes. “Pass-through entity” does
not include a trust, estate, grantor of a grantor trust, or disregarded entity.
      (28)   “Pension” means any amount paid to an employee or former employee
that is reported to the recipient on an IRS form 1099-R, or successor form.
Pension does not include deferred compensation, or amounts attributable to
nonqualified deferred compensation plans, reported as FICA/Medicare wages on an
IRS form W-2, Wage and Tax Statement, or successor form.
      (29)   “Person” includes individuals, firms, companies, joint stock
companies, business trusts, estates, trusts, partnerships, limited liability
partnerships, limited liability companies, associations, C corporations, S
corporations, governmental entities, and any other entity.
      (30)   “Postal service” means the United States postal service, or
private delivery service delivering documents and packages within an agreed
upon delivery schedule, or any other carrier service delivering the item.
      (31)   “Postmark date,” “date of postmark,” and similar terms include the
date recorded and marked by a delivery service and recorded electronically to a
database kept in the regular course of its business and marked on the cover in
which the payment or document is enclosed, the date on which the payment or
document was given to the delivery service for delivery.
      (32)   “Pre-2017 net operating loss carryforward.”
         A.   Means any net operating loss incurred in a taxable year beginning
before January 1, 2017, to the extent such loss was permitted, by a resolution
or ordinance of the municipality that was adopted by the municipality before
January 1, 2016, to be carried forward and utilized to offset income or net
profit generated in such municipality in future taxable years.
         B.   For the purpose of calculating municipal taxable income, any pre-
2017 net operating loss carryforward may be carried forward to any taxable
year, including taxable years beginning in 2017 or thereafter, for the number
of taxable years provided in the resolution or ordinance or until fully
utilized, whichever is earlier.
      (33)   “Qualified municipal corporation” means a municipal corporation
that, by resolution or ordinance adopted on or before December 31, 2011,
adopted Ohio adjusted gross income, as defined by Ohio R.C. 5747.01, as the
income subject to tax for the purposes of imposing a municipal income tax.
      (34)   “Qualifying wages” means wages, as defined in Section 3121(a) of
the Internal Revenue Code, without regard to any wage limitations, adjusted as
follows:
         A.   Deduct the following amounts:
            1.   Any amount included in wages if the amount constitutes
compensation attributable to a plan or program described in Section 125 of the
Internal Revenue Code.
            2.   Any amount included in wages if the amount constitutes payment
on account of a disability related to sickness or an accident paid by a party
unrelated to the employer, agent of an employer, or other payer.
            3.   Any amount included in wages that is exempt income.
         B.   Add the following amounts:
            1.   Any amount not included in wages solely because the employee
was employed by the employer before April 1, 1986.
            2.   Any amount not included in wages because the amount arises
from the sale, exchange, or other disposition of a stock option, the exercise
of a stock option, or the sale, exchange, or other disposition of stock
purchased under a stock option. Division (c)(34)B.2. of this section applies
only to those amounts constituting ordinary income.
            3.   Any amount not included in wages if the amount is an amount
described in Section 401(k), 403(b), or 457 of the Internal Revenue Code.
Division (c)(34)B.3. of this section applies only to employee contributions and
employee deferrals.
            4.   Any amount that is supplemental unemployment compensation
benefits described in Section 3402(o)(2) of the Internal Revenue Code and not
included in wages.
            5.   Any amount received that is treated as self-employment income
for federal tax purposes in accordance with Section 1402(a)(8) of the Internal
Revenue Code.
            6.   Any amount not included in wages if all of the following
apply:
               a.   For the taxable year the amount is employee compensation
that is earned outside of the United States and that either is included in the
taxpayer’s gross income for federal income tax purposes or would have been
included in the taxpayer’s gross income for such purposes if the taxpayer did
not elect to exclude the income under Section 911 of the Internal Revenue Code;
               b.   For no preceding taxable year did the amount constitute
wages as defined in Section 3121(a) of the Internal Revenue Code;
               c.   For no succeeding taxable year will the amount constitute
wages; and
               d.   For any taxable year the amount has not otherwise been
added to wages pursuant to either division (c)(34)B. of this section or Ohio
R.C. 718.03 of the Ohio Revised Code, as that section existed before the
effective date of H.B. 5 of the 130th general assembly, March 23, 2015.
      (35)   “Related entity” means any of the following:
         A.   An individual stockholder, or a member of the stockholder’s
family enumerated in Ohio R.C. 318, if the stockholder and the members of the
stockholder’s family own directly, indirectly, beneficially, or constructively,
in the aggregate, at least 50% of the value of the taxpayer’s outstanding
stock;
         B.   A stockholder, or a stockholder’s partnership, estate, trust, or
corporation, if the stockholder and the stockholder’s partnerships, estates,
trusts, or corporations own directly, indirectly, beneficially, or
constructively, in the aggregate, at least 50% of the value of the taxpayer’s
outstanding stock;
         C.   A corporation, or a party related to the corporation in a manner
that would require an attribution of stock from the corporation to the party or
from the party to the corporation under division (c)(35)D. of this section,
provided the taxpayer owns directly, indirectly, beneficially, or
constructively, at least 50% of the value of the corporation’s outstanding
stock;
         D.   The attribution rules described in Section 318 of the Internal
Revenue Code apply for the purpose of determining whether the ownership
requirements in divisions (c)(35)A. to C. of this section have been met.
      (36)   “Related member” means a person that, with respect to the taxpayer
during all or any portion of the taxable year, is either a related entity, a
component member as defined in section 1563(b) of the Internal Revenue Code, or
a person to or from whom there is attribution of stock ownership in accordance
with Section 1563(e) of the Internal Revenue Code except, for purposes of
determining whether a person is a related member under this division, “20%”
shall be substituted for “5%” wherever “5%” appears in Section 1563(e) of the
Internal Revenue Code.
      (37)   “Resident” means an individual who is domiciled in the
municipality as determined under §
881.04(b) of this chapter.
      (38)   “S corporation” means a person that has made an election under
subchapter S of Chapter 1 of Subtitle A of the Internal Revenue Code for its
taxable year.
      (39)   “Schedule C” means Internal Revenue Service schedule C (form 1040)
filed by a taxpayer pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code.
      (40)   “Schedule E” Means Internal Revenue Service schedule E (form 1040)
filed by a taxpayer pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code.
      (41)   “Schedule F” means Internal Revenue Service schedule F (form 1040)
filed by a taxpayer pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code.
      (42)   “Single member limited liability company” means a limited
liability company that has one direct member.
      (43)   “Small employer” means any employer that had total revenue of less
than five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) during the preceding taxable
year. For purposes of this division, “total revenue” means receipts of any type
or kind, including, but not limited to, sales receipts; payments; rents;
profits; gains, dividends, and other investment income; commissions; premiums;
money; property; grants; contributions; donations; gifts; program service
revenue; patient service revenue; premiums; fees, including premium fees and
service fees; tuition payments; unrelated business revenue; reimbursements; any
type of payment from a governmental unit, including grants and other
allocations; and any other similar receipts reported for federal income tax
purposes or under generally accepted accounting principles. “Small employer”
does not include the federal government; any state government, including any
state agency or instrumentality; any political subdivision; or any entity
treated as a government for financial accounting and reporting purposes.
      (44)   “Tax Administrator” means the individual charged with direct
responsibility for administration of an income tax levied by a municipal
corporation in accordance with this chapter, and also includes the following:
         A.   A municipal corporation acting as the agent of another municipal
corporation;
         B.   A person retained by a municipal corporation to administer a tax
levied by the municipal corporation, but only if the municipal corporation does
not compensate the person in whole or in part on a contingency basis;
         C.   The Central Collection Agency (CCA) or the Regional Income Tax
Agency (RITA) or their successors in interest, or another entity organized to
perform functions similar to those performed by the Central Collection Agency
and the Regional Income Tax Agency.
      (45)   “Tax return preparer” means any individual described in Section
7701 (a)(36) of the Internal Revenue Code and 26 C.F.R. 301.7701-15 .
      (46)   “Taxable year” means the corresponding tax reporting period as
prescribed for the taxpayer under the Internal Revenue Code.
      (47)   “Taxpayer.”
         A.   Means a person subject to a tax levied on income by a municipal
corporation in accordance with this chapter. “Taxpayer” does not include a
grantor trust or, except as provided in division (c)(47)B.1. of this section, a
disregarded entity.
         B.   1.   A single member limited liability company that is a
disregarded entity for federal tax purposes may be a separate taxpayer from its
single member in all Ohio municipal corporations in which it either filed as a
separate taxpayer or did not file for its taxable year ending in 2003, if all
of the following conditions are met:
               a.   The limited liability company’s single member is also a
limited liability company.
               b.   The limited liability company and its single member were
formed and doing business in one or more Ohio municipal corporations for at
least five years before January 1, 2004.
               c.   Not later than December 31, 2004, the limited liability
company and its single member each made an election to be treated as a separate
taxpayer under Ohio R.C. 718.01(L) as this section existed on December 31,
2004.
               d.   The limited liability company was not formed for the
purpose of evading or reducing Ohio municipal corporation income tax liability
of the limited liability company or its single member.
               e.   The Ohio municipal corporation that was the primary place
of business of the sole member of the limited liability company consented to
the election.
            2.   For purposes of division (c)(47)B.1.e. of this section, a
municipal corporation was the primary place of business of a limited liability
company if, for the limited liability company’s taxable year ending in 2003,
its income tax liability was greater in that municipal corporation than in any
other municipal corporation in Ohio, and that tax liability to that municipal
corporation for its taxable year ending in 2003 was at least four hundred
thousand dollars ($400,000.00).
      (48)   “Taxpayers’ rights and responsibilities” means the rights provided
to taxpayers in Ohio R.C. 718.11 , 718.12 , 718.19, 718.23, 718.36, 718.37,
718.38, 5717.011 , and 5717.03 and any corresponding ordinances of the
municipality, and the responsibilities of taxpayers to file, report, withhold,
remit, and pay municipal income tax and otherwise comply with Ohio R.C. Chapter
718 and resolutions, ordinances, and rules adopted by a municipal corporation
for the imposition and administration of a municipal income tax.
      (49)   “Video lottery terminal” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C.
3770.21.
      (50)   “Video lottery terminal sales agent” means a lottery sales agent
licensed under Ohio R.C. Chapter 3770 to conduct video lottery terminals on
behalf of the state pursuant to Ohio R.C. 3770.21.
(Ord. 15-O-2839, passed 11-17-2015)
§ 881.04  INCOME SUBJECT TO TAX FOR INDIVIDUALS.
   (a)   Determining municipal taxable income for individuals.
      (1)   “Municipal taxable income” for a resident of the Municipality is
calculated as follows:  “Income” reduced by “exempt income” to the extent such
exempt income is otherwise included in income, reduced by allowable employee
business expense deduction as found in §
881.03(c)(20)B. of this chapter, further reduced by any “pre-2017 net operating
loss carryforward” equals “municipal taxable income.”
         A.   “Income” is defined in §
881.03(c)(14) of this chapter.
            1.   “Qualifying wages” is defined in §
881.03(c)(34).
            2.   “Net profit” is included in “income”, and is defined in §
881.03(c)(23) of this chapter. This section also provides that the net
operating loss carryforward shall be calculated and deducted in the same manner
as provided in §
881.03(c)(1)H. Treatment of net profits received by an individual taxpayer from
rental real estate is provided in §
881.06(b)(5).
            3.   Section
881.03(c)(14) provides the following: offsetting and net operating loss
carryforward treatment in §
881.03(c)(14)A.2.a.; resident’s distributive share of net profit from pass
through entity treatment in §
881.03(c)(14)A.2.b.; treatment of S Corporation distributive share of net
profit in the hands of the shareholder in §
881.03(c)(14)A.3.; restriction of amount of loss permitted to be carried
forward for use by taxpayer in a subsequent taxable year in §
881.03(14)A.4.
            4.   “Pass through entity” is defined in §
881.03(c)(27).
         B.   “Exempt income” is defined in §
881.03(c)(11) of this chapter.
         C.   Allowable employee business expense deduction is described in §
881.03(c)(20)B. of this chapter, and is subject to the limitations provided in
that section.
         D.   “Pre-2017 net operating loss carryforward” is defined in §
881.03(c)(32) of this chapter.
      (2)   “Municipal taxable income” for a nonresident of the municipality is
calculated as follows:  “Income” reduced by “exempt income” to the extent such
exempt income is otherwise included in income, as applicable, apportioned or
sitused to the municipality as provided in §
881.06(b) of this chapter, reduced by allowable employee business expense
deduction as found in §
881.03(c)(20)B. of this chapter, further reduced by any “pre-2017 net operating
loss carryforward” equals “municipal taxable income”.
         A.   “Income” is defined in §
881.03(c)(14) of this chapter.
            1.   “Qualifying wages” is defined in §
881.03(c)(34).
            2.   “Net profit” is included in “income,” and is defined in §
881.03(c)(23) of this chapter. This section also provides that the net
operating loss carryforward shall be calculated and deducted in the same manner
as provided in §
881.03(c)(1)H. “Net profit” for a nonresident individual includes any net
profit of the nonresident, but excludes the distributive share of net profit or
loss of only pass through entity owned directly or indirectly by the
nonresident.
            3.   “Pass through entity” is defined in §
881.03(c)(27).
         B.   “Exempt income” is defined in §
881.03(c)(11) of this chapter.
         C.   “Apportioned or sitused to the municipality as provided in §
881.06(b) of this chapter” includes the apportionment of net profit income
attributable to work done or services performed in the Municipality. Treatment
of net profits received by an individual taxpayer from rental real estate is
provided in §
881.06(b)(5).
         D.   “Allowable employee business expense deduction” as described in §
881.03(c)(20)B. of this chapter, is subject to the limitations provided in that
section. For a nonresident of the municipality, the deduction is limited to the
extent the expenses are related to the performance of personal services by the
nonresident in the municipality.
         E.   “Pre-2017 net operating loss carryforward” is defined in §
881.03(c)(32) of this chapter.
   (b)   Domicile.
      (1)   As used in this section:
         A.   “Domicile” means the true, fixed and permanent home of the
taxpayer to which whenever absent, the taxpayer intends to return.
         B.   An individual is presumed to be domiciled in the municipality for
all or part of a taxable year if the individual was domiciled in the
municipality on the last day of the immediately preceding taxable year or if
the Tax Administrator reasonably concludes that the individual is domiciled in
the municipality for all or part of the taxable year.
         C.   An individual may rebut the presumption of domicile described in
division (b)(1)A. of this section if the individual establishes by a
preponderance of the evidence that the individual was not domiciled in the
municipality for all or part of the taxable year.
      (2)   For the purpose of determining whether an individual is domiciled
in the municipality for all or part of a taxable year, factors that may be
considered include, but are not limited to, the following:
         A.   The individual’s domicile in other taxable years;
         B.   The location at which the individual is registered to vote;
         C.   The address on the individual’s driver’s license;
         D.   The location of real estate for which the individual claimed a
property tax exemption or reduction allowed on the basis of the individual’s
residence or domicile;
         E.   The location and value of abodes owned or leased by the
individual;
         F.   Declarations, written or oral, made by the individual regarding
the individual’s residency;
         G.   The primary location at which the individual is employed.
         H.   The location of educational institutions attended by the
individual’s dependents as defined in Section 152 of the Internal Revenue Code,
to the extent that tuition paid to such educational institution is based on the
residency of the individual or the individual’s spouse in the municipal
corporation or state where the educational institution is located;
         I.   The number of contact periods the individual has with the
municipality. For the purposes of this division, an individual has one “contact
period” with the municipality if the individual is away overnight from the
individual’s abode located outside of the municipality and while away overnight
from that abode spends at least some portion, however minimal, of each of two
consecutive days in the municipality. For purposes of this section, the state’s
contact period test or bright-line test and resulting determination have no
bearing on municipal residency or domicile.
      (3)   All applicable factors are provided in Ohio R.C. 718.012.
   (c)   Exemption for member or employee of General Assembly and certain
judges.
      (1)   Only the municipal corporation of residence shall be permitted to
levy a tax on the income of any member or employee of the Ohio General
Assembly, including the Lieutenant Governor, whose income is received as a
result of services rendered as such member or employee and is paid from
appropriated funds of this state.
      (2)   Only the municipal corporation of residence and the city of
Columbus shall levy a tax on the income of the Chief Justice or a Justice of
the Supreme Court received as a result of services rendered as the Chief
Justice or Justice. Only the municipal corporation of residence shall levy a
tax on the income of a judge sitting by assignment of the Chief Justice or on
the income of a district court of appeals judge sitting in multiple locations
within the district, received as a result of services rendered as a judge.
(Ord. 15-O-2839, passed 11-17-2015)
§ 881.05  COLLECTION AT SOURCE.
   (a)   Collection at source; withholding from qualifying wages.
      (1)   A.   Each employer, agent of an employer, or other payer located or
doing business in the municipality shall withhold from each employee an amount
equal to the qualifying wages of the employee earned by the employee in the
municipality multiplied by the applicable rate of the municipality’s income
tax, except for qualifying wages for which withholding is not required under §
881.05(b) of this chapter or division (a)(4) or (a)(6) of this section. An
employer, agent of an employer, or other payer shall deduct and withhold the
tax from qualifying wages on the date that the employer, agent, or other payer
directly, indirectly, or constructively pays the qualifying wages to, or
credits the qualifying wages to the benefit of, the employee.
         B.   In addition to withholding the amounts required under division
(a)(1)A. of this section, an employer, agent of an employer, or other payer may
also deduct and withhold, on the request of an employee, taxes for the
municipal corporation in which the employee is a resident.
      (2)   An employer, agent of an employer, or other payer shall remit to
the Tax Administrator of the municipality the greater of the income taxes
deducted and withheld or the income taxes required to be deducted and withheld
by the employer, agent, or other payer, along with any report required by the
Tax Administrator to accompany such payment, according to the following
schedule:
         A.   Any employer, agent of an employer, or other payer not required
to make payments under division (a)(2)B. of this section of taxes required to
be deducted and withheld shall make quarterly payments to the Tax Administrator
not later than the last day of the month following the last day of each
calendar quarter.
         B.   Taxes required to be deducted and withheld shall be remitted
monthly to the Tax Administrator if the total taxes deducted and withheld or
required to be deducted and withheld by the employer, agent, or other payer on
behalf of the municipal corporation in the preceding calendar year exceeded two
thousand three hundred ninety-nine dollars ($2,399), or if the total amount of
taxes deducted and withheld or required to be deducted and withheld on behalf
of the municipality in any month of the preceding calendar quarter exceeded two
hundred dollars ($200.00). Payment under division (a)(2)B. of this section
shall be made to the Tax Administrator not later than 15 days after the last
day of each month.
      (3)   An employer, agent of an employer, or other payer shall make and
file a return showing the amount of tax withheld by the employer, agent, or
other payer from the qualifying wages of each employee and remitted to the Tax
Administrator. A return filed by an employer, agent, or other payer under this
division shall be accepted by the municipality as the return required of an
employee whose sole income subject to the tax under this chapter is the
qualifying wages reported by the employee’s employer, agent of an employer, or
other payer, unless the municipality requires all resident individual taxpayers
to file a tax return under §
881.09(a) of this chapter.
      (4)   An employer, agent of an employer, or other payer is not required
to withhold municipal income tax with respect to an individual’s disqualifying
disposition of an incentive stock option if, at the time of the disqualifying
disposition, the individual is not an employee of either the corporation with
respect to whose stock the option has been issued or of such corporation’s
successor entity.
      (5)   A.   An employee is not relieved from liability for a tax by the
failure of the employer, agent of an employer, or other payer to withhold the
tax as required under this chapter or by the employer’s, agent’s, or other
payer’s exemption from the requirement to withhold the tax.
         B.   The failure of an employer, agent of an employer, or other payer
to remit to the municipality the tax withheld relieves the employee from
liability for that tax unless the employee colluded with the employer, agent,
or other payer in connection with the failure to remit the tax withheld.
      (6)   Compensation deferred before June 26, 2003, is not subject to any
municipal corporation income tax or municipal income tax withholding
requirement to the extent the deferred compensation does not constitute
qualifying wages at the time the deferred compensation is paid or distributed.
      (7)   Each employer, agent of an employer, or other payer required to
withhold taxes is liable for the payment of that amount required to be
withheld, whether or not such taxes have been withheld, and such amount shall
be deemed to be held in trust for the municipality until such time as the
withheld amount is remitted to the Tax Administrator.
      (8)   On or before the last day of February of each year, an employer
shall file a withholding reconciliation return with the Tax Administrator
listing the names, addresses, and social security numbers of all employees from
whose qualifying wages tax was withheld or should have been withheld for the
municipality during the preceding calendar year, the amount of tax withheld, if
any, from each such employee’s qualifying wage, the total amount of qualifying
wages paid to such employee during the preceding calendar year, the name of
every other municipal corporation for which tax was withheld or should have
been withheld from such employee during the preceding calendar year, any other
information required for federal income tax reporting purposes on Internal
Revenue Service form W-2 or its equivalent form with respect to such employee,
and other information as may be required by the Tax Administrator.
      (9)   The officer or the employee of the employer, agent of an employer,
or other payer with control or direct supervision of or charged with the
responsibility for withholding the tax or filing the reports and making
payments as required by this section, shall be personally liable for a failure
to file a report or pay the tax due as required by this section. The
dissolution of an employer, agent of an employer, or other payer does not
discharge the officer’s or employee’s liability for a failure of the employer,
agent of an employer, or other payer to file returns or pay any tax due.
      (10)   An employer is required to deduct and withhold municipal income
tax on tips and gratuities received by the employer’s employees and
constituting qualifying wages only to the extent that the tips and gratuities
are under the employer’s control. For the purposes of this division, a tip or
gratuity is under the employer’s control if the tip or gratuity is paid by the
customer to the employer for subsequent remittance to the employee, or if the
customer pays the tip or gratuity by credit card, debit card, or other
electronic means.
      (11)   A Tax Administrator shall consider any tax withheld by an employer
at the request of an employee when such tax is not otherwise required to be
withheld by this chapter to be tax required to be withheld and remitted for the
purposes of this section.
   (b)   Collection at source; occasional entrant.
      (1)   For the purpose of this division (b), the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
         A.   “Employer” includes a person that is a related member to or of an
employer.
         B.   “Fixed location” means a permanent place of doing business in
this state, such as an office, warehouse, storefront, or similar location owned
or controlled by an employer.
         C.   “Principal place of work.”
            1.   Means the fixed location to which an employee is required to
report for employment duties on a regular and ordinary basis. If the employee
is not required to report for employment duties on a regular and ordinary basis
to a fixed location, “principal place of work” means the worksite location in
this state to which the employee is required to report for employment duties on
a regular and ordinary basis. If the employee is not required to report for
employment duties on a regular and ordinary basis to a fixed location or
worksite location, “principal place of work” means the location in this state
at which the employee spends the greatest number of days in a calendar year
performing services for or on behalf of the employee’s employer.
            2.   If there is not a single municipal corporation in which the
employee spent the “greatest number of days in a calendar year” performing
services for or on behalf of the employer, but instead there are two or more
municipal corporations in which the employee spent an identical number of days
that is greater than the number of days the employee spent in any other
municipal corporation, the employer shall allocate any of the employee’s
qualifying wages subject to division (b)(2)A.1. of this section among those two
or more municipal corporations. The allocation shall be made using any fair and
reasonable method, including, but not limited to, an equal allocation among
such municipal corporations or an allocation based upon the time spent or sales
made by the employee in each such municipal corporation. A municipal
corporation to which qualifying wages are allocated under this division shall
be the employee’s “principal place of work” with respect to those qualifying
wages for the purposes of this section.
            3.   For the purposes of this division, the location at which an
employee spends a particular day shall be deemed in accordance with division
(b)(2)B. of this section, except that “location” shall be substituted for
“municipal corporation” wherever “municipal corporation” appears in that
division.
         D.   “Professional athlete” means an athlete who performs services in
a professional athletic event for wages or other remuneration.
         E.   “Professional entertainer” means a person who performs services
in the professional performing arts for wages or other remuneration on a per-
event basis.
         F.   “Public figure” means a person of prominence who performs
services at discrete events, such as speeches, public appearances, or similar
events, for wages or other remuneration on a per-event basis.
         G.   “Worksite location” means a construction site or other temporary
worksite in this state at which the employer provides services for more than 20
days during the calendar year. “Worksite location” does not include the home of
an employee.
      (2)   A.   Subject to divisions (b)(3), (b)(5), (b)(6), and (b)(7) of
this section, an employer is not required to withhold municipal income tax on
qualifying wages paid to an employee for the performance of personal services
in a municipal corporation that imposes such a tax if the employee performed
such services in the municipal corporation on 20 or fewer days in a calendar
year, unless one of the following conditions applies:
            1.   The employee’s principal place of work is located in the
municipality.
            2.   The employee performed services at one or more presumed
worksite locations in the municipality. For the purposes of this division,
“presumed worksite location” means a construction site or other temporary
worksite in this state at which the employer provides services that can
reasonably be expected by the employer to last more than 20 days in a calendar
year. Services can “reasonably be expected by the employer to last more than 20
days” if either of the following applies at the time the services commence:
               a.   The nature of the services are such that it will require
more than 20 days of actual services to complete the services;
               b.   The agreement between the employer and its customer to
perform services at a location requires the employer to perform actual services
at the location for more than 20 days.
            3.   The employee is a resident of the municipality and has
requested that the employer withhold tax from the employee’s qualifying wages
as provided in §
881.05(a) of this chapter.
            4.   The employee is a professional athlete, professional
entertainer, or public figure, and the qualifying wages are paid for the
performance of services in the employee’s capacity as a professional athlete,
professional entertainer, or public figure within the municipality.
         B.   For the purposes of division (b)(2)A. of this section, an
employee shall be considered to have spent a day performing services in a
municipal corporation only if the employee spent more time performing services
for or on behalf of the employer in that municipal corporation than in any
other municipal corporation on that day. For the purposes of determining the
amount of time an employee spent in a particular location, the time spent
performing one or more of the following activities shall be considered to have
been spent at the employee’s principal place of work:
            1.   Traveling to the location at which the employee will first
perform services for the employer for the day;
            2.   Traveling from a location at which the employee was performing
services for the employer to any other location;
            3.   Traveling from any location to another location in order to
pick up or load, for the purpose of transportation or delivery, property that
has been purchased, sold, assembled, fabricated, repaired, refurbished,
processed, remanufactured, or improved by the employee’s employer;
            4.   Transporting or delivering property described in division (b)
(2)B.3. of this section, provided that, upon delivery of the property, the
employee does not temporarily or permanently affix the property to real estate
owned, used, or controlled by a person other than the employee’s employer;
            5.   Traveling from the location at which the employee makes the
employee’s final delivery or pick-up for the day to either the employee’s
principal place of work or a location at which the employee will not perform
services for the employer.
      (3)   If the principal place of work of an employee is located in a
municipal corporation that imposes an income tax in accordance with this
chapter, the exception from withholding requirements described in division (b)
(2)A. of this section shall apply only if, with respect to the employee’s
qualifying wages described in that division, the employer withholds and remits
tax on such qualifying wages to the municipal corporation in which the
employee’s principal place of work is located.
      (4)   A.   Except as provided in division (b)(4)B. of this section, if,
during a calendar year, the number of days an employee spends performing
personal services in a municipal corporation exceeds the 20-day threshold
described in division (b)(2)A. of this section, the employer shall withhold and
remit tax to that municipal corporation for any subsequent days in that
calendar year on which the employer pays qualifying wages to the employee for
personal services performed in that municipal corporation.
         B.   An employer required to begin withholding tax for a municipal
corporation under division (b)(4)A. of this section may elect to withhold tax
for that municipal corporation for the first 20 days on which the employer paid
qualifying wages to the employee for personal services performed in that
municipal corporation.
         C.   If an employer makes the election described in division (b)(4)B.
of this section, the taxes withheld and paid by such an employer during those
first 20 days to the municipal corporation in which the employee’s principal
place of work is located are refundable to the employee.
      (5)   Without regard to the number of days in a calendar year on which an
employee performs personal services in any municipal corporation, an employer
shall withhold municipal income tax on all of the employee’s qualifying wages
for a taxable year and remit that tax only to the municipal corporation in
which the employer’s fixed location is located if the employer qualifies as a
small employer as defined in §
881.03 of this chapter. To determine whether an employer qualifies as a small
employer for a taxable year, a Tax Administrator may require the employer to
provide the Tax Administrator with the employer’s federal income tax return for
the preceding taxable year.
      (6)   Divisions (b)(2)A. and (b)(4) of this section shall not apply to
the extent that a Tax Administrator and an employer enter into an agreement
regarding the manner in which the employer shall comply with the requirements
of §
881.05(a) of this chapter.
      (7)   A.   In the case of a person performing personal services at a
petroleum refinery located in a municipal corporation that imposes a tax on
income, an employer is not required to withhold municipal income tax on the
qualifying wages of such a person if the person performs those services on 12
or fewer days in a calendar year, unless the principal place of work of the
employer is located in another municipal corporation in this state that imposes
a tax applying to compensation paid to the person for services performed on
those days and the person is not liable to that other municipal corporation for
tax on the compensation paid for such services. For the purposes of this
division, a petroleum refinery is a facility with a standard industrial
classification code facility classification of 2911, petroleum refining.
         B.   Notwithstanding division (b)(4) of this section, if, during a
calendar year, the number of days an individual performs personal services at a
petroleum refinery exceeds 12, the employer shall withhold tax for the
municipal corporation for the first 12 days for which the employer paid
qualifying wages to the individual and for all subsequent days in the calendar
year on which the individual performed services at the refinery.
   (c)   Collection at source; casino and VLT.
      (1)   The municipality shall require a casino facility or a casino
operator, as defined in Section 6(C)(9) of Article XV, Ohio Constitution, and
Ohio R.C. 3772.01, respectively, or a lottery sales agent conducting video
lottery terminals sales on behalf of the state to withhold and remit municipal
income tax with respect to amounts other than qualifying wages as provided in
this division (c).
      (2)   If a person’s winnings at a casino facility are an amount for which
reporting to the Internal Revenue Service of the amount is required by Section
6041 of the Internal Revenue Code, as amended, the casino operator shall deduct
and withhold municipal income tax from the person’s winnings at the rate of the
tax imposed by the municipal corporation in which the casino facility is
located.
      (3)   Amounts deducted and withheld by a casino operator are held in
trust for the benefit of the municipal corporation to which the tax is owed.
         A.   On or before the tenth day of each month, the casino operator
shall file a return electronically with the Tax Administrator of the
municipality, providing the name, address, and social security number of the
person from whose winnings amounts were deducted and withheld, the amount of
each such deduction and withholding during the preceding calendar month, the
amount of the winnings from which each such amount was withheld, the type of
casino gaming that resulted in such winnings, and any other information
required by the Tax Administrator. With this return, the casino operator shall
remit electronically to the municipality all amounts deducted and withheld
during the preceding month.
         B.   Annually, on or before the thirty-first day of January, a casino
operator shall file an annual return electronically with the Tax Administrator
of the municipal corporation in which the casino facility is located,
indicating the total amount deducted and withheld during the preceding calendar
year. The casino operator shall remit electronically with the annual return any
amount that was deducted and withheld and that was not previously remitted. If
the name, address, or social security number of a person or the amount deducted
and withheld with respect to that person was omitted on a monthly return for
that reporting period, that information shall be indicated on the annual
return.
         C.   Annually, on or before the thirty-first day of January, a casino
operator shall issue an information return to each person with respect to whom
an amount has been deducted and withheld during the preceding calendar year.
The information return shall show the total amount of municipal income tax
deducted from the person’s winnings during the preceding year. The casino
operator shall provide to the Tax Administrator a copy of each information
return issued under this division. The Administrator may require that such
copies be transmitted electronically.
         D.   A casino operator that fails to file a return and remit the
amounts deducted and withheld shall be personally liable for the amount
withheld and not remitted. Such personal liability extends to any penalty and
interest imposed for the late filing of a return or the late payment of tax
deducted and withheld.
         E.   If a casino operator sells the casino facility or otherwise quits
the casino business, the amounts deducted and withheld along with any penalties
and interest thereon are immediately due and payable. The successor shall
withhold an amount of the purchase money that is sufficient to cover the
amounts deducted and withheld along with any penalties and interest thereon
until the predecessor casino operator produces either of the following:
            1.   A receipt from the Tax Administrator showing that the amounts
deducted and withheld and penalties and interest thereon have been paid;
            2.   A certificate from the Tax Administrator indicating that no
amounts are due. If the successor fails to withhold purchase money, the
successor is personally liable for the payment of the amounts deducted and
withheld and penalties and interest thereon.
         F.   The failure of a casino operator to deduct and withhold the
required amount from a person’s winnings does not relieve that person from
liability for the municipal income tax with respect to those winnings.
      (4)   If a person’s prize award from a video lottery terminal is an
amount for which reporting to the Internal Revenue Service is required by
Section 6041 of the Internal Revenue Code, as amended, the video lottery sales
agent shall deduct and withhold municipal income tax from the person’s prize
award at the rate of the tax imposed by the municipal corporation in which the
video lottery terminal facility is located.
      (5)   Amounts deducted and withheld by a video lottery sales agent are
held in trust for the benefit of the municipal corporation to which the tax is
owed.
         A.   The video lottery sales agent shall issue to a person from whose
prize award an amount has been deducted and withheld a receipt for the amount
deducted and withheld, and shall obtain from the person receiving a prize award
the person’s name, address, and social security number in order to facilitate
the preparation of returns required by this division (c).
         B.   On or before the tenth day of each month, the video lottery sales
agent shall file a return electronically with the Tax Administrator of the
municipality providing the names, addresses, and social security numbers of the
persons from whose prize awards amounts were deducted and withheld, the amount
of each such deduction and withholding during the preceding calendar month, the
amount of the prize award from which each such amount was withheld, and any
other information required by the Tax Administrator. With the return, the video
lottery sales agent shall remit electronically to the Tax Administrator all
amounts deducted and withheld during the preceding month.
         C.   A video lottery sales agent shall maintain a record of all
receipts issued under division (c)(5) of this section and shall make those
records available to the Tax Administrator upon request. Such records shall be
maintained in accordance with Ohio R.C. 5747.17 and any rules adopted pursuant
thereto.
         D.   Annually, on or before the thirty-first day of January, each
video lottery terminal sales agent shall file an annual return electronically
with the Tax Administrator of the municipal corporation in which the facility
is located indicating the total amount deducted and withheld during the
preceding calendar year. The video lottery sales agent shall remit
electronically with the annual return any amount that was deducted and withheld
and that was not previously remitted. If the name, address, or social security
number of a person or the amount deducted and withheld with respect to that
person was omitted on a monthly return for that reporting period, that
information shall be indicated on the annual return.
         E.   Annually, on or before the thirty-first day of January, a video
lottery sales agent shall issue an information return to each person with
respect to whom an amount has been deducted and withheld during the preceding
calendar year. The information return shall show the total amount of municipal
income tax deducted and withheld from the person’s prize award by the video
lottery sales agent during the preceding year. A video lottery sales agent
shall provide to the Tax Administrator of the municipal corporation a copy of
each information return issued under this division. The Tax Administrator may
require that such copies be transmitted electronically.
         F.   A video lottery sales agent who fails to file a return and remit
the amounts deducted and withheld is personally liable for the amount deducted
and withheld and not remitted. Such personal liability extends to any penalty
and interest imposed for the late filing of a return or the late payment of tax
deducted and withheld.
      (6)   A.   If a video lottery sales agent ceases to operate video lottery
terminals, the amounts deducted and withheld along with any penalties and
interest thereon are immediately due and payable. The successor of the video
lottery sales agent that purchases the video lottery terminals from the agent
shall withhold an amount from the purchase money that is sufficient to cover
the amounts deducted and withheld and any penalties and interest thereon until
the predecessor video lottery sales agent operator produces either of the
following:
            1.   A receipt from the Tax Administrator showing that the amounts
deducted and withheld and penalties and interest thereon have been paid;
            2.   A certificate from the Tax Administrator indicating that no
amounts are due.
         B.   If the successor fails to withhold purchase money, the successor
is personally liable for the payment of the amounts deducted and withheld and
penalties and interest thereon.
      (7)   The failure of a video lottery sales agent to deduct and withhold
the required amount from a person’s prize award does not relieve that person
from liability for the municipal income tax with respect to that prize award.
      (8)   If a casino operator or lottery sales agent files a return late,
fails to file a return, remits amounts deducted and withheld late, or fails to
remit amounts deducted and withheld as required under this section, the Tax
Administrator of a municipal corporation may impose the following applicable
penalty:
         A.   For the late remittance of, or failure to remit, tax deducted and
withheld under this section, a penalty equal to 50% of the tax deducted and
withheld;
         B.   For the failure to file, or the late filing of, a monthly or
annual return, a penalty of five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each return not
filed or filed late. Interest shall accrue on past due amounts deducted and
withheld at the rate prescribed in Ohio R.C. 5703.47.
      (9)   Amounts deducted and withheld on behalf of a municipal corporation
shall be allowed as a credit against payment of the tax imposed by the
municipal corporation and shall be treated as taxes paid for purposes of §
881.07 of this chapter. This division applies only to the person for whom the
amount is deducted and withheld.
      (10)   The Tax Administrator shall prescribe the forms of the receipts
and returns required under this section.
(Ord. 15-O-2839, passed 11-17-2015; Ord. 16-O-2883, passed 10-4-2016)
§ 881.06  INCOME SUBJECT TO NET PROFIT TAX.
   (a)   Determining municipal taxable income for taxpayers who are not
individuals. “Municipal taxable income” for a taxpayer who is not an individual
for the municipality is calculated as follows: “Income” reduced by “Exempt
income” to the extent otherwise included in income, multiplied by
apportionment, further reduced by any “Pre-2017 net operating loss
carryforward” equals “Municipal taxable income”.
      (1)   “Income” for a taxpayer that is not an individual means the “net
profit” of the taxpayer.
         A.   “Net profit” for a person other than an individual is defined in
§
881.03(c)(23).
         B.   “Adjusted federal taxable income” is defined in §
881.03(c)(1) of this chapter.
      (2)   “Exempt income” is defined in §
881.03(c)(11) of this chapter.
      (3)   “Apportionment” means the apportionment as determined by §
881.06(b) of this chapter.
      (4)   “Pre-2017 net operating loss carryforward” is defined in §
881.03(c)(32) of this chapter.
   (b)   Net profit; income subject to net profit tax; alternative
apportionment. This division (b) applies to any taxpayer engaged in a business
or profession in the municipality unless the taxpayer is an individual who
resides in the municipality or the taxpayer is an electric company, combined
company, or telephone company that is subject to and required to file reports
under Ohio R.C. Chapter 5745.
      (1)   Net profit from a business or profession conducted both within and
without the boundaries of the municipality shall be considered as having a
taxable situs in the municipality for purposes of municipal income taxation in
the same proportion as the average ratio of the following:
         A.   The average original cost of the real property and tangible
personal property owned or used by the taxpayer in the business or profession
in the municipality during the taxable period to the average original cost of
all of the real and tangible personal property owned or used by the taxpayer in
the business or profession during the same period, wherever situated. As used
in this division, tangible personal or real property shall include property
rented or leased by the taxpayer and the value of such property shall be
determined by multiplying the annual rental thereon by eight;
         B.   Wages, salaries, and other compensation paid during the taxable
period to individuals employed in the business or profession for services
performed in the municipality to wages, salaries, and other compensation paid
during the same period to individuals employed in the business or profession,
wherever the individual’s services are performed, excluding compensation from
which taxes are not required to be withheld under §
881.05(b) of this chapter;
         C.   Total gross receipts of the business or profession from sales and
rentals made and services performed during the taxable period in the
municipality to total gross receipts of the business or profession during the
same period from sales, rentals, and services, wherever made or performed.
      (2)   A.   If the apportionment factors described in division (b)(1) of
this section do not fairly represent the extent of a taxpayer’s business
activity in the municipality, the taxpayer may request, or the Tax
Administrator of the municipality may require, that the taxpayer use, with
respect to all or any portion of the income of the taxpayer, an alternative
apportionment method involving one or more of the following:
            1.   Separate accounting;
            2.   The exclusion of one or more of the factors;
            3.   The inclusion of one or more additional factors that would
provide for a more fair apportionment of the income of the taxpayer to the
municipality;
            4.   A modification of one or more of the factors.
         B.   A taxpayer request to use an alternative apportionment method
shall be in writing and shall accompany a tax return, timely filed appeal of an
assessment, or timely filed amended tax return. The taxpayer may use the
requested alternative method unless the Tax Administrator denies the request in
an assessment issued within the period prescribed by §
881.19(a) of this chapter.
         C.   A Tax Administrator may require a taxpayer to use an alternative
apportionment method as described in division (b)(2)A. of this section only by
issuing an assessment to the taxpayer within the period prescribed by §
881.19(a) of this chapter.
         D.   Nothing in division (b)(2) of this section nullifies or otherwise
affects any alternative apportionment arrangement approved by a Tax
Administrator or otherwise agreed upon by both the Tax Administrator and
taxpayer before January 1, 2016.
      (3)   As used in division (b)(1)B. of this section, “wages, salaries, and
other compensation” includes only wages, salaries, or other compensation paid
to an employee for services performed at any of the following locations:
         A.   A location that is owned, controlled, or used by, rented to, or
under the possession of one of the following:
            1.   The employer;
            2.   A vendor, customer, client, or patient of the employer, or a
related member of such a vendor, customer, client, or patient;
            3.   A vendor, customer, client, or patient of a person described
in division (C)(1)(b) of this section, or a related member of such a vendor,
customer, client, or patient.
         B.   Any location at which a trial, appeal, hearing, investigation,
inquiry, review, court-martial, or similar administrative, judicial, or
legislative matter or proceeding is being conducted, provided that the
compensation is paid for services performed for, or on behalf of, the employer
or that the employee’s presence at the location directly or indirectly benefits
the employer;
         C.   Any other location, if the Tax Administrator determines that the
employer directed the employee to perform the services at the other location in
lieu of a location described in division (b)(3)A. or (b)(3)B. of this section
solely in order to avoid or reduce the employer’s municipal income tax
liability. If a Tax Administrator makes such a determination, the employer may
dispute the determination by establishing, by a preponderance of the evidence,
that the Tax Administrator’s determination was unreasonable.
      (4)   For the purposes of division (b)(1)C. of this section, receipts
from sales and rentals made and services performed shall be sitused to a
municipal corporation as follows:
         A.   Gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property shall
be sitused to the municipal corporation in which the sale originated. For the
purposes of this division, a sale of property originates in a municipal
corporation if, regardless of where title passes, the property meets any of the
following criteria:
            1.   The property is shipped to or delivered within the municipal
corporation from a stock of goods located within the municipal corporation.
            2.   The property is delivered within the municipal corporation
from a location outside the municipal corporation, provided the taxpayer is
regularly engaged through its own employees in the solicitation or promotion of
sales within such municipal corporation and the sales result from such
solicitation or promotion.
            3.   The property is shipped from a place within the municipal
corporation to purchasers outside the municipal corporation, provided that the
taxpayer is not, through its own employees, regularly engaged in the
solicitation or promotion of sales at the place where delivery is made.
         B.   Gross receipts from the sale of services shall be sitused to the
municipal corporation to the extent that such services are performed in the
municipal corporation.
         C.   To the extent included in income, gross receipts from the sale of
real property located in the municipal corporation shall be sitused to the
municipal corporation.
         D.   To the extent included in income, gross receipts from rents and
royalties from real property located in the municipal corporation shall be
sitused to the municipal corporation.
         E.   Gross receipts from rents and royalties from tangible personal
property shall be sitused to the municipal corporation based upon the extent to
which the tangible personal property is used in the municipal corporation.
      (5)   The net profit received by an individual taxpayer from the rental
of real estate owned directly by the individual or by a disregarded entity
owned by the individual shall be subject to tax only by the municipal
corporation in which the property generating the net profit is located and the
municipal corporation in which the individual taxpayer that receives the net
profit resides. A municipal corporation shall allow such taxpayers to elect to
use separate accounting for the purpose of calculating net profit sitused under
this division to the municipal corporation in which the property is located.
      (6)   A.   Except as provided in division (b)(6)B. of this section,
commissions received by a real estate agent or broker relating to the sale,
purchase, or lease of real estate shall be sitused to the municipal corporation
in which the real estate is located. Net profit reported by the real estate
agent or broker shall be allocated to a municipal corporation based upon the
ratio of the commissions the agent or broker received from the sale, purchase,
or lease of real estate located in the municipal corporation to the commissions
received from the sale, purchase, or lease of real estate everywhere in the
taxable year.
         B.   An individual who is a resident of a municipal corporation that
imposes a municipal income tax shall report the individual’s net profit from
all real estate activity on the individual’s annual tax return for that
municipal corporation. The individual may claim a credit for taxes the
individual paid on such net profit to another municipal corporation to the
extent that such credit is allowed under §
881.08(a) of this chapter.
      (7)   If, in computing a taxpayer’s adjusted federal taxable income, the
taxpayer deducted any amount with respect to a stock option granted to an
employee, and if the employee is not required to include in the employee’s
income any such amount or a portion thereof because it is exempted from
taxation under §
881.03(c)(11)L. and (c)(34)A.4. of this chapter, by a municipal corporation to
which the taxpayer has apportioned a portion of its net profit, the taxpayer
shall add the amount that is exempt from taxation to the taxpayer’s net profit
that was apportioned to that municipal corporation. In no case shall a taxpayer
be required to add to its net profit that was apportioned to that municipal
corporation any amount other than the amount upon which the employee would be
required to pay tax were the amount related to the stock option not exempted
from taxation. This division applies solely for the purpose of making an
adjustment to the amount of a taxpayer’s net profit that was apportioned to a
municipal corporation under this section.
      (8)   When calculating the ratios described in division (b)(1) of this
section for the purposes of that division or division (b)(2) of this section,
the owner of a disregarded entity shall include in the owner’s ratios the
property, payroll, and gross receipts of such disregarded entity.
   (c)   Consolidated federal income tax return.
      (1)   For the purpose of this division, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
         A.   “Affiliated group of corporations” means an affiliated group as
defined in Section 1504 of the Internal Revenue Code, except that, if such a
group includes at least one incumbent local exchange carrier that is primarily
engaged in the business of providing local exchange telephone service in this
state, the affiliated group shall not include any incumbent local exchange
carrier that would otherwise be included in the group.
         B.   “Consolidated federal income tax return” means a consolidated
return filed for federal income tax purposes pursuant to Section 1501 of the
Internal Revenue Code.
         C.   “Consolidated federal taxable income” means the consolidated
taxable income of an affiliated group of corporations, as computed for the
purposes of filing a consolidated federal income tax return, before
consideration of net operating losses or special deductions. “Consolidated
federal taxable income” does not include income or loss of an incumbent local
exchange carrier that is excluded from the affiliated group under division (c)
(1)A. of this section.
         D.   “Incumbent local exchange carrier” has the same meaning as in
Ohio R.C. 4927.01.
         E.   “Local exchange telephone service” has the same meaning as in
Ohio R.C. 5727.01.
      (2)   A.   For taxable years beginning on or after January 1, 2016, a
taxpayer that is a member of an affiliated group of corporations may elect to
file a consolidated municipal income tax return for a taxable year if at least
one member of the affiliated group of corporations is subject to the municipal
income tax in that taxable year and if the affiliated group of corporations
filed a consolidated federal income tax return with respect to that taxable
year.
            1.   The election is binding for a five-year period beginning with
the first taxable year of the initial election unless a change in the reporting
method is required under federal law.
            2.   The election continues to be binding for each subsequent five-
year period unless the taxpayer elects to discontinue filing consolidated
municipal income tax returns under division (c)(2)B. of this section; or
            3.   A taxpayer receives permission from the Tax Administrator. The
Tax Administrator shall approve such a request for good cause shown.
         B.   An election to discontinue filing consolidated municipal income
tax returns under this section must be made in the first year following the
last year of a five-year consolidated municipal income tax return election
period in effect under division (c)(2)A. of this section. The election to
discontinue filing a consolidated municipal income tax return is binding for a
five-year period beginning with the first taxable year of the election.
         C.   An election made under division (c)(2)A. or (c)(2)B. of this
section is binding on all members of the affiliated group of corporations
subject to a municipal income tax.
      (3)   A taxpayer that is a member of an affiliated group of corporations
that filed a consolidated federal income tax return for a taxable year shall
file a consolidated municipal income tax return for that taxable year if the
Tax Administrator determines, by a preponderance of the evidence, that
intercompany transactions have not been conducted at arm’s length and that
there has been a distortive shifting of income or expenses with regard to
allocation of net profits to the municipal corporation. A taxpayer that is
required to file a consolidated municipal income tax return for a taxable year
shall file a consolidated municipal income tax return for all subsequent
taxable years unless the taxpayer requests and receives written permission from
the Tax Administrator to file a separate return or a taxpayer has experienced a
change in circumstances.
      (4)   A taxpayer shall prepare a consolidated municipal income tax return
in the same manner as is required under the United States Department of
Treasury regulations that prescribe procedures for the preparation of the
consolidated federal income tax return required to be filed by the common
parent of the affiliated group of which the taxpayer is a member.
      (5)   A.   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (c)(5)B., (c)(5)C.,
and (c)(5)D. of this section, corporations that file a consolidated municipal
income tax return shall compute adjusted federal taxable income, as defined in
§
881.03(c)(1) of this chapter, by substituting “consolidated federal taxable
income” for “federal taxable income” wherever “federal taxable income” appears
in that division and by substituting “an affiliated group of corporation’s” for
“a C corporation’s” wherever “a C corporation’s” appears in that division.
         B.   No corporation filing a consolidated municipal income tax return
shall make any adjustment otherwise required under §
881.03(c)(1) of this chapter to the extent that the item of income or deduction
otherwise subject to the adjustment has been eliminated or consolidated in the
computation of consolidated federal taxable income.
         C.   If the net profit or loss of a pass-through entity having at
least 80% of the value of its ownership interest owned or controlled, directly
or indirectly, by an affiliated group of corporations is included in that
affiliated group’s consolidated federal taxable income for a taxable year, the
corporation filing a consolidated municipal income tax return shall do one of
the following with respect to that pass-through entity’s net profit or loss for
that taxable year:
            1.   Exclude the pass-through entity’s net profit or loss from the
consolidated federal taxable income of the affiliated group and, for the
purpose of making the computations required in §
881.06(b) of this chapter, exclude the property, payroll, and gross receipts of
the pass-through entity in the computation of the affiliated group’s net profit
sitused to a municipal corporation. If the entity’s net profit or loss is so
excluded, the entity shall be subject to taxation as a separate taxpayer on the
basis of the entity’s net profits that would otherwise be included in the
consolidated federal taxable income of the affiliated group.
            2.   Include the pass-through entity’s net profit or loss in the
consolidated federal taxable income of the affiliated group and, for the
purpose of making the computations required in §
881.06(b) of this chapter, include the property, payroll, and gross receipts of
the pass-through entity in the computation of the affiliated group’s net profit
sitused to a municipal corporation. If the entity’s net profit or loss is so
included, the entity shall not be subject to taxation as a separate taxpayer on
the basis of the entity’s net profits that are included in the consolidated
federal taxable income of the affiliated group.
         D.   If the net profit or loss of a pass-through entity having less
than 80% of the value of its ownership interest owned or controlled, directly
or indirectly, by an affiliated group of corporations is included in that
affiliated group’s consolidated federal taxable income for a taxable year, all
of the following shall apply:
            1.   The corporation filing the consolidated municipal income tax
return shall exclude the pass-through entity’s net profit or loss from the
consolidated federal taxable income of the affiliated group and, for the
purposes of making the computations required in §
881.06(b) of this chapter, exclude the property, payroll, and gross receipts of
the pass-through entity in the computation of the affiliated group’s net profit
sitused to a municipal corporation;
            2.   The pass-through entity shall be subject to municipal income
taxation as a separate taxpayer in accordance with this chapter on the basis of
the entity’s net profits that would otherwise be included in the consolidated
federal taxable income of the affiliated group.
      (6)   Corporations filing a consolidated municipal income tax return
shall make the computations required under §
881.06(b) of this chapter by substituting “consolidated federal taxable income
attributable to” for “net profit from” wherever “net profit from” appears in
that section and by substituting “affiliated group of corporations” for
“taxpayer” wherever “taxpayer” appears in that section.
      (7)   Each corporation filing a consolidated municipal income tax return
is jointly and severally liable for any tax, interest, penalties, fines,
charges, or other amounts imposed by a municipal corporation in accordance with
this chapter on the corporation, an affiliated group of which the corporation
is a member for any portion of the taxable year, or any one or more members of
such an affiliated group.
      (8)   Corporations and their affiliates that made an election or entered
into an agreement with a municipal corporation before January 1, 2016, to file
a consolidated or combined tax return with such municipal corporation may
continue to file consolidated or combined tax returns in accordance with such
election or agreement for taxable years beginning on and after January 1, 2016.
   (d)   Tax credit for businesses that foster new jobs in Ohio. The
municipality, by ordinance, may grant a refundable or nonrefundable credit
against its tax on income to a taxpayer to foster job creation in the
municipality. If a credit is granted under this section, it shall be measured
as a percentage of the new income tax revenue the municipality derives from new
employees of the taxpayer and shall be for a term not exceeding 15 years.
Before the municipality passes an ordinance granting a credit, the municipality
and the taxpayer shall enter into an agreement specifying all the conditions of
the credit.
   (e)   Tax credits to foster job retention. The municipality, by ordinance,
may grant a refundable or nonrefundable credit against its tax on income to a
taxpayer for the purpose of fostering job retention in the municipality. If a
credit is granted under this section, it shall be measured as a percentage of
the income tax revenue the municipality derives from the retained employees of
the taxpayer, and shall be for a term not exceeding 15 years. Before the
municipality passes an ordinance allowing such a credit, the municipality and
the taxpayer shall enter into an agreement specifying all the conditions of the
credit.
(Ord. 15-O-2839, passed 11-17-2015)
§ 881.07  DECLARATION OF ESTIMATED TAX.
   (a)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   “Estimated taxes” means the amount that the taxpayer reasonably
estimates to be the taxpayer’s tax liability for a municipal corporation’s
income tax for the current taxable year.
      (2)   “Tax liability” means the total taxes due to a municipal
corporation for the taxable year, after allowing any credit to which the
taxpayer is entitled, and after applying any estimated tax payment, withholding
payment, or credit from another taxable year.
   (b)   (1)   Every taxpayer shall make a declaration of estimated taxes for
the current taxable year, on the form prescribed by the Tax Administrator, if
the amount payable as estimated taxes is at least two hundred dollars
($200.00). For the purposes of this section:
         A.   Taxes withheld from qualifying wages shall be considered as paid
to the municipal corporation for which the taxes were withheld in equal amounts
on each payment date. If the taxpayer establishes the dates on which all
amounts were actually withheld, the amounts withheld shall be considered as
paid on the dates on which the amounts were actually withheld.
         B.   An overpayment of tax applied as a credit to a subsequent taxable
year is deemed to be paid on the date of the postmark stamped on the cover in
which the payment is mailed or, if the payment is made by electronic funds
transfer, the date the payment is submitted. As used in this division, “date of
the postmark” means, in the event there is more than one date on the cover, the
earliest date imprinted on the cover by the postal service.
         C.   A taxpayer having a taxable year of less than 12 months shall
make a declaration under rules prescribed by the Tax Administrator.
         D.   Taxes withheld by a casino operator or by a lottery sales agent
under Ohio R.C. 718.031 are deemed to be paid to the municipal corporation for
which the taxes were withheld on the date the taxes are withheld from the
taxpayer’s winnings.
      (2)   Taxpayers filing joint returns shall file joint declarations of
estimated taxes.
      (3)   The declaration of estimated taxes shall be filed on or before the
date prescribed for the filing of municipal income tax returns under §
881.09(a)(7) of this chapter or on or before the fifteenth day of the fourth
month of the first taxable year after the taxpayer becomes subject to tax for
the first time.
      (4)   Taxpayers reporting on a fiscal year basis shall file a declaration
on or before the fifteenth day of the fourth month after the beginning of each
fiscal year or period.
      (5)   The original declaration or any subsequent amendment may be
increased or decreased on or before any subsequent quarterly payment day as
provided in this section.
   (c)   (1)   The required portion of the tax liability for the taxable year
that shall be paid through estimated taxes made payable to the municipality or
Tax Administrator, including the application of tax refunds to estimated taxes
and withholding on or before the applicable payment date, shall be as follows:
         A.   On or before the fifteenth day of the fourth month after the
beginning of the taxable year, 22.5% of the tax liability for the taxable year;
         B.   On or before the fifteenth day of the sixth month after the
beginning of the taxable year, 45% of the tax liability for the taxable year;
         C.   On or before the fifteenth day of the ninth month after the
beginning of the taxable year, 67.5% of the tax liability for the taxable year;
         D.   On or before the fifteenth day of the twelfth month of the
taxable year, 90% of the tax liability for the taxable year.
      (2)   A taxpayer may amend a declaration under rules prescribed by the
Tax Administrator. When an amended declaration has been filed, the unpaid
balance shown due on the amended declaration shall be paid in equal
installments on or before the remaining payment dates. The amended declaration
must be filed on the next applicable due date as outlined in (c)(1)a. through
(c)(1)d. of this section.
      (3)   On or before the fifteenth day of the fourth month of the year
following that for which the declaration or amended declaration was filed, an
annual return shall be filed and any balance which may be due shall be paid
with the return in accordance with §
881.09(a) of this chapter.
         A.   For taxpayers who are individuals, or who are not individuals and
are reporting and filing on a calendar year basis, the annual tax return is due
on the same date as the filing of the federal tax return, unless extended
pursuant to Ohio R.C. 5747.08(G).
         B.   For taxpayers who are not individuals, and are reporting and
filing on a fiscal year basis or any period other than a calendar year, the
annual return is due on the fifteenth day of the fourth month following the end
of the taxable year or period.
      (4)   An amended declaration is required whenever the taxpayer’s
estimated tax liability changes during the taxable year. A change in estimated
tax liability may either increase or decrease the estimated tax liability for
the taxable year.
   (d)   (1)   In the case of any underpayment of any portion of a tax
liability, penalty and interest may be imposed pursuant to §
881.10 of this chapter upon the amount of underpayment for the period of
underpayment, unless the underpayment is due to reasonable cause as described
in division (e) of this section. The amount of the underpayment shall be
determined as follows:
         A.   For the first payment of estimated taxes each year, 22.5% of the
tax liability, less the amount of taxes paid by the date prescribed for that
payment;
         B.   For the second payment of estimated taxes each year, 45% of the
tax liability, less the amount of taxes paid by the date prescribed for that
payment;
         C.   For the third payment of estimated taxes each year, 67.5% of the
tax liability, less the amount of taxes paid by the date prescribed for that
payment;
         D.   For the fourth payment of estimated taxes each year, 90% of the
tax liability, less the amount of taxes paid by the date prescribed for that
payment.
      (2)   The period of the underpayment shall run from the day the estimated
payment was required to be made to the date on which the payment is made. For
purposes of this section, a payment of estimated taxes on or before any payment
date shall be considered a payment of any previous underpayment only to the
extent the payment of estimated taxes exceeds the amount of the payment
presently required to be paid to avoid any penalty.
   (e)   An underpayment of any portion of tax liability determined under
division (d) of this section shall be due to reasonable cause and the penalty
imposed by this section shall not be added to the taxes for the taxable year if
any of the following apply:
      (1)   The amount of estimated taxes that were paid equals at least 90% of
the tax liability for the current taxable year, determined by annualizing the
income received during the year up to the end of the month immediately
preceding the month in which the payment is due.
      (2)   The amount of estimated taxes that were paid equals at least 100%
of the tax liability shown on the return of the taxpayer for the preceding
taxable year, provided that the immediately preceding taxable year reflected a
period of 12 months and the taxpayer filed a return with the municipal
corporation under §
881.09(a) of this chapter for that year.
      (3)   The taxpayer is an individual who resides in the municipality but
was not domiciled there on the first day of January of the calendar year that
includes the first day of the taxable year.
   (f)   A Tax Administrator may waive the requirement for filing a declaration
of estimated taxes for any class of taxpayers after finding that the waiver is
reasonable and proper in view of administrative costs and other factors.
(Ord. 15-O-2839, passed 11-17-2015)
§ 881.08  CREDIT FOR TAX PAID.
   (a)   Credit for tax paid to another municipality.
      (1)   Where a resident of the municipality is subject to a municipal
income tax in another municipality, he or she shall be entitled to a credit as
hereinafter set forth.
      (2)   Every individual taxpayer who resides in the municipality who
receives net profits, salaries, commissions, or other personal compensation for
work done or services performed or rendered outside of the municipality, if it
be made to appear that he or she has paid a municipal income tax on the same
income taxable under this chapter to another municipality, shall be allowed a
credit against the tax imposed by this chapter of an amount not to exceed 0.5%
so paid by him or her or in his or her behalf to such other municipality. The
credit shall not exceed 0.5% of the tax assessed by this chapter on such income
earned in such other municipality or municipalities where such tax is paid.
      (3)   A claim for refund or credit under this section shall be made in
such manner as the Administrator may by regulation provide.
   (b)   Refundable credit for qualifying loss.
      (1)   For the purpose of this division (b), the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
         A.   “Nonqualified deferred compensation plan” means a compensation
plan described in Section 3121(v)(2)(C) of the Internal Revenue Code.
         B.   “Qualifying loss.”
            1.   Except as provided in division (b)(1)B.2. of this section,
“qualifying loss” means the excess, if any, of the total amount of compensation
the payment of which is deferred pursuant to a nonqualified deferred
compensation plan over the total amount of income the taxpayer has recognized
for federal income tax purposes for all taxable years on a cumulative basis as
compensation with respect to the taxpayer’s receipt of money and property
attributable to distributions in connection with the nonqualified deferred
compensation plan.
            2.   If, for one or more taxable years, the taxpayer has not paid
to one or more municipal corporations income tax imposed on the entire amount
of compensation the payment of which is deferred pursuant to a nonqualified
deferred compensation plan, then the “qualifying loss” is the product of the
amount resulting from the calculation described in division (b)(1)B.1. of this
section computed without regard to division (b)(1)B.2. of this section and a
fraction the numerator of which is the portion of such compensation on which
the taxpayer has paid income tax to one or more municipal corporations and the
denominator of which is the total amount of compensation the payment of which
is deferred pursuant to a nonqualified deferred compensation plan.
            3.   With respect to a nonqualified deferred compensation plan, the
taxpayer sustains a qualifying loss only in the taxable year in which the
taxpayer receives the final distribution of money and property pursuant to that
nonqualified deferred compensation plan.
         C.   “Qualifying tax rate” means the applicable tax rate for the
taxable year for which the taxpayer paid income tax to a municipal corporation
with respect to any portion of the total amount of compensation the payment of
which is deferred pursuant to a nonqualified deferred compensation plan. If
different tax rates applied for different taxable years, then the “qualifying
tax rate” is a weighted average of those different tax rates. The weighted
average shall be based upon the tax paid to the municipal corporation each year
with respect to the nonqualified deferred compensation plan.
      (2)   A.   Except as provided in division (b)(4) of this section, a
refundable credit shall be allowed against the income tax imposed by a
municipal corporation for each qualifying loss sustained by a taxpayer during
the taxable year. The amount of the credit shall be equal to the product of the
qualifying loss and the qualifying tax rate.
         B.   A taxpayer shall claim the credit allowed under this section from
each municipal corporation to which the taxpayer paid municipal income tax with
respect to the nonqualified deferred compensation plan in one or more taxable
years.
         C.   If a taxpayer has paid tax to more than one municipal corporation
with respect to the nonqualified deferred compensation plan, the amount of the
credit that a taxpayer may claim from each municipal corporation shall be
calculated on the basis of each municipal corporation’s proportionate share of
the total municipal corporation income tax paid by the taxpayer to all
municipal corporations with respect to the nonqualified deferred compensation
plan.
         D.   In no case shall the amount of the credit allowed under this
section exceed the cumulative income tax that a taxpayer has paid to a
municipal corporation for all taxable years with respect to the nonqualified
deferred compensation plan.
      (3)   A.   For purposes of this section, municipal corporation income tax
that has been withheld with respect to a nonqualified deferred compensation
plan shall be considered to have been paid by the taxpayer with respect to the
nonqualified deferred compensation plan.
         B.   Any municipal income tax that has been refunded or otherwise
credited for the benefit of the taxpayer with respect to a nonqualified
deferred compensation plan shall not be considered to have been paid to the
municipal corporation by the taxpayer.
      (4)   The credit allowed under this section is allowed only to the extent
the taxpayer’s qualifying loss is attributable to:
         A.   The insolvency or bankruptcy of the employer who had established
the nonqualified deferred compensation plan; or
         B.   The employee’s failure or inability to satisfy all of the
employer’s terms and conditions necessary to receive the nonqualified deferred
compensation.
   (c)   Credit for person working in joint economic development district or
zone.  A municipality shall grant a credit against its tax on income to a
resident of the municipality who works in a joint economic development zone
created under Ohio R.C. 715.691 or a joint economic development district
created under Ohio R.C. 715.70, 715.71, or 715.72 to the same extent that it
grants a credit against its tax on income to its residents who are employed in
another municipal corporation, pursuant to §
881.08(a) of this chapter.
   (d)   Credit for tax beyond statute for obtaining refund.
      (1)   Income tax that has been deposited or paid to the municipality, but
should have been deposited or paid to another municipal corporation, is
allowable by the municipality as a refund, but is subject to the three-year
limitation on refunds as provided in §
881.09(f) of this chapter.
      (2)   Income tax that should have been deposited or paid to the
municipality, but was deposited or paid to another municipal corporation, shall
be subject to collection and recovery by the municipality. To the extent a
refund of such tax or withholding is barred by the limitation on refunds as
provided in §
881.09(f), the municipality will allow a non-refundable credit equal to the tax
or withholding paid to the other municipality against the income tax the
municipality claims is due. If the municipality’s tax rate is higher, the tax
representing the net difference of the tax rates is also subject to collection
by the municipality, along with any penalty and interest accruing during the
period of nonpayment.
      (3)   No carryforward of credit will be permitted when the overpayment is
beyond the three-year limitation for refunding of same as provided in §
881.09(f) of this chapter.
      (4)   Nothing in this section requires a municipality to allow credit for
tax paid to another municipal corporation if the municipality has reduced
credit for tax paid to another municipal corporation. Section
881.08(a) of this chapter regarding any limitation on credit shall prevail.
(Ord. 15-O-2839, passed 11-17-2015)
§ 881.09  ANNUAL RETURN.
   (a)   Return and payment of tax.
      (1)   A.   An annual return with respect to the income tax levied on
municipal taxable income by the municipality shall be completed and filed by
every taxpayer for any taxable year for which the taxpayer is subject to the
tax, regardless of whether or not income tax is due.
         B.   The Tax Administrator shall accept on behalf of all nonresident
individual taxpayers a return filed by an employer, agent of an employer, or
other payer located in the municipality under §
881.05(a)(3) of this chapter when the nonresident individual taxpayer’s sole
income subject to the tax is the qualifying wages reported by the employer,
agent of an employer, or other payer, and no additional tax is due to the
municipality.
         C.   All resident individual taxpayers, 18 years of age and older,
shall file an annual municipal income tax return with the municipality,
regardless of income or liability.
      (2)   If an individual is deceased, any return or notice required of that
individual shall be completed and filed by that decedent’s executor,
administrator, or other person charged with the property of that decedent.
      (3)   If an individual is unable to complete and file a return or notice
required by the municipality in accordance with this chapter, the return or
notice required of that individual shall be completed and filed by the
individual’s duly authorized agent, guardian, conservator, fiduciary, or other
person charged with the care of the person or property of that individual. Such
duly authorized agent, guardian, conservator, fiduciary, or other person
charged with the care of the person or property of that individual shall
provide, with the filing of the return, appropriate documentation to support
that they are authorized to file a return or notice on behalf of the taxpayer.
This notice shall include any legally binding authorizations, and contact
information including name, address, and phone number of the duly authorized
agent, guardian, conservator, fiduciary, or other person.
      (4)   Returns or notices required of an estate or a trust shall be
completed and filed by the fiduciary of the estate or trust. Such fiduciary
shall provide, with the filing of the return, appropriate documentation to
support that they are authorized to file a return or notice on behalf of the
taxpayer. This notice shall include any legally binding authorizations, and
contact i nformation including name, address, and phone number of the
fiduciary.
      (5)   No municipal corporation shall deny spouses the ability to file a
joint return.
      (6)   A.   Each return required to be filed under this section shall
contain the signature of the taxpayer or the taxpayer’s duly authorized agent
and of the person who prepared the return for the taxpayer, and shall include
the taxpayer’s social security number or taxpayer identification number. Each
return shall be verified by a declaration under penalty of perjury.
         B.   A taxpayer who is an individual is required to include, with each
annual return, amended return, or request for refund required under this
section, copies of only the following documents: all of the taxpayer’s Internal
Revenue Service form W-2, “Wage and Tax Statements,” including all information
reported on the taxpayer’s federal W-2, as well as taxable wages reported or
withheld for any municipal corporation; the taxpayer’s Internal Revenue Service
form 1040 and, with respect to an amended tax return or refund request, any
other documentation necessary to support the refund request or the adjustments
made in the amended return. An individual taxpayer who files the annual return
required by this section electronically is not required to provide paper copies
of any of the foregoing to the Tax Administrator unless the Tax Administrator
requests such copies after the return has been filed.
         C.   A taxpayer that is not an individual is required to include, with
each annual net profit return, amended net profit return, or request for refund
required under this section, copies of only the following documents: the
taxpayer’s Internal Revenue Service form 1041, form 1065, form 1120, form 1120-
REIT, form 1120F, or form 1120S, and, with respect to an amended tax return or
refund request, any other documentation necessary to support the refund request
or the adjustments made in the amended return.
         D.   A taxpayer that is not an individual and that files an annual net
profit return electronically through the Ohio Business Gateway or in some other
manner shall either mail the documents required under this division to the Tax
Administrator at the time of filing or, if electronic submission is available,
submit the documents electronically through the Ohio Business Gateway or a
portal provided by municipality. The Department of Taxation shall publish a
method of electronically submitting the documents required under this division
through the Ohio Business Gateway on or before January 1, 2016. The Department
shall transmit all documents submitted electronically under this division to
the appropriate Tax Administrator.
         E.   After a taxpayer files a tax return, the Tax Administrator shall
request, and the taxpayer shall provide, any information, statements, or
documents required by the municipality to determine and verify the taxpayer’s
municipal income tax liability. The requirements imposed under division (a)(6)
of this section apply regardless of whether the taxpayer files on a generic
form or on a form prescribed by the Tax Administrator.
         F.   Any other documentation, including schedules, other municipal
income tax returns, or other supporting documentation necessary to verify
credits, income, losses, or other pertinent factors on the return shall also be
included to avoid delay in processing, or disallowance by the Tax Administrator
of undocumented credits or losses.
      (7)   A.   1.   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, each
individual income tax return required to be filed under this section shall be
completed and filed as required by the Tax Administrator on or before the date
prescribed for the filing of state individual income tax returns under Ohio
R.C. 5747.08(G). The taxpayer shall complete and file the return or notice on
forms prescribed by the Tax Administrator or on generic forms, together with
remittance made payable to the municipality or Tax Administrator.
            2.   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, each annual net
profit income tax return required to be filed under this section by a taxpayer
that is not an individual shall be completed and filed as required by the Tax
Administrator on or before the fifteenth day of the fourth month following the
end of the taxpayer’s taxable year or period. The taxpayer shall complete and
file the return or notice on forms prescribed by the Tax Administrator or on
generic forms, together with remittance made payable to the municipality or Tax
Administrator.
            3.   In the case of individual income tax return required to be
filed by an individual, and net profit income tax return required to be filed
by a taxpayer who is not an individual, no remittance is required if the amount
shown to be due is ten dollars ($10.00) or less.
         B.   If the Tax Administrator considers it necessary in order to
ensure the payment of the tax imposed by the municipality in accordance with
this chapter, the Tax Administrator may require taxpayers to file returns and
make payments otherwise than as provided in this section, including taxpayers
not otherwise required to file annual returns.
         C.   With respect to taxpayers to whom §
881.09(b) of this chapter applies, to the extent that any provision in this
division conflicts with any provision in §
881.09(b) of this chapter, the provision in §
881.09(b) of this chapter prevails.
      (8)   A.   For taxable years beginning after 2015, the municipality shall
not require a taxpayer to remit tax with respect to net profits if the amount
due is ten dollars ($10.00) or less.
         B.   Any taxpayer not required to remit tax to the municipality for a
taxable year pursuant to division (a)(8)A. of this section shall file with the
municipality an annual net profit return under division (a)(6)C. and (a)(6)D.
of this section.
      (9)   A.   If any report, claim, statement, or other document required to
be filed, or any payment required to be made, within a prescribed period or on
or before a prescribed date under this chapter is delivered after that period
or that to the Tax Administrator or other municipal official with which the
report, claim, statement, or other document is required to be filed, or to
which the payment is required to be made, the date of the postmark stamped on
the cover in which the report, claim, statement, or other document, or payment
is mailed shall be deemed to be the date of delivery or the date of payment.
“The date of postmark” means, in the event there is more than one date on the
cover, the earliest date imprinted on the cover by the postal service.
         B.   If a payment under this chapter is made by electronic funds
transfer, the payment shall be considered to be made on the date of the
timestamp assigned by the first electronic system receiving that payment.
      (10)   The amounts withheld for the municipality by an employer, the
agent of an employer, or other payer as described in §
881.05(a) of this chapter shall be allowed to the recipient of the compensation
as credits against payment of the tax imposed on the recipient unless the
amounts withheld were not remitted to the municipality and the recipient
colluded with the employer, agent, or other payer in connection with the
failure to remit the amounts withheld.
      (11)   Each return required by the municipality to be filed in accordance
with this section shall include a box that the taxpayer may check to authorize
another person, including a tax return preparer who prepared the return, to
communicate with the Tax Administrator about matters pertaining to the return.
The return or instructions accompanying the return shall indicate that by
checking the box the taxpayer authorizes the Tax Administrator to contact the
preparer or other person concerning questions that arise during the examination
or other review of the return and authorizes the preparer or other person only
to provide the Tax Administrator with information that is missing from the
return, to contact the Tax Administrator for information about the examination
or other review of the return or the status of the taxpayer’s refund or
payments, and to respond to notices about mathematical errors, offsets, or
return preparation that the taxpayer has received from the Tax Administrator
and has shown to the preparer or other person. Authorization by the taxpayer of
another person to communicate with the Tax Administrator about matters
pertaining to the return does not preclude the Tax Administrator from
contacting the taxpayer regarding such matters.
      (12)   The Tax Administrator of the municipality shall accept for filing
a generic form of any income tax return, report, or document required by the
municipality in accordance with this chapter, provided that the generic form,
once completed and filed, contains all of the information required by
ordinances, resolutions, or rules adopted by the municipality or Tax
Administrator, and provided that the taxpayer or tax return preparer filing the
generic form otherwise complies with the provisions of this chapter and of the
municipality’s ordinance or resolution governing the filing of returns,
reports, or documents.
      (13)   When income tax returns, reports, or other documents require the
signature of a tax return preparer, the Tax Administrator shall accept a
facsimile of such a signature in lieu of a manual signature.
      (14)   A.   As used in this division, “worksite location” has the same
meaning as in §
881.05(b) of this chapter.
         B.   A person may notify a Tax Administrator that the person does not
expect to be a taxpayer with respect to the municipal corporation for a taxable
year if both of the following conditions apply:
            1.   The person was required to file a tax return with the
municipal corporation for the immediately preceding taxable year because the
person performed services at a worksite location within the municipal
corporation, and the person has filed all appropriate and required returns and
remitted all applicable income tax and withholding payments as provided by this
chapter. The Tax Administrator is not required to accept an affidavit from a
taxpayer who has not complied with the provisions of this chapter.
            2.   The person no longer provides services in the municipal
corporation, and does not expect to be subject to the municipal corporation’s
income tax for the taxable year. The person shall provide the notice in a
signed affidavit that briefly explains the person’s circumstances, including
the location of the previous worksite location and the last date on which the
person performed services or made any sales within the municipal corporation.
The affidavit also shall include the following statement: “The affiant has no
plans to perform any services within the municipal corporation, make any sales
in the municipal corporation, or otherwise become subject to the tax levied by
the municipal corporation during the taxable year. If the affiant does become
subject to the tax levied by the municipal corporation for the taxable year,
the affiant agrees to be considered a taxpayer and to properly register as a
taxpayer with the municipal corporation, if such a registration is required by
the municipal corporation’s resolutions, ordinances, or rules.” The person
shall sign the affidavit under penalty of perjury.
            3.   If a person submits an affidavit described in division (a)
(14)B. of this section, the Tax Administrator shall not require the person to
file any tax return for the taxable year unless the Tax Administrator possesses
information that conflicts with the affidavit or if the circumstances described
in the affidavit change, or the taxpayer has engaged in activity which results
in work being performed, services provided, sales made, or other activity that
results in municipal taxable income reportable to the municipality in the
taxable year. It shall be the responsibility of the taxpayer to comply with the
provisions of this chapter relating to the reporting and filing of municipal
taxable income on an annual municipal income tax return, even if an affidavit
has been filed with the Tax Administrator for the taxable year. Nothing in
division (a)(14) of this section prohibits the Tax Administrator from
performing an audit of the person.
   (b)   Return and payment of tax; individuals serving in combat zone.
      (1)   Each member of the national guard of any state and each member of a
reserve component of the armed forces of the United States called to active
duty pursuant to an executive order issued by the President of the United
States or an act of the Congress of the United States, and each civilian
serving as support personnel in a combat zone or contingency operation in
support of the armed forces, may apply to the Tax Administrator of the
municipality for both an extension of time for filing of the return and an
extension of time for payment of taxes required by the municipality in
accordance with this chapter during the period of the member’s or civilian’s
duty service and for 180 days thereafter. The application shall be filed on or
before the one hundred eightieth day after the member’s or civilian’s duty
terminates. An applicant shall provide such evidence as the Tax Administrator
considers necessary to demonstrate eligibility for the extension.
      (2)   A.   If the Tax Administrator ascertains that an applicant is
qualified for an extension under this section, the Tax Administrator shall
enter into a contract with the applicant for the payment of the tax in
installments that begin on the one hundred eighty-first day after the
applicant’s active duty or service terminates. Except as provided in division
(b)(2)C. of this section, the Tax Administrator may prescribe such contract
terms as the Tax Administrator considers appropriate.
         B.   If the Tax Administrator ascertains that an applicant is
qualified for an extension under this section, the applicant shall neither be
required to file any return, report, or other tax document nor be required to
pay any tax otherwise due to the municipality before the one hundred eighty-
first day after the applicant’s active duty or service terminates.
         C.   Taxes paid pursuant to a contract entered into under division (b)
(2)A. of this section are not delinquent. The Tax Administrator shall not
require any payments of penalties or interest in connection with those taxes
for the extension period.
      (3)   A.   Nothing in this division denies to any person described in
this division the application of divisions (b)(1) and (b)(2) of this section.
         B.   1.   A qualifying taxpayer who is eligible for an extension under
the Internal Revenue Code shall receive both an extension of time in which to
file any return, report, or other tax document and an extension of time in
which to make any payment of taxes required by the municipality in accordance
with this chapter. The length of any extension granted under division (b)
(3)B.1. of this section shall be equal to the length of the corresponding
extension that the taxpayer receives under the Internal Revenue Code. As used
in this section, “qualifying taxpayer” means a member of the National Guard or
a member of a reserve component of the armed forces of the United States called
to active duty pursuant to either an executive order issued by the President of
the United States or an act of the Congress of the United States, or a civilian
serving as support personnel in a combat zone or contingency operation in
support of the armed forces.
            2.   Taxes the payment of which is extended in accordance with
division (b)(3)B.1. of this section are not delinquent during the extension
period. Such taxes become delinquent on the first day after the expiration of
the extension period if the taxes are not paid prior to that date. The Tax
Administrator shall not require any payment of penalties or interest in
connection with those taxes for the extension period. The Tax Administrator
shall not include any period of extension granted under division (b)(3)B.1. of
this section in calculating the penalty or interest due on any unpaid tax.
      (4)   For each taxable year to which division (b)(1), (b)(2), or (b)(3)
of this section applies to a taxpayer, the provisions of divisions (b)(2)B. and
(b)(2)C. or (b)(3) of this section, as applicable, apply to the spouse of that
taxpayer if the filing status of the spouse and the taxpayer is married filing
jointly for that year.
   (c)   Use of Ohio Business Gateway; types of filings authorized.
      (1)   Any taxpayer subject to municipal income taxation with respect to
the taxpayer’s net profit from a business or profession may file any municipal
income tax return or, estimated municipal income tax return, or extension for
filing a municipal income tax return, and may make payment of amounts shown to
be due on such returns, by using the Ohio Business Gateway.
      (2)   Any employer, agent of an employer, or other payer may report the
amount of municipal income tax withheld from qualifying wages, and may make
remittance of such amounts, by using the Ohio Business Gateway.
      (3)   Nothing in this section affects the due dates for filing employer
withholding tax returns or deposit of any required tax.
      (4)   The use of the Ohio Business Gateway by municipal corporations,
taxpayers, or other persons does not affect the legal rights of municipalities
or taxpayers as otherwise permitted by law. The State of Ohio shall not be a
party to the administration of municipal income taxes or to an appeal of a
municipal income tax matter, except as otherwise specifically provided by law.
      (5)   Nothing in this section shall be construed as limiting or removing
the authority of any municipal corporation to administer, audit, and enforce
the provisions of its municipal income tax.
   (d)   Extension of time to file.
      (1)   Any taxpayer that has duly requested an automatic six-month
extension for filing the taxpayer’s federal income tax return shall
automatically receive an extension for the filing of a municipal income tax
return. The extended due date of the municipal income tax return shall be the
fifteenth day of the tenth month after the last day of the taxable year to
which the return relates.
      (2)   Any taxpayer that qualifies for an automatic federal extension for
a period other than six months for filing the taxpayer’s federal income tax
return shall automatically receive an extension for the filing of a municipal
income tax return. The extended due date of the municipal income tax return
shall be the same as that of the extended federal income tax return.
      (3)   A taxpayer that has not requested or received a six-month extension
for filing the taxpayer’s federal income tax return may request that the Tax
Administrator grant the taxpayer a six-month extension of the date for filing
the taxpayer’s municipal income tax return. If the request is received by the
Tax Administrator on or before the date the municipal income tax return is due,
the Tax Administrator shall grant the taxpayer’s requested extension.
      (4)   An extension of time to file under this chapter is not an extension
of the time to pay any tax due unless the Tax Administrator grants an extension
of that date.
      (5)   If the State Tax Commissioner extends for all taxpayers the date
for filing state income tax returns under Ohio R.C. 5747.08(G), a taxpayer
shall automatically receive an extension for the filing of a municipal income
tax return. The extended due date of the municipal income tax return shall be
the same as the extended due date of the state income tax return.
   (e)   Amended returns.
      (1)   A.   A taxpayer shall file an amended return with the Tax
Administrator in such form as the Tax Administrator requires if any of the
facts, figures, computations, or attachments required in the taxpayer’s annual
return to determine the tax due levied by the municipality in accordance with
this chapter must be altered.
         B.   Within 60 days after the final determination of any federal or
state tax liability affecting the taxpayer’s municipal tax liability, that
taxpayer shall make and file an amended municipal return showing income subject
to the municipal income tax based upon such final determination of federal or
state tax liability, and pay any additional municipal income tax shown due
thereon or make a claim for refund of any overpayment, unless the tax or
overpayment is ten dollars ($10.00) or less.
         C.   If a taxpayer intends to file an amended consolidated municipal
income tax return, or to amend its type of return from a separate return to a
consolidated return, based on the taxpayer’s consolidated federal income tax
return, the taxpayer shall notify the Tax Administrator before filing the
amended return.
      (2)   A.   In the case of an underpayment, the amended return shall be
accompanied by payment of any combined additional tax due together with any
penalty and interest thereon. If the combined tax shown to be due is ten
dollars ($10.00) or less, such amount need not accompany the amended return.
Except as provided under division (e)(2)B. of this section, the amended return
shall not reopen those facts, figures, computations, or attachments from a
previously filed return that are not affected, either directly or indirectly,
by the adjustment to the taxpayer’s federal or state income tax return unless
the applicable statute of limitations for civil actions or prosecutions under §
881.19 of this chapter has not expired for a previously filed return.
         B.   The additional tax to be paid shall not exceed the amount of tax
that would be due if all facts, figures, computations, and attachments were
reopened.
      (3)   A.   In the case of an overpayment, a request for refund may be
filed under this division within the period prescribed by §
881.19(a)(2) of this chapter for filing the amended return even if it is filed
beyond the period prescribed in that division if it otherwise conforms to the
requirements of that division. If the amount of the refund is ten dollars
($10.00) or less, no refund need be paid by the municipality to the taxpayer.
Except as set forth in division (e)(3)B. of this section, a request filed under
this division shall claim refund of overpayments resulting from alterations to
only those facts, figures, computations, or attachments required in the
taxpayer’s annual return that are affected, either directly or indirectly, by
the adjustment to the taxpayer’s federal or state income tax return unless it
is also filed within the time prescribed in §
881.09(f) of this chapter. Except as set forth in division (e)(3)B. of this
section, the request shall not reopen those facts, figures, computations, or
attachments that are not affected, either directly or indirectly, by the
adjustment to the taxpayer’s federal or state income tax return.
         B.   The amount to be refunded shall not exceed the amount of refund
that would be due if all facts, figures, computations, and attachments were
reopened.
   (f)   Refunds.
      (1)   Upon receipt of a request for a refund, the Tax Administrator of
the municipality, in accordance with this section, shall refund to employers,
agents of employers, other payers, or taxpayers, with respect to any income or
withholding tax levied by the municipality:
         A.   Overpayments of more than ten dollars ($10.00);
         B.   Amounts paid erroneously if the refund requested exceeds ten
dollars ($10.00).
      (2)   A.   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, returns setting
forth a request for refund shall be filed with the Tax Administrator, within
three years after the tax was due or paid, whichever is later. Any
documentation that substantiates the taxpayer’s claim for a refund must be
included with the return filing. Failure to remit all documentation, including
schedules, other municipal income tax returns, or other supporting
documentation necessary to verify credits, income, losses or other pertinent
factors on the return will cause delay in processing, and/or disallowance of
undocumented credits or losses.
         B.   On filing of the refund request, the Tax Administrator shall
determine the amount of refund due and certify such amount to the appropriate
municipal corporation official for payment. Except as provided in division (f)
(2)C. of this section, the Administrator shall issue an assessment to any
taxpayer whose request for refund is fully or partially denied. The assessment
shall state the amount of the refund that was denied, the reasons for the
denial, and instructions for appealing the assessment.
         C.   If a Tax Administrator denies in whole or in part a refund
request included within the taxpayer’s originally filed annual income tax
return, the Tax Administrator shall notify the taxpayer, in writing, of the
amount of the refund that was denied, the reasons for the denial, and
instructions for requesting an assessment that may be appealed under §
881.18 of this chapter.
      (3)   A request for a refund that is received after the last day for
filing specified in division (f)(2) of this section shall be considered to have
been filed in a timely manner if any of the following situations exist:
         A.   The request is delivered by the postal service, and the earliest
postal service postmark on the cover in which the request is enclosed is not
later than the last day for filing the request.
         B.   The request is delivered by the postal service, the only postmark
on the cover in which the request is enclosed was affixed by a private postal
meter, the date of that postmark is not later than the last day for filing the
request, and the request is received within seven days of such last day.
         C.   The request is delivered by the postal service, no postmark date
was affixed to the cover in which the request is enclosed or the date of the
postmark so affixed is not legible, and the request is received within seven
days of the last day for making the request.
      (4)   Interest shall be allowed and paid on any overpayment by a taxpayer
of any municipal income tax obligation from the date of the overpayment until
the date of the refund of the overpayment, except that if any overpayment is
refunded within 90 days after the final filing date of the annual return or 90
days after the completed return is filed, whichever is later, no interest shall
be allowed on the refund. For the purpose of computing the payment of interest
on amounts overpaid, no amount of tax for any taxable year shall be considered
to have been paid before the date on which the return on which the tax is
reported is due, without regard to any extension of time for filing that
return. Interest shall be paid at the interest rate described in §
881.10(a)(4) of this chapter.
      (5)   As used in this section, “withholding tax” has the same meaning as
in §
881.10 of this chapter.
(Ord. 15-O-2839, passed 11-17-2015; Ord. 16-O-2883, passed 10-4-2016)
§ 881.10  INTEREST, FEES AND CHARGES.
   (a)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   “Applicable law” means this chapter, the resolutions, ordinances,
codes, directives, instructions, and rules adopted by the municipality provided
such resolutions, ordinances, codes, directives, instructions, and rules impose
or directly or indirectly address the levy, payment, remittance, or filing
requirements of a municipal income tax.
      (2)   “Federal short-term rate” means the rate of the average market
yield on outstanding marketable obligations of the United States with remaining
periods to maturity of three years or less, as determined under Section 1274 of
the Internal Revenue Code, for July of the current year.
      (3)   “Income tax,” “estimated income tax,” and “withholding tax” mean
any income tax, estimated income tax, and withholding tax imposed by a
municipal corporation pursuant to applicable law, including at any time before
January 1, 2016.
      (4)   “Interest rate as described in division (a) of this section” means
the federal short-term rate, rounded to the nearest whole number per cent, plus
5%. The rate shall apply for the calendar year next following the July of the
year in which the federal short-term rate is determined in accordance with
division (a)(2) of this section.
      (5)   “Return” includes any tax return, report, reconciliation, schedule,
and other document required to be filed with a Tax Administrator or municipal
corporation by a taxpayer, employer, any agent of the employer, or any other
payer pursuant to applicable law, including at any time before January 1, 2016.
      (6)   “Unpaid estimated income tax” means estimated income tax due but
not paid by the date the tax is required to be paid under applicable law.
      (7)   “Unpaid income tax” means income tax due but not paid by the date
the income tax is required to be paid under applicable law.
      (8)   “Unpaid withholding tax” means withholding tax due but not paid by
the date the withholding tax is required to be paid under applicable law.
      (9)   “Withholding tax” includes amounts an employer, any agent of an
employer, or any other payer did not withhold in whole or in part from an
employee’s qualifying wages, but that, under applicable law, the employer,
agent, or other payer is required to withhold from an employee’s qualifying
wages.
   (b)   (1)   This section shall apply to the following:
         A.   Any return required to be filed under applicable law for taxable
years beginning on or after January 1, 2016;
         B.   Income tax, estimated income tax, and withholding tax required to
be paid or remitted to the municipality on or after January 1, 2016 for taxable
years beginning on or after January 1, 2016.
      (2)   This section does not apply to returns required to be filed or
payments required to be made before January 1, 2016, regardless of the filing
or payment date. Returns required to be filed or payments required to be made
before January 1, 2016, but filed or paid after that date shall be subject to
the ordinances or rules, as adopted from time to time before January 1, 2016 of
this municipality.
   (c)   The municipality shall impose on a taxpayer, employer, any agent of
the employer, and any other payer, and will attempt to collect, the interest
amounts and penalties prescribed in this section when the taxpayer, employer,
any agent of the employer, or any other payer for any reason fails, in whole or
in part, to make to the municipality timely and full payment or remittance of
income tax, estimated income tax, or withholding tax or to file timely with the
municipality any return required to be filed.
      (1)   Interest shall be imposed at the rate defined as “interest rate as
described in division (a) of this section,” per annum, on all unpaid income
tax, unpaid estimated income tax, and unpaid withholding tax. This imposition
of interest shall be assessed per month, or fraction of a month.
      (2)   With respect to unpaid income tax and unpaid estimated income tax,
a penalty equal to 15% of the amount not timely paid shall be imposed.
      (3)   With respect to any unpaid withholding tax, a penalty equal to 50%
of the amount not timely paid shall be imposed.
      (4)   With respect to returns other than estimated income tax returns,
the municipality shall impose a monthly penalty of twenty-five dollars ($25.00)
for each failure to timely file each return, regardless of the liability shown
thereon for each month, or any fraction thereof, during which the return
remains unfiled regardless of the liability shown thereon. The penalty shall
not exceed a total of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) in assessed penalty
for each failure to timely file a return.
   (d)   With respect to income taxes, estimated income taxes, withholding
taxes, and returns, the municipality shall not impose, seek to collect, or
collect any penalty, amount of interest, charges or additional fees not
described in this section.
   (e)   With respect to income taxes, estimated income taxes, withholding
taxes, and returns, the municipality shall not refund or credit any penalty,
amount of interest, charges, or additional fees that were properly imposed or
collected before January 1, 2016.
   (f)   The Tax Administrator may, in the Tax Administrator’s sole discretion,
abate or partially abate penalties or interest imposed under this section when
the Tax Administrator deems such abatement or partial abatement to be
appropriate. Such abatement or partial abatement shall be properly documented
and maintained on the record of the taxpayer who received benefit of such
abatement or partial abatement.
   (g)   The municipality may impose on the taxpayer, employer, any agent of
the employer, or any other payer the municipality’s post-judgment collection
costs and fees, including attorney’s fees.
(Ord. 15-O-2839, passed 11-17-2015)
§ 881.11  AUDIT.
   (a)   At or before the commencement of an audit, as defined in §
881.03(c)(3) of this chapter, the Tax Administrator shall provide to the
taxpayer a written description of the roles of the Tax Administrator and of the
taxpayer during an audit and a statement of the taxpayer’s rights, including
any right to obtain a refund of an overpayment of tax. At or before the
commencement of an audit, the Tax Administrator shall inform the taxpayer when
the audit is considered to have commenced.
   (b)   Except in cases involving suspected criminal activity, the Tax
Administrator shall conduct an audit of a taxpayer during regular business
hours and after providing reasonable notice to the taxpayer. A taxpayer who is
unable to comply with a proposed time for an audit on the grounds that the
proposed time would cause inconvenience or hardship must offer reasonable
alternative dates for the audit.
   (c)   At all stages of an audit by the Tax Administrator, a taxpayer is
entitled to be assisted or represented by an attorney, accountant, bookkeeper,
or other tax practitioner. The Tax Administrator shall prescribe a form by
which a taxpayer may designate such a person to assist or represent the
taxpayer in the conduct of any proceedings resulting from actions by the Tax
Administrator. If a taxpayer has not submitted such a form, the Tax
Administrator may accept other evidence, as the Tax Administrator considers
appropriate, that a person is the authorized representative of a taxpayer. A
taxpayer may refuse to answer any questions asked by the person conducting an
audit until the taxpayer has an opportunity to consult with the taxpayer’s
attorney, accountant, bookkeeper, or other tax practitioner. This division does
not authorize the practice of law by a person who is not an attorney.
   (d)   A taxpayer may record, electronically or otherwise, the audit
examination.
   (e)   The failure of the Tax Administrator to comply with a provision of
this section shall neither excuse a taxpayer from payment of any taxes owed by
the taxpayer nor cure any procedural defect in a taxpayer’s case.
   (f)   If the Tax Administrator fails to substantially comply with the
provisions of this section, the Tax Administrator, upon application by the
taxpayer, shall excuse the taxpayer from penalties and interest arising from
the audit.
(Ord. 15-O-2839, passed 11-17-2015)
§ 881.12  ROUNDING.
   A person may round to the nearest whole dollar all amounts the person is
required to enter on any return, report, voucher, or other document required
under this chapter. Any fractional part of a dollar that equals or exceeds
fifty cents ($0.50) shall be rounded to the next whole dollar, and any
fractional part of a dollar that is less than fifty cents ($0.50) shall be
dropped, rounding down to the nearest whole dollar. If a person chooses to
round amounts entered on a document, the person shall round all amounts entered
on the document.
(Ord. 15-O-2839, passed 11-17-2015)
§ 881.13  AUTHORITY AND POWERS OF THE TAX ADMINISTRATOR.
   (a)   Authority of Tax Administrator; administrative powers of The Tax
Administrator. The Tax Administrator has the authority to perform all duties
and functions necessary and appropriate to implement the provisions of this
chapter, including without limitation:
      (1)   Exercise all powers whatsoever of an inquisitorial nature as
provided by law, including, the right to inspect books, accounts, records,
memorandums, and federal and state income tax returns, to examine persons under
oath, to issue orders or subpoenas for the production of books, accounts,
papers, records, documents, and testimony, to take depositions, to apply to a
court for attachment proceedings as for contempt, to approve vouchers for the
fees of officers and witnesses, and to administer oaths; provided that the
powers referred to in this division of this section shall be exercised by the
Tax Administrator only in connection with the performance of the duties
respectively assigned to the Tax Administrator under a municipal corporation
income tax ordinance or resolution adopted in accordance with this chapter;
      (2)   Appoint agents and prescribe their powers and duties;
      (3)   Confer and meet with officers of other municipal corporations and
states and officers of the United States on any matters pertaining to their
respective official duties as provided by law;
      (4)   Exercise the authority provided by law, including orders from
bankruptcy courts, relative to remitting or refunding taxes, including
penalties and interest thereon, illegally or erroneously imposed or collected,
or for any other reason overpaid, and, in addition, the Tax Administrator may
investigate any claim of overpayment and make a written statement of the Tax
Administrator’s findings, and, if the Tax Administrator finds that there has
been an overpayment, approve and issue a refund payable to the taxpayer, the
taxpayer’s assigns, or legal representative as provided in this chapter;
      (5)   Exercise the authority provided by law relative to consenting to
the compromise and settlement of tax claims;
      (6)   Exercise the authority provided by law relative to the use of
alternative apportionment methods by taxpayers in accordance with §
881.06(b) of this chapter;
      (7)   Make all tax findings, determinations, computations, assessments,
and orders the Tax Administrator is by law authorized and required to make and,
pursuant to time limitations provided by law, on the Tax Administrator’s own
motion, review, redetermine, or correct any tax findings, determinations,
computations, assessments, or orders the Tax Administrator has made, but the
Tax Administrator shall not review, redetermine, or correct any tax finding,
determination, computation, assessment, or order which the Tax Administrator
has made for which an appeal has been filed with the Local Board of Tax Review
or other appropriate tribunal, unless such appeal or application is withdrawn
by the appellant or applicant, is dismissed, or is otherwise final;
      (8)   Destroy any or all returns or other tax documents in the manner
authorized by law; and
      (9)   Enter into an agreement with a taxpayer to simplify the withholding
obligations described in §
881.05(a) of this chapter.
   (b)   Authority of Tax Administrator; compromise of claim and payment over
time.
      (1)   As used in this division (b), “claim” means a claim for an amount
payable to the municipality that arises pursuant to the municipal income tax
imposed in accordance with this chapter.
      (2)   The Tax Administrator may do either of the following if such action
is in the best interests of the municipality:
         A.   Compromise a claim;
         B.   Extend for a reasonable period the time for payment of a claim by
agreeing to accept monthly or other periodic payments, upon such terms and
conditions as the Tax Administrator may require.
      (3)   The Tax Administrator’s rejection of a compromise or payment-over-
time agreement proposed by a person with respect to a claim shall not be
appealable.
      (4)   A compromise or payment-over-time agreement with respect to a claim
shall be binding upon and shall inure to the benefit of only the parties to the
compromise or agreement, and shall not extinguish or otherwise affect the
liability of any other person.
      (5)   A.   A compromise or payment-over-time agreement with respect to a
claim shall be void if the taxpayer defaults under the compromise or agreement
or if the compromise or agreement was obtained by fraud or by misrepresentation
of a material fact. Any amount that was due before the compromise or agreement
and that is unpaid shall remain due, and any penalties or interest that would
have accrued in the absence of the compromise or agreement shall continue to
accrue and be due.
         B.   The Tax Administrator shall have sole discretion to determine
whether or not penalty, interest, charges or applicable fees will be assessed
through the duration of any compromise or payment-over-time agreement.
      (6)   The Tax Administrator may require that the taxpayer provide
detailed financial documentation and information, in order to determine whether
or not a payment-over-time agreement will be authorized. The taxpayer’s failure
to provide the necessary and required information by the Tax Administrator
shall preclude consideration of a payment-over-time agreement.
   (c)   Authority of Tax Administrator; right to examine.
      (1)   The Tax Administrator, or any authorized agent or employee thereof
may examine the books, papers, records, and federal and state income tax
returns of any employer, taxpayer, or other person that is subject to, or that
the Tax Administrator believes is subject to, the provisions of this chapter
for the purpose of verifying the accuracy of any return made or, if no return
was filed, to ascertain the tax due under this chapter. Upon written request by
the Tax Administrator or a duly authorized agent or employee thereof, every
employer, taxpayer, or other person subject to this section is required to
furnish the opportunity for the Tax Administrator, authorized agent, or
employee to investigate and examine such books, papers, records, and federal
and state income tax returns at a reasonable time and place designated in the
request.
      (2)   The records and other documents of any taxpayer, employer, or other
person that is subject to, or that a Tax Administrator believes is subject to,
the provisions of this chapter shall be open to the Tax Administrator’s
inspection during business hours and shall be preserved for a period of six
years following the end of the taxable year to which the records or documents
relate, unless the Tax Administrator, in writing, consents to their destruction
within that period, or by order requires that they be kept longer. The Tax
Administrator of a municipal corporation may require any person, by notice
served on that person, to keep such records as the Tax Administrator determines
necessary to show whether or not that person is liable, and the extent of such
liability, for the income tax levied by the municipality or for the withholding
of such tax.
      (3)   The Tax Administrator may examine under oath any person that the
Tax Administrator reasonably believes has knowledge concerning any income that
was or would have been returned for taxation or any transaction tending to
affect such income. The Tax Administrator may, for this purpose, compel any
such person to attend a hearing or examination and to produce any books,
papers, records, and federal and state income tax returns in such person’s
possession or control. The person may be assisted or represented by an
attorney, accountant, bookkeeper, or other tax practitioner at any such hearing
or examination. This division does not authorize the practice of law by a
person who is not an attorney.
      (4)   No person issued written notice by the Tax Administrator compelling
attendance at a hearing or examination or the production of books, papers,
records, or federal and state income tax returns under this section shall fail
to comply.
   (d)   Authority of Tax Administrator; requiring identifying information.
      (1)   The Tax Administrator may require any person filing a tax document
with the Tax Administrator to provide identifying information, which may
include the person’s social security number, federal employer identification
number, or other identification number requested by the Tax Administrator. A
person required by the Tax Administrator to provide identifying information
that has experienced any change with respect to that information shall notify
the Tax Administrator of the change before, or upon, filing the next tax
document requiring the identifying information.
      (2)   A.   If the Tax Administrator makes a request for identifying
information and the Tax Administrator does not receive valid identifying
information within 30 days of making the request, nothing in this chapter
prohibits the Tax Administrator from imposing a penalty upon the person to whom
the request was directed pursuant to §
881.10 of this chapter, in addition to any applicable penalty described in §
881.99 of this chapter.
         B.   If a person required by the Tax Administrator to provide
identifying information does not notify the Tax Administrator of a change with
respect to that information as required under division (d)(1) of this section
within 30 days after filing the next tax document requiring such identifying
information, nothing in this chapter prohibits the Tax Administrator from
imposing a penalty pursuant to §
881.10 of this chapter.
         C.   The penalties provided for under divisions (d)(2)A. and (d)(2)B.
of this section may be billed and imposed in the same manner as the tax or fee
with respect to which the identifying information is sought and are in addition
to any applicable criminal penalties described in §
881.99 of this chapter for a violation of §
881.15 of this chapter, and any other penalties that may be imposed by the Tax
Administrator by law.
(Ord. 15-O-2839, passed 11-17-2015)
§ 881.14  CONFIDENTIALITY.
   (a)   Any information gained as a result of returns, investigations,
hearings, or verifications required or authorized by Ohio R.C. Chapter 718 or
by the charter or ordinance of the municipality is confidential, and no person
shall access or disclose such information except in accordance with a proper
judicial order or in connection with the performance of that person’s official
duties or the official business of the municipality as authorized by Ohio R.C.
Chapter 718 or the charter or ordinance authorizing the levy. The Tax
Administrator of the municipality or a designee thereof may furnish copies of
returns filed or otherwise received under this chapter and other related tax
information to the Internal Revenue Service, the State Tax Commissioner, and
Tax Administrators of other municipal corporations.
   (b)   This section does not prohibit the municipality from publishing or
disclosing statistics in a form that does not disclose information with respect
to particular taxpayers.
(Ord. 15-O-2839, passed 11-17-2015)
§ 881.15  FRAUD.
   No person shall knowingly make, present, aid, or assist in the preparation
or presentation of a false or fraudulent report, return, schedule, statement,
claim, or document authorized or required by municipal corporation ordinance or
state law to be filed with the Tax Administrator, or knowingly procure,
counsel, or advise the preparation or presentation of such report, return,
schedule, statement, claim, or document, or knowingly change, alter, or amend,
or knowingly procure, counsel, or advise such change, alteration, or amendment
of the records upon which such report, return, schedule, statement, claim, or
document is based with intent to defraud the municipality or the Tax
Administrator.
(Ord. 15-O-2839, passed 11-17-2015)
§ 881.16  OPINION OF THE TAX ADMINISTRATOR.
   (a)   An “opinion of the Tax Administrator” means an opinion issued under
this section with respect to prospective municipal income tax liability. It
does not include ordinary correspondence of the Tax Administrator.
   (b)   A taxpayer may submit a written request for an opinion of the Tax
Administrator as to whether or how certain income, source of income, or a
certain activity or transaction will be taxed. The written response of the Tax
Administrator shall be an “opinion of the Tax Administrator” and shall bind the
Tax Administrator, in accordance with divisions (c), (g), and (h) of this
section, provided all of the following conditions are satisfied:
      (1)   The taxpayer’s request fully and accurately describes the specific
facts or circumstances relevant to a determination of the taxability of the
income, source of income, activity, or transaction, and, if an activity or
transaction, all parties involved in the activity or transaction are clearly
identified by name, location, or other pertinent facts.
      (2)   The request relates to a tax imposed by the municipality in
accordance with this chapter.
      (3)   The Tax Administrator’s response is signed by the Tax Administrator
and designated as an “opinion of the Tax Administrator.”
   (c)   An opinion of the Tax Administrator shall remain in effect and shall
protect the taxpayer for whom the opinion was prepared and who reasonably
relies on it from liability for any taxes, penalty, or interest otherwise
chargeable on the activity or transaction specifically held by the Tax
Administrator’s opinion to be taxable in a particular manner or not to be
subject to taxation for any taxable years that may be specified in the opinion,
or until the earliest of the following dates:
      (1)   The effective date of a written revocation by the Tax Administrator
sent to the taxpayer by certified mail, return receipt requested. The effective
date of the revocation shall be the taxpayer’s date of receipt or one year
after the issuance of the opinion, whichever is later;
      (2)   The effective date of any amendment or enactment of a relevant
section of the Ohio Revised Code, uncodified state law, or the municipality’s
income tax ordinance that would substantially change the analysis and
conclusion of the opinion of the Tax Administrator;
      (3)   The date on which a court issues an opinion establishing or
changing relevant case law with respect to the Ohio Revised Code, uncodified
state law, or the municipality’s income tax ordinance;
      (4)   If the opinion of the Tax Administrator was based on the
interpretation of federal law, the effective date of any change in the relevant
federal statutes or regulations, or the date on which a court issues an opinion
establishing or changing relevant case law with respect to federal statutes or
regulations;
      (5)   The effective date of any change in the taxpayer’s material facts
or circumstances;
      (6)   The effective date of the expiration of the opinion, if specified
in the opinion.
   (d)   (1)   A taxpayer is not relieved of tax liability for any activity or
transaction related to a request for an opinion that contained any
misrepresentation or omission of one or more material facts.
      (2)   If the taxpayer knowingly has misrepresented the pertinent facts or
omitted material facts with intent to defraud the municipality in order to
obtain a more favorable opinion, the taxpayer may be in violation of §
881.15 of this chapter.
   (e)   If a Tax Administrator provides written advice under this section, the
opinion shall include a statement that:
      (1)   The tax consequences stated in the opinion may be subject to change
for any of the reasons stated in division (c) of this section;
      (2)   It is the duty of the taxpayer to be aware of such changes.
   (f)   A Tax Administrator may refuse to offer an opinion on any request
received under this section.
   (g)   This section binds a Tax Administrator only with respect to opinions
of the Tax Administrator issued on or after January 1, 2016.
   (h)   An opinion of a Tax Administrator binds that Tax Administrator only
with respect to the taxpayer for whom the opinion was prepared and does not
bind the Tax Administrator of any other municipal corporation.
   (i)   A Tax Administrator shall make available the text of all opinions
issued under this section, except those opinions prepared for a taxpayer who
has requested that the text of the opinion remain confidential. In no event
shall the text of an opinion be made available until the Tax Administrator has
removed all information that identifies the taxpayer and any other parties
involved in the activity or transaction.
   (j)   An opinion of the Tax Administrator issued under this section or a
refusal to offer an opinion under division (f) may not be appealed.
(Ord. 15-O-2839, passed 11-17-2015)
§ 881.17  ASSESSMENT; APPEAL BASED ON PRESUMPTION OF DELIVERY.
   (A)   (1)   The Tax Administrator shall serve an assessment either by
personal service, by certified mail, or by a delivery service authorized under
Ohio R.C. 5703.056.
      (2)   The Tax Administrator may deliver the assessment through
alternative means as provided in this section, including, but not limited to,
delivery by secure electronic mail. Such alternative delivery method must be
authorized by the person subject to the assessment.
      (3)   Once service of the assessment has been made by the Tax
Administrator or other municipal official, or the designee of either, the
person to whom the assessment is directed may protest the ruling of that
assessment by filing an appeal with the Local Board of Tax Review within 60
days after the receipt of service. The delivery of an assessment of the Tax
Administrator as prescribed in Ohio R.C. 718.18 is prima facie evidence that
delivery is complete and that the assessment is served.
   (b)   (1)   A person may challenge the presumption of delivery and service
as set forth in this division. A person disputing the presumption of delivery
and service under this section bears the burden of proving by a preponderance
of the evidence that the address to which the assessment was sent was not an
address with which the person was associated at the time the Tax Administrator
originally mailed the assessment by certified mail. For the purposes of this
section, a person is associated with an address at the time the Tax
Administrator originally mailed the assessment if, at that time, the person was
residing, receiving legal documents, or conducting business at the address; or
if, before that time, the person had conducted business at the address and,
when the assessment was mailed, the person’s agent or the person’s affiliate
was conducting business at the address. For the purposes of this section, a
person’s affiliate is any other person that, at the time the assessment was
mailed, owned or controlled at least 20%, as determined by voting rights, of
the addressee’s business.
      (2)   If a person elects to appeal an assessment on the basis described
in division (b)(1) of this section, and if that assessment is subject to
collection and is not otherwise appealable, the person must do so within 60
days after the initial contact by the Tax Administrator or other municipal
official, or the designee of either, with the person. Nothing in this division
prevents the Tax Administrator or other official from entering into a
compromise with the person if the person does not actually file such an appeal
with the Local Board of Tax Review.
(Ord. 15-O-2839, passed 11-17-2015)
§ 881.18  LOCAL BOARD OF TAX REVIEW; APPEAL TO LOCAL BOARD OF TAX REVIEW.
   (a)   (1)   The legislative authority of the municipality shall maintain a
Local Board of Tax Review to hear appeals as provided in Ohio R.C. Chapter 718.
      (2)   The Local Board of Tax Review shall consist of three members. One
of such members of the Local Board of Tax Review must be domiciled within the
municipality, but one or both of the other two members thereof need not be
domiciled within the municipality. Two members shall be appointed by the
legislative authority of the municipality, and may not be employees, elected
officials, or contractors with the municipality at any time during their term
or in the five years immediately preceding the date of appointment. One member
shall be appointed by the top administrative official of the municipality. This
member may be an employee of the municipality, but may not be the Director of
Finance or equivalent officer, or the Tax Administrator or other similar
official or an employee directly involved in municipal tax matters, or any
direct subordinate thereof.
      (3)   The term for members of the Local Board of Tax Review appointed by
the legislative authority of the municipality shall be two years. There is no
limit on the number of terms that a member may serve should the member be
reappointed by the legislative authority. The board member appointed by the top
administrative official of the municipality shall serve at the discretion of
the administrative official.
      (4)   Members of the Board of Tax Review appointed by the legislative
authority may be removed by the legislative authority as set forth in Ohio R.C.
718.11(A)(4).
      (5)   A member of the Board who, for any reason, ceases to meet the
qualifications for the position prescribed by this section shall resign
immediately by operation of law.
      (6)   A vacancy in an unexpired term shall be filled in the same manner
as the original appointment within 60 days of when the vacancy was created. Any
member appointed to fill a vacancy occurring prior to the expiration of the
term for which the member’s predecessor was appointed shall hold office for the
remainder of such term. No vacancy on the Board shall impair the power and
authority of the remaining members to exercise all the powers of the Board.
      (7)   If a member is temporarily unable to serve on the Board due to a
conflict of interest, illness, absence, or similar reason, the legislative
authority or top administrative official that appointed the member shall
appoint another individual to temporarily serve on the Board in the member’s
place. This appointment shall be subject to the same requirements and
limitations as are applicable to the appointment of the member temporarily
unable to serve.
      (8)   No member of the Local Board of Tax Review shall receive
compensation, fee, or reimbursement of expenses for service on the Board.
      (9)   A member of a Local Board of Tax Review shall not be appointed to
or serve on another such board simultaneously.
   (b)   Whenever a Tax Administrator issues an assessment, the Tax
Administrator shall notify the taxpayer in writing at the same time of the
taxpayer’s right to appeal the assessment, the manner in which the taxpayer may
appeal the assessment, and the address to which the appeal should be directed,
and to whom the appeal should be directed.
   (c)   Any person who has been issued an assessment may appeal the assessment
to the Board by filing a request with the Board. The request shall be in
writing, shall specify the reason or reasons why the assessment should be
deemed incorrect or unlawful, and shall be filed within 60 days after the
taxpayer receives the assessment.
   (d)   The Local Board of Tax Review shall schedule a hearing to be held
within 60 days after receiving an appeal of an assessment under division (c) of
this section, unless the taxpayer requests additional time to prepare or waives
a hearing. If the taxpayer does not waive the hearing, the taxpayer may appear
before the Board and/or may be represented by an attorney at law, certified
public accountant, or other representative. The Board may allow a hearing to be
continued as jointly agreed to by the parties. In such a case, the hearing must
be completed within 120 days after the first day of the hearing unless the
parties agree otherwise.
   (e)   The Board may affirm, reverse, or modify the Tax Administrator’s
assessment or any part of that assessment. The Board shall issue a final
determination on the appeal within 90 days after the Board’s final hearing on
the appeal, and send a copy of its final determination by ordinary mail to all
of the parties to the appeal within 15 days after issuing the final
determination. The taxpayer or the Tax Administrator may appeal the Board’s
final determination as provided in Ohio R.C. 5717.011.
   (f)   The Local Board of Tax Review created pursuant to this section shall
adopt rules governing its procedures, including a schedule of related costs,
and shall keep a record of its transactions. The rules governing the Local
Board of Tax Review procedures shall be in writing, and may be amended as
needed by the Local Board of Tax Review. Such records are not public records
available for inspection under Ohio R.C. 149.43. For this reason, any
documentation, copies of returns or reports, final determinations, or working
papers for each case must be maintained in a secure location under the control
of the Tax Administrator. No member of the Local Board of Tax Review may remove
such documentation, copies of returns or reports, final determinations, or
working papers from the hearing. Hearings requested by a taxpayer before a
Local Board of Tax Review created pursuant to this section are not meetings of
a public body subject to Ohio R.C. 121.22. For this reason, such hearings shall
not be open to the public, and only those parties to the case may be present
during the hearing.
(Ord. 15-O-2839, passed 11-17-2015)
§ 881.19  ACTIONS TO RECOVER; STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS.
   (a)   (1)   A.   Civil actions to recover municipal income taxes and
penalties and interest on municipal income taxes shall be brought within the
latter of:
            1.   Three years after the tax was due or the return was filed,
whichever is later; or
            2.   One year after the conclusion of the qualifying deferral
period, if any.
         B.   The time limit described in division (a)(1)A. of this section may
be extended at any time if both the Tax Administrator and the employer, agent
of the employer, other payer, or taxpayer consent in writing to the extension.
Any extension shall also extend for the same period of time the time limit
described in division (c) of this section.
      (2)   As used in this section, “qualifying deferral period” means a
period of time beginning and ending as follows:
         A.   Beginning on the date a person who is aggrieved by an assessment
files with a Local Board of Tax Review the request described in §
881.18 of this chapter. That date shall not be affected by any subsequent
decision, finding, or holding by any administrative body or court that the
Local Board of Tax Review with which the aggrieved person filed the request did
not have jurisdiction to affirm, reverse, or modify the assessment or any part
of that assessment.
         B.   Ending the later of the sixtieth day after the date on which the
final determination of the Local Board of Tax Review becomes final or, if any
party appeals from the determination of the Local Board of Tax Review, the
sixtieth day after the date on which the final determination of the Local Board
of Tax Review is either ultimately affirmed in whole or in part or ultimately
reversed and no further appeal of either that affirmation, in whole or in part,
or that reversal is available or taken.
   (b)   Prosecutions for an offense made punishable under a resolution or
ordinance imposing an income tax shall be commenced within three years after
the commission of the offense, provided that in the case of fraud, failure to
file a return, or the omission of 25% or more of income required to be
reported, prosecutions may be commenced within six years after the commission
of the offense.
   (c)   A claim for a refund of municipal income taxes shall be brought within
the time limitation provided in §
881.09(f) of this chapter.
   (d)   (1)   Notwithstanding the fact that an appeal is pending, the
petitioner may pay all or a portion of the assessment that is the subject of
the appeal. The acceptance of a payment by the municipality does not prejudice
any claim for refund upon final determination of the appeal.
      (2)   If upon final determination of the appeal an error in the
assessment is corrected by the Tax Administrator, upon an appeal so filed or
pursuant to a final determination of the Local Board of Tax Review created
under §
881.18 of this chapter, of the Ohio Board of Tax Appeals, or any court to which
the decision of the Ohio Board of Tax Appeals has been appealed, so that the
amount due from the party assessed under the corrected assessment is less than
the amount paid, there shall be issued to the appellant or to the appellant’s
assigns or legal representative a refund in the amount of the overpayment as
provided by §
881.09(f) of this chapter, with interest on that amount as provided by division
(d) of this section.
   (e)   No civil action to recover municipal income tax or related penalties
or interest shall be brought during either of the following time periods:
      (1)   The period during which a taxpayer has a right to appeal the
imposition of that tax or interest or those penalties;
      (2)   The period during which an appeal related to the imposition of that
tax or interest or those penalties is pending.
(Ord. 15-O-2839, passed 11-17-2015)
§ 881.97  COLLECTION OF TAX AFTER TERMINATION OF CHAPTER.
   (a)   This chapter shall continue in full force and effect insofar as the
levy of taxes is concerned until repealed, and insofar as the collection of
taxes levied hereunder and actions and proceedings for collecting any tax so
levied or enforcing any provisions of this chapter are concerned, it shall
continue in full force and effect until all of the taxes levied in the
aforesaid period are fully paid and any and all suits and prosecutions for the
collection of taxes or for the punishment of violations of this chapter have
been fully terminated, subject to the limitations contained in §
881.19.
   (b)   Annual returns due for all or any part of the last effective year of
this chapter shall be due on the date provided in §
881.09(a) as though the same were continuing.
(Ord. 15-O-2839, passed 11-17-2015)
§ 881.98  SAVINGS CLAUSE.
   If any sentence, clause, section, or part of this chapter, or any tax
imposed against, or exemption from tax granted to, any taxpayer or forms of
income specified herein is found to be unconstitutional, illegal, or invalid,
such unconstitutionality, illegality, or invalidity shall affect only such
clause, sentence, section, or part of this chapter so found and shall not
affect or impair any of the remaining provisions, sentences, clauses, sections,
or other parts of this chapter. It is hereby declared to be the intention of
the legislative authority of the municipality that this chapter would have been
adopted had such unconstitutional, illegal, or invalid sentence, clause,
section, or part thereof not been included in this chapter.
(Ord. 15-O-2839, passed 11-17-2015)
§ 881.99  PENALTY.
   (a)   Except as provided in division (b) of this section, whoever violates §
881.15 of this chapter, §
881.14(a) of this chapter, or §
881.05(a) of this chapter by failing to remit municipal income taxes deducted
and withheld from an employee, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree and shall be subject to a fine of not more than one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) or imprisonment for a term of up to six months, or both. In
addition, the violation is punishable by dismissal from office or discharge
from employment, or both.
   (b)   Any person who discloses information received from the Internal
Revenue Service in violation of Internal Revenue Code Sec. 7213(a), 7213A, or
7431 shall be guilty of a felony of the fifth degree and shall be subject to a
fine of not more than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) plus the costs of
prosecution, or imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years, or both. In
addition, the violation is punishable by dismissal from office or discharge
from employment, or both.
   (c)   Each instance of access or disclosure in violation of §
881.14(a) of this chapter constitutes a separate offense.
   (d)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter, for which no
penalty is otherwise provided in this §
881.99, is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree and shall be fined not
more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisoned not more than six
months, or both, for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed
each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. By way of an
illustrative enumeration, such violations of this chapter shall include but not
be limited to the following acts, conduct, and/or omissions:
      (1)   Fail, neglect, or refuse to make any return or declaration required
by this chapter; or
      (2)   Knowingly make any incomplete return; or
      (3)   Willfully fail, neglect, or refuse to pay the tax, penalties, and
interest, or any combination thereof, imposed by this chapter; or
      (4)   Cause to not be remitted the city income tax withheld from
qualifying wages of employees to the municipality municipal corporation as
required by §
881.05(a); or
      (5)   Neglect or refuse to withhold or remit municipal income tax from
employees; or
      (6)   Refuse to permit the Tax Administrator or any duly authorized agent
or employee to examine his or her books, records, papers, federal and state
income tax returns, or any documentation relating to the income or net profits
of a taxpayer; or
      (7)   Fail to appear before the Tax Administrator and to produce his or
her books, records, papers, federal and state income tax returns, or any
documentation relating to the income or net profits of a taxpayer upon order or
subpoena of the Tax Administrator; or
      (8)   Refuse to disclose to the Tax Administrator any information with
respect to such person’s income or net profits, or in the case of a person
responsible for maintaining information relating to his or her employers’
income or net profits, such person’s employer’s income or net profits; or
      (9)   Fail to comply with the provisions of this chapter or any order or
subpoena of the Tax Administrator; or
      (10)   To avoid imposition or collection of municipal income tax,
willfully give to an employer or prospective employer false information as to
his or her true name, correct social security number and residence address, or
willfully fail to promptly notify an employer or a prospective employer of any
change in residence address and date thereof; or
      (11)   Fail, as an employer, agent of an employer, or other payer, to
maintain proper records of employees residence addresses, total qualifying
wages paid and municipal tax withheld, or to knowingly give the Tax
Administrator false information; or
      (12)   Willfully fail, neglect, or refuse to make any payment of
estimated municipal income tax for any taxable year or any part of any taxable
year in accordance with this chapter; or
      (13)   Attempt to do anything whatsoever to avoid the payment of the
whole or any part of the tax, penalties or interest imposed by this chapter.
      (14)   For purposes of this section, any violation that does not specify
a culpable mental state or intent, shall be one of strict liability and no
culpable mental state or intent shall be required for a person to be guilty of
that violation.
      (15)   For purposes of this section, the term “person” shall, in addition
to the meaning prescribed in §
881.03, include in the case of a corporation, association, pass-through entity
or unincorporated business entity not having any resident owner or officer
within the city, any employee or agent of such corporation, association, pass-
through entity or unincorporated business entity who has control or supervision
over or is charged with the responsibility of filing the municipal income tax
returns and making the payments of the municipal income tax as required by this
chapter.
(Ord. 15-O-2839, passed 11-17-2015)
CHAPTER 882:  MOTOR VEHICLE LICENSE TAX
Section
882.01   Levy; rate.
882.02   Motor Vehicle License Tax Fund.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Motor Vehicle License Tax - see Ohio R.C. 4504.06, 4504.172
   Display of license plates; obstructions - see TRAF.
436.09
   Use of illegal license plates - see TRAF.
436.10
§ 882.01  LEVY; RATE.
   (a)   There is hereby levied, commencing in 2011, an annual license tax, in
addition to the tax levied by Ohio R.C. 4503.02, 4503.07 and 4503.18, upon the
operation of motor vehicles on the public roads or highways. Such tax shall be
at the rate of five dollars ($5.00) per motor vehicle on all motor vehicles,
the district of registration of which, as defined in Ohio R.C. 4503.10, is in
the municipality. Such levy and rate shall be in accordance with Ohio R.C.
4504.172.
   (b)   The Manager is hereby authorized to take all steps as may be deemed
necessary to accomplish the intent and purpose of this section.
(Res. 87-R-90, passed 8-18-1987; Res. 09-R-396, passed 12-15-2009)
§ 882.02  MOTOR VEHICLE LICENSE TAX FUND.
   (a)   There is hereby established a special fund, pursuant to Ohio R.C.
5705.09, which fund shall be titled the Motor Vehicle License Tax Fund.
   (b)   Such Fund shall be used for the purpose of receiving and disbursing
the license tax proceeds.
   (c)   Any interest derived from such Fund shall be deposited to such Fund
pursuant to Ohio R.C. 5705.10.
(Ord. 88-O-1037, passed 6-21-1988)
PART TEN:  STREETS, UTILITIES AND PUBLIC SERVICES CODE
      TITLE TWO - Streets and Sidewalks
         Chap.
1020.   Excavations.
         Chap.
1022.   Street Improvements.
         Chap.
1024.   Sidewalks.
      TITLE FOUR - Utilities
         Chap.
1040.   Utilities Generally.
         Chap.
1042.   Water.
         Chap.
1044.   Sewers.
         Chap.
1045.  Storm Water Management and Erosion and Sedimentation Control
Regulations.
         Chap.
1046.   Gas.
         Chap.
1048.   Electricity.
         Chap.
1050.   Use of Public Ways by Service Providers.
         Chap.
1052.   Identity Theft Prevention Program.
      TITLE SIX - Other Public Services
         Chap.
1060.   Garbage and Rubbish Collection and Disposal.
         Chap.
1062.   Parks.
         Chap.
1064.   Columbiana Cemetery.
         Chap.
1066.   Public Safety Vehicle Service.
TITLE TWO:  STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
CHAPTER 1020:  EXCAVATIONS
Section
1020.01   Definitions.
1020.02   Permit required.
1020.03   Street openings limited.
1020.04   Commencement of work.
1020.05   Permits nontransferable.
1020.06   Permit expiration.
1020.07   Municipal utility cuts.
1020.08   State and county highways.
1020.09   Rights of municipality.
1020.10   Permit revocation.
1020.11   Duties and responsibilities of applicants.
1020.12   Duties and responsibilities of permittees.
1020.13   Opening and excavation restrictions.
1020.14   Backfilling and restoring openings.
1020.15   Deposit required.
1020.16   Form of deposit.
1020.17   Insufficient deposit.
1020.18   Yearly deposit.
1020.19   Deposit and cost schedules.
1020.20   Decision on costs.
1020.21   Refund of deposit.
1020.22   Maintenance bond requirements.
1020.23   Defaults in performance.
1020.24   Completion of work.
1020.25   Insurance requirements.
1020.26   Notices of improvements.
1020.27   Restrictions upon opening new streets.
1020.28   Penalty for opening new streets.
1020.29   Street list requirements.
1020.30   Abandoned facilities.
1020.31   Street opening permit notices.
1020.99   Penalty.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Openings by the municipality - see Ohio R.C. 723.02
   Excavation liability - see Ohio R.C. 723.49 et seq.
   Abandoned excavations - see GEN. OFF.
660.09
   Care and maintenance of streets - see S.U. & P.S.
1022.04
   Subdivision design standards for streets - see P. & Z.
1248.04 et seq.
§ 1020.01  DEFINITIONS.
   The following words, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section, except in those instances where the context
clearly indicates otherwise. In this chapter, the singular shall include the
plural and the masculine shall include the feminine and the neuter.
   (a)   “Applicant” means any person who makes application for a permit.
   (b)   “Director” means the Service Director or his or her authorized deputy,
representative or inspector.
   (c)   “Emergency” means any unforeseen circumstance or occurrence, the
existence of which constitutes a clear and immediate danger to persons or
properties.
   (d)   “Municipal authority” means any body corporate and politic created
pursuant to the laws of the state.
   (e)   “Municipality” means the Municipality of Columbiana, Ohio.
   (f)   “Permittee” means any person who has been issued a permit and has
agreed to fulfill all the terms of this chapter.
   (g)   “Person” means and includes any natural person, partnership, firm,
association, utility or corporation. Whenever used in any section prescribing
and imposing a penalty, the term “person,” as applied to associations, means
the partners or members thereof, and as applied to corporations, the officers
thereof.
   (h)   “Public utility company” means any company subject to the jurisdiction
of and control by the Ohio Public Utility Commission.
   (i)   “Street” means and includes a public street, public easement, public
right-of-way, public highway, public alley, public way or public road accepted
or maintained by the municipality.
(1974 Code, § 903.01)
§ 1020.02  PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No person shall make any tunnel, opening or excavation of any kind in or
under the surface of any street without first securing a permit from the
municipality for each separate undertaking. However, any person maintaining
pipes, lines or other underground facilities in or under the surface of any
street may proceed with an opening without a permit when emergency
circumstances demand the work to be done immediately, provided the permit could
not reasonably and practically have been obtained beforehand. Such person shall
thereafter apply for a permit on the first regular business day on which the
office of the Service Director is open for business, and such permit shall be
retroactive to the date when the work was begun. In all cases where emergency
openings are necessary, the Police Department shall be notified prior to such
opening.
(1974 Code, § 903.02)
§ 1020.03  STREET OPENINGS LIMITED.
   No person to whom a permit has been granted shall perform any of the work
authorized by such permit in any amount greater than that specified in the
permit, except that upon approval by the Service Director, additional work may
be done under the provisions of the permit in such an amount as the Director
shall deem appropriate and necessary to complete the work. Any deposit and bond
posted in connection with the permit shall be deemed to cover any such
additional work as may be approved pursuant to this section within the limit
mentioned herein.
(1974 Code, § 903.03)
§ 1020.04  COMMENCEMENT OF WORK.
   Work for which a permit has been issued shall commence within ten days after
the issuance of the permit therefor. If not so commenced, the permit shall be
automatically terminated unless the permittee applies to the Service Director
for an extension of time within which to commence work. If such an extension is
granted, the original permit shall remain in force for the period of time
specified in the extension. Permits which terminate within ten days after
issuance or within any extension of time granted by the Director may be renewed
only upon the payment of an additional permit fee as originally required.
(1974 Code, § 903.04)
§ 1020.05  PERMITS NONTRANSFERABLE.
   Permits are not transferable from one person to another, and the work shall
not be made in any place other than the location specifically designated in the
permit.
(1974 Code, § 903.05)
§ 1020.06  PERMIT EXPIRATION.
   Every permit shall expire at the time stated in the permit. If the permittee
should not complete the work within the specified time, he or she shall, prior
to expiration of the permit, present in writing to the Service Director a
request for an extension of time, setting forth therein the reasons for the
requested extension. If, in the opinion of the Director, such an extension is
necessary and not contrary to the public interest, the permittee may be granted
additional time for the completion of the work.
(1974 Code, § 903.06)
§ 1020.07  MUNICIPAL UTILITY CUTS.
   All street openings required by utilities owned and/or operated by the
municipality shall be made and restored under the direction and supervision of
the Service Director. The permit, fee, deposit, insurance and bond requirements
of this chapter shall not be applicable to any openings made by such
municipally owned and/or operated utilities.
(1974 Code, § 903.07)
§ 1020.08  STATE AND COUNTY HIGHWAYS.
   The provisions of this chapter shall not be applicable in those instances
where the highway is maintained by the state or the county.
(1974 Code, § 903.08)
§ 1020.09  RIGHTS OF MUNICIPALITY.
   Every permit shall be granted subject to the right of the municipality or of
any other person to lawfully use the street for any purpose, not inconsistent
with the permit.
(1974 Code, § 903.09)
§ 1020.10  PERMIT REVOCATION.
   (a)   Any permit may be revoked by the Service Director after notice to the
permittee for:
      (1)   Violation of any condition of the permit or of any provision of
this chapter;
      (2)   Violation of any provision of any other applicable ordinance or law
relating to the work; or
      (3)   Existence of any condition or the doing of any act constituting or
creating a nuisance or endangering life or property.
   (b)   A permittee shall be granted a period of three days from the date of
the notice to correct the violation and to proceed with the diligent
prosecution of the work authorized by the permit before such permit is revoked.
   (c)   Written notice of any such violation or condition shall be served upon
the permittee or his or her agent engaged in the work. The notice shall contain
a brief statement of the reasons for revoking the permit. Notice may be given
either by personal delivery thereof to the person to be notified or by
certified or registered United States mail addressed to the person to be
notified.
   (d)   When any permit has been revoked and the work authorized by the permit
has not been completed, the Director shall do such work as may be necessary to
restore the street or part thereof to as good a condition as before the opening
was made. All expenses hereby incurred by the municipality shall be recovered
from the deposit or bond the permittee has made or filed with the municipality.
(1974 Code, § 903.10)
§ 1020.11  DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF APPLICANTS.
   It shall be the duty and responsibility of any applicant to:
   (a)   Make written application for such permit with the Service Director on
such form as he or she  shall prescribe. No work shall commence until the
Director has approved the application and plan and issued a permit, and until
the permittee has paid and provided all fees, deposits, certificates and bonds
required by this chapter;
   (b)   Furnish in triplicate a plan showing the work to be performed under
such permit. Two copies of such plan shall be returned to the applicant at the
time the permit is granted; and
   (c)   Agree to save the municipality, its officers, employees and agents
harmless from any and all costs, damages and liabilities which may accrue or be
claimed to accrue by reason of any work performed under such permit. The
acceptance of any permit under this chapter shall constitute such an agreement
by the applicant whether the same is expressed or not.
(1974 Code, § 903.11)
§ 1020.12  DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF PERMITTEES.
   It shall be the duty and responsibility of any person receiving a permit to:
   (a)   Pay a permit fee of five dollars ($5.00). However, public utility
companies and municipal authorities may, upon written notice to the Service
Director, elect to be billed monthly for such fees as they accrue;
   (b)   Make a deposit to cover the cost of inspecting the work authorized by
the permit, unless excepted from such requirements by the provisions of §§
1020.15 through
1020.21;
   (c)   Furnish a performance bond as required by §§
1020.22 through
1020.24, unless excepted from such requirement by such sections;
   (d)   Furnish a certificate of insurance as required by §
1020.25, unless excepted from such requirement by such section; and
   (e)   Keep the original copy of the permit and an approved copy of the plan
at all times while such work is in progress at the location for which such
permit was granted, and show such permit and/or plan upon demand by the
municipal street or police authorities.
(1974 Code, § 903.12)
§ 1020.13  OPENING AND EXCAVATION RESTRICTIONS.
   (a)   No opening or excavation in any street shall extend beyond the
centerline of the street before being backfilled and the surface of the street
temporarily restored.
   (b)   No more than 250 feet measured longitudinally shall be opened in any
street at any one time, except by special permission of the Service Director.
   (c)   All utility facilities shall be located sufficiently ahead of trench
excavation work to avoid damage to those facilities and to permit their
relocation, if necessary.
   (d)   Pipe drains, pipe culverts or other facilities encountered shall be
protected by the permittee.
   (e)   Any person whose facilities are damaged or caused to be relocated by
the permittee may make the necessary repairs or relocation and file a claim
against the permittee with the municipality for the cost of such repairs or
relocation. Public utility companies concerned shall be notified by the
municipality in sufficient time to determine the validity of the damage or
relocation claims. The cost of such repair or relocation work may be held by
the Director from the deposit pending determination of liability for the
damage.
   (f)   Monuments of concrete, iron or other lasting material set for the
purpose of locating or preserving the lines of any street or property
subdivision, or a precise survey reference point or a permanent survey bench
mark within the municipality shall not be removed or disturbed or caused to be
removed or disturbed unless permission to do so is first obtained in writing
from the Director. Permission shall be granted only upon condition that the
permittee shall pay all expenses incident to the proper replacement of the
monument.
   (g)   When work performed by the permittee interferes with the established
drainage system of any street, provision shall be made by the permittee to
provide proper drainage to the satisfaction of the Director.
   (h)   When any earth, gravel or other excavated material is caused to roll,
flow or wash upon any street, the permittee shall cause the same to be removed
from the street within 24 hours after deposit. In the event the earth, gravel
or other excavated lateral so deposited is not removed, the Director shall
cause such removal, and the cost incurred shall be paid by the permittee or
deducted from his or her deposit.
   (i)   Every permittee shall place around the project such barriers,
barricades, lights, warning flags and danger signs as shall be determined by
the Director to be necessary for the protection of the public.
      (1)   Additional safety requirements may be prescribed by the Director,
following applicable state and national standards.
      (2)   Whenever any person fails to provide or maintain the safety devices
required by the Director, such devices shall be installed and maintained by the
municipality. The amount of the cost incurred shall be paid by the permittee or
deducted from his or her deposit.
      (3)   No person shall willfully move, remove, injure, destroy or
extinguish any barrier, warning lights, sign or notice erected, placed or
posted in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
   (j)   Access to private driveways shall be provided except during working
hours when construction operations prohibit provision of such access. Free
access must be provided to fire hydrants at all times.
   (k)   Excavated materials shall be laid compactly along the side of the
trench and kept trimmed up so as to cause as little inconvenience as possible
to public travel. In order to expedite the flow of traffic or to abate a dirt
or dust nuisance, the Director may require the permittee to provide toe boards
or bins, and if the excavated area is muddy and causes inconvenience to
pedestrians, temporary wooden plank walks shall be installed by the permittee
as directed by the Director. If the street is not wide enough to hold the
excavated material without using part of the adjacent sidewalk, the permittee
shall keep a passageway at least one-half the sidewalk width open along such
sidewalk line.
   (l)   Work authorized by a permit shall be performed between the hours of 7:
00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday, unless the permittee obtains
written consent from the Director to do the work at an earlier or later hour.
Such permission shall be granted only in case of an emergency or in the event
the work authorized by the permit is to be performed in traffic congested
areas.
   (m)   In granting any permit, the Director may attach such other conditions
thereto as may be reasonably necessary to prevent damage to public or private
property or to prevent the operation from being conducted in a manner hazardous
to life or property or in a manner likely to create a nuisance. Such conditions
may include, but shall not be limited to:
      (1)   Limitations on the period of the year in which the work may be
performed;
      (2)   Restrictions as to the size and type of equipment;
      (3)   Designation of routes upon which materials may be transported;
      (4)   The place and manner of disposal of excavated materials;
      (5)   Requirements as to the laying of dust, the cleaning of streets, the
prevention of noise and other results offensive or injurious to the
neighborhood, the general public or any portion thereof; and
      (6)   Regulations as to the use of streets in the course of the work.
(1974 Code, § 903.13)
§ 1020.14  BACKFILLING AND RESTORING OPENINGS.
   (a)   All pavement cuts, openings and excavations shall be properly made,
backfilled and temporarily surfaced by the permittee according to municipal
specifications.
   (b)   The Service Director must be notified by the permittee during the 48-
hour period preceding beginning of backfilling of the date and approximate time
at which backfilling will be begun.
   (c)   The work of the final restoration, including both paving surface and
paving base, shall be performed by the permittee according to municipal
specifications.
   (d)   If the Director finds that paving surfaces adjacent to the street
opening may be damaged where trenches are made parallel to the street, or where
a number of cross trenches are laid in close proximity to one another, or where
the equipment used may cause such damage, he or she may require a negotiated
contribution from the permittee for the resurfacing in the place of patching
such street if the total area of the proposed patch or probably damaged area
exceeds 25% of the total pavement surfacing between curb faces or between
concrete gutter edges in any block. Such negotiations shall be carried on and
contributions agreed upon prior to issuance of a permit.
   (e)   After excavation is commenced, the work of making and backfilling the
same shall be prosecuted with due diligence.
   (f)   The Director shall make such inspections as he or she may deem
necessary of all work authorized by a permit. The Director is empowered to
provide a full-time inspector, if necessary, to ensure compliance with the
provisions of this chapter.
   (g)   All inspection costs shall be borne by the permittee. Such costs shall
be based on a schedule of charges on file in the office of the Director.
   (h)   The permittee shall notify the Director in writing upon completion of
all work accomplished under the provisions of the permit. A certificate of
final inspection shall be issued by the Director to each permittee no sooner
than one year after the permanent restoration of the excavation has been made,
provided the work authorized by the permit has been performed according to
municipal specifications. Prior to the issuance of a certificate, the Director
shall make a final inspection of the restoration to determine whether municipal
specifications have been adhered to.
   (i)   If any settlement in a restored area occurs within a period of one
year from date of completion of the permanent restoration, any expense incurred
by the municipality in correcting such settlement shall be paid by the
permittee or recovered from his or her bond, unless the permittee submits proof
satisfactory to the Director that the settlement was not due to defective
backfilling.
   (j)   In no case shall any opening made by a permittee be considered in the
charge or care of the municipality or any of its officers or employees, and no
officer or employee is authorized in any way to take or assume any jurisdiction
over any such opening, except in the exercise of the police power, when it is
necessary to protect life and property.
(1974 Code, § 903.14)
§ 1020.15  DEPOSIT REQUIRED.
   The Service Director, upon receipt of a properly completed application,
shall determine the amount of the deposit to be made by the permittee in
accordance with a schedule of charges provided by §
1020.19. However, the minimum amount of the deposit shall be fifty dollars
($50.00). The deposit shall be paid at the time the permit is received, and the
deposit shall be used to reimburse the municipality for the cost of any work
and/or materials furnished by it in connection with the work authorized by the
permit, to cover all necessary inspections of such work and for any other
purpose set forth in this chapter. The municipality may elect to waive this
requirement insofar as it pertains to a public utility company if such company
files with the municipality its corporate bond in a form satisfactory to the
Municipal Attorney, conditioned upon the payment to the municipality of all
costs which would otherwise be covered by and paid out of such a deposit. In
the event any public utility company elects to file such a bond, the
municipality shall bill such company monthly for such costs as they accrue.
(1974 Code, § 903.15)
§ 1020.16  FORM OF DEPOSIT.
   The deposit may be either in the form of a certified, treasurer’s or
cashier’s check or in lawful money of the United States.
(1974 Code, § 903.16)
§ 1020.17  INSUFFICIENT DEPOSIT.
   If any deposit is less than sufficient to pay all costs, the permittee
shall, upon demand, pay to the municipality an amount equal to the deficiency.
If the permittee fails or refuses to pay such deficiency, the municipality may
institute an action to recover the same in any court of competent jurisdiction.
Until such deficiency is paid in full, no additional permits shall be issued to
such permittee.
(1974 Code, § 903.17)
§ 1020.18  YEARLY DEPOSIT.
   Whenever any public utility, if it does not elect to file a corporate bond
as provided in §
1020.15, or a municipal authority, shall anticipate more than one street
opening or excavation per calendar year, such public utility or municipal
authority may post one deposit in an amount and form as provided above for the
calendar year or part thereof to cover the cost of any and all work.
(1974 Code, § 903.18)
§ 1020.19  DEPOSIT AND COST SCHEDULES.
   The Service Director shall establish and maintain a schedule of charges for
inspections, labor, materials and such other expenses as may be incurred by the
municipality in meeting the requirements of this chapter. In developing the
schedule, the Director shall be guided by the prevailing costs in the area for
labor, materials and equipment. The Director shall revise the schedule of
charges periodically to reflect any increase or decrease in costs used to
establish such charges. The schedule of charges shall be open to public
inspection in the office of the Director upon demand.
(1974 Code, § 903.19)
§ 1020.20  DECISION ON COSTS.
   The Service Director shall determine the cost of any work done or repairs
made by him or her or under his or her direction, pursuant to the provisions of
this chapter. In the event a permittee disputes the amount charged by the
Director for work done or repairs made by the municipality, the municipal
governing body shall decide the amount due the municipality.
(1974 Code, § 903.20)
§ 1020.21  REFUND OF DEPOSIT.
   Upon notification by the permittee that all work authorized by the permit
has been completed and after restoration of the opening, the Director shall
refund to the permittee his or her deposit less all costs incurred by the
municipality in connection with such permit. In no event shall the permit fee
be refunded.
(1974 Code, § 903.21)
§ 1020.22  MAINTENANCE BOND REQUIREMENTS.
   Each applicant, upon the receipt of a permit, shall provide the municipality
with an acceptable corporate surety bond to guarantee faithful performance of
the work authorized by a permit granted pursuant to this chapter. The amount of
the bond shall be 100% of the estimated cost of restoring the street opening.
The term of the bond shall begin upon the date of posting thereof and shall
terminate upon the receipt by the permittee of a certificate of final
inspection from the Director. If the permittee anticipates requesting more than
one permit per year as required by this chapter, he or she may furnish one
continuing corporate surety bond in such amount as the Director deems necessary
to guarantee faithful performance. The amount of such bond shall be in relation
to the cost of restoring pavement cuts to be made by the permittee throughout
the year. The municipality may elect to waive the requirement insofar as it
pertains to a public utility company if such company files with the
municipality its corporate bond in a form satisfactory to the Municipal
Attorney, conditioned upon compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
(1974 Code, § 903.22)
§ 1020.23  DEFAULTS IN PERFORMANCE.
   Whenever the Service Director shall find that a default has occurred in the
performance of any term or condition of the permit, written notice thereof
shall be given to the principal and to the surety on the bond. Such notice
shall state the work to be done, the estimated cost thereof, and the period of
time deemed by the Director to be reasonably necessary for the completion of
the work.
(1974 Code, § 903.23)
§ 1020.24  COMPLETION OF WORK.
   After receipt of such notice the surety must, within the time therein
specified, either cause the required work to be performed, or failing therein,
indemnify the municipality for the cost of doing the work as set forth in the
notice.
(1974 Code, § 903.24)
§ 1020.25  INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS.
   Each applicant, upon the receipt of a permit, shall provide the municipality
with an acceptable certificate of insurance indicating that he or she is
insured against claims for damages for personal injury as well as against
claims for property damage which may arise from or out of the performance of
the work, whether such performance be by himself or herself, his or her
subcontractor or anyone directly or indirectly employed by him or her. Such
insurance shall cover collapse, explosive hazards and underground work by
equipment on the street, and shall include protection against liability arising
from completed operations. The amount of the insurance shall be prescribed by
the Service Director in accordance with the nature of the risk involved.
However, the liability insurance for bodily injury in effect shall not be less
than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for each person, and three
hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) for each accident, and for property
damages not less than fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00), with an aggregate of
one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for all accidents. A public utility
company or municipal authority may be relieved of the obligation of submitting
such a certificate if it submits satisfactory evidence that it is insured or
has adequate provision for self insurance, in accordance with the requirements
of this chapter. Public utilities and authorities may submit annually such
evidence of insurance coverage in lieu of individual submissions for each
permit.
(1974 Code, § 903.25)
§ 1020.26  NOTICES OF IMPROVEMENTS.
   When the municipality shall improve or pave any street, the Clerk of Council
shall give notice to all persons owning property abutting on the street about
to be paved or improved, and to all public utilities and municipal authorities
operating in the municipality, and all such persons, public utilities and
municipal authorities shall make all connections as well as any repairs thereto
which would necessitate excavation of the street, within 45 days from the
giving of such notice. The time shall be extended if permission is requested in
writing and approved by the Clerk of Council after consultation with the
Service Director.
(1974 Code, § 903.26)
§ 1020.27  RESTRICTIONS UPON OPENING NEW STREETS.
   No permit shall be issued by the Service Director which would allow an
excavation or opening in a paved and improved street surface less than five
years old unless the applicant can clearly demonstrate that public health or
safety require that the proposed work be permitted or unless an emergency
condition exists.
(1974 Code, § 903.27)
§ 1020.28  PENALTY FOR OPENING NEW STREETS.
   If by special action of the Service Director, a permit is issued to open any
paved and improved street surface less than five years old, a penalty charge
shall be made for the opening, except that the penalty shall be waived in the
event the work is of an emergency nature. The penalty charge shall be on a
sliding scale and shall be equal to 2% of the cost of restoring the opening for
each unelasped month or fraction thereof of the five-year restricted period.
(1974 Code, § 903.28)
§ 1020.29  STREET LIST REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   Every person owning, using, controlling or having an interest in
pipes, conduits, ducts or other structures under the surface of any street used
for the purpose of supplying or conveying gas, electricity, communication
impulses, water or steam to or from the municipality or to or from its
inhabitants, or for any other purposes, shall file with the Service Director
within 120 days after the adoption of this chapter, a written statement
containing the names of the municipality’s streets wherein the aforementioned
facilities owned by such a person are located.
   (b)   Within 90 days after January 1 of each and every year, such person
shall notify in writing the Director of the changes necessary to maintain  the
street list required in division (a) hereof.
(1974 Code, § 903.29)
§ 1020.30  ABANDONED FACILITIES.
   (a)   Whenever any pipe, conduit, duct, tunnel or other structure located
under the surface of any street, or the use thereof, is abandoned, the person
owning, using, controlling or having an interest therein shall, within 30 days
after such abandonment, file with the Service Director a statement in writing
giving in detail the location of the structure so abandoned.
   (b)   Whenever there are manholes or tunnels associated with abandoned
underground facilities, such manholes or tunnels shall be filled in at the time
of abandonment and the Director notified thereof in writing.
   (c)   When the municipality plans to pave or improve streets in which there
are abandoned facilities, the owners of such facilities shall be required to
remove them if, in the opinion of Council, their removal is in the best
interest of the municipality. If the owner shall refuse to remove such
facilities, the municipality shall remove the abandoned facilities and the
owner shall reimburse the municipality for such removal.
(1974 Code, § 903.30)
§ 1020.31  STREET OPENING PERMIT NOTICES.
   (a)   If the work to be undertaken by the permittee is such that it will
affect the use of properties abutting or adjoining the project, the Service
Director shall notify the affected property owners and/or tenants of the
proposed work to be done.
   (b)   If the work to be undertaken by a permittee will affect other
subsurface installations in the vicinity of the proposed opening, the Director
shall notify the owners of such facilities of the proposed work.
   (c)   The Director shall notify in writing the Police and Fire Departments
of all street opening permits he or she grants. Such notification shall state
the nature of the work to be done, proposed beginning and completion dates and
the location of such projects.
(1974 Code, § 903.31)
§ 1020.99  PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor for a first offense and shall be fined not more than one hundred
fifty dollars ($150.00).  For any subsequent offense, the offender is guilty of
a misdemeanor of the third degree and shall be fined not more than five hundred
dollars ($500.00) or imprisoned not more than 60 days, or both.  A separate
offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a violation
occurs or continues.
CHAPTER 1022:  STREET IMPROVEMENTS
Section
1022.01   Unimproved street defined.
1022.02   Construction and material specifications.
1022.03   Side road drainage.
1022.04   Care and maintenance.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Planning Commission - see CHTR.
9.02; P. & Z.
Ch. 1220
   Power to establish and care for streets - see Ohio R.C. 715.19, 717.01,
723.01
   Surface treatment - see Ohio R.C. 723.23, 723.31
   Compulsory service connections - see Ohio R. C. 729.06, 743.37
   Street excavations - see S.U. & P.S.
Ch. 1020
   Subdivision design standards for streets - see P. & Z.
1248.04 et seq.
   Street improvements - see P. & Z.
1250.05 et seq.
§ 1022.01  UNIMPROVED STREET DEFINED.
   As used in this chapter, an “unimproved street” means a street that, even
though platted as a street, has not been opened for public use, or a street
which, though traveled by the public, does not meet the criteria established in
this chapter for an improved street.
(Ord. 1633, passed 8-6-1968)
§ 1022.02  CONSTRUCTION AND MATERIAL SPECIFICATIONS.
   No street in the municipality shall be classified as an improved street
until the following minimum requirements have been met.
   (a)   Improvement of streets shall be made by property owners or others
according to the adopted typical street cross-section on file in the Municipal
Building and by further provisions of this chapter.
   (b)   The minimum improved travel surface shall be 24 feet wide. The
Planning Commission may determine that the width of any certain street should
be more than the 24 feet minimum, but in no case greater than three-fifths of
the width of the street right-of-way.
   (c)   The base course shall be constructed in conformity with the adopted
typical section of bituminous aggregate base (Items 301 and 302 minimum eight
inch depth), or ten inch minimum No. 12 slag or limestone or aggregate base
(Item 304), as per the January 1, 2000, edition of the State of Ohio Department
of Transportation Construction and Material Specifications.
   (d)   The above work must be constructed according to a line and grade which
will be furnished by the municipality.
   (e)   The surface course shall have a minimum of four-inch compacted
thickness of asphalt concrete placed in two layers. The first course shall be a
leveling course with a minimum thickness of two and one-half inches, which
shall be placed after the base course has received a tack coat of liquid
asphalt to bind the leveling course to the base course. The leveling course
shall be Item 402 of the State of Ohio Department of Transportation
Construction and Material Specifications. The finish surface course shall have
at least a one and one-half inches compacted thickness and shall be Item 404 of
such Specifications.
   (f)   All streets shall be curbed by a standard curb Type 2, or Type 6 as
per the State of Ohio Department of Transportation Construction and Material
Specifications. The City Engineer shall designate the type of curb to be used
for the application.
   (g)   At such time as a plan of a street is presented, the size of all
drives and approach culvert and storm sewers shall be designated by the
Municipal Engineer and noted on such plans.
   (h)   All storm sewers, driveway pipe and side drainage shall be furnished
by the abutting property owners, and shall be of the size and type designated
by the Municipal Engineer and noted on such plans.
   (i)   The Manager may amend, so as to lessen, or may waive, any requirement
hereinbefore listed, by and with consent of Council.
(Ord. 02-O-1970, passed 9-3-2002)
§ 1022.03  SIDE ROAD DRAINAGE.
   Council may, upon the recommendation of the Planning Commission and the
Municipal Engineer, permit a rolled ditch-type of side road drainage, provided
that driveway pipe and a sufficient number of ditch-inlet basins are installed
and properly connected to drain the area.
(Ord. 1633, passed 8-6-1968)
§ 1022.04  CARE AND MAINTENANCE.
   After the improvements required by this chapter have been made, and after
the municipality has inspected and approved the same, the municipality shall
care for and maintain such streets in the same condition as they are at the
time of acceptance.
(Res. 1288, passed 12-18-1962)
CHAPTER 1024:  SIDEWALKS
Section
1024.01   Specifications for sidewalks in commercial areas.
1024.02   Exception to commercial area specifications.
1024.03   Specifications for sidewalks in residential and industrial areas.
1024.04   Specifications for concrete sidewalks.
1024.05   Review of commercial property improvement plans by Planning
Commission.
1024.06   Deviations.
1024.99   Penalty.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Notice to construct or repair sidewalks - see Ohio R.C. 729.03 et seq.
   Driving upon sidewalks, tree lawns or curbs - see TRAF.
432.24
   Duty to keep sidewalks in repair and clean - see GEN. OFF.
660.05
   Sidewalk obstructions; damage or injury - see GEN. OFF.
660.10
   Water on sidewalks - see GEN. OFF.
660.15
   Planning Commission - see P. & Z.
Ch. 1220
   Sidewalk improvements for subdivisions - see P. & Z.
1248.12,
1250.13
§ 1024.01  SPECIFICATIONS FOR SIDEWALKS IN COMMERCIAL AREAS.
   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (b) and (c) below all
sidewalks constructed in the municipality in an area for commercial
establishments shall be a minimum of ten feet in width, extending outward from
the building line or from one foot outside the property line, whichever would
apply. The sidewalk shall be constructed of Berea or Amherst sandstone
flagging, or material of equal quality or concrete pavers or portland cement
concrete, as hereinafter specified. The space intervening between the curb and
sidewalk shall be paved as above specified or covered with sod.
   (b)   In the event that a commercial property owner shall be required by a
lawful court order or a state or federal governmental regulation to provide
access to such property for the handicapped, and in the event that such access
can only be provided by a ramp constructed upon the sidewalk abutting such
property, the minimum width of the sidewalk abutting such property may be
reduced to not less than six feet to the extent necessary to accommodate such
ramp, and such ramp may be used to provide such access, with the approval of
the City Planning Commission following a site plan review of the need for, the
proposed construction, and/or the use of such ramp in accordance with the
provisions of §
1260.32 of the Codified Ordinances of Columbiana, and the Planning Commission
may condition such approval as it sees fit, including, but not limited to, a
condition that such commercial property owner shall execute an indemnification
agreement whereby the municipality shall be held harmless from any claims,
demands, actions, causes of action, liability and costs of any nature arising
from or incident to injury (including death) or damage to persons or property
on or about such ramp and such sidewalk.
   (c)   In the event that steps, staircases, stoops, platforms or other such
passageways shall be necessary to provide access from the sidewalk to
commercial property, the same may be used to provide such access, with the
approval of the City Planning Commission following a site plan review of the
need for, the proposed construction, and/or the use of the same in accordance
with the provisions of §
1260.32 of the Codified Ordinances of Columbiana, and the Planning Commission
may condition such approval as it sees fit, including, but not limited to, a
condition that the owner of such commercial property shall execute an
indemnification agreement whereby the city shall be held harmless from any
claims, demands, actions, causes of action, liability and costs of any nature
arising from or incident to injury (including death) or damage to persons or
property on or about such steps, staircases, stoops, platforms or other such
passageways and such sidewalk.
(Ord. 1609, passed 5-21-1968; Ord. 04-O-2126, passed 4-6-2004; Ord. 08-O-2490,
passed 11-4-2008)
§ 1024.02  EXCEPTION TO COMMERCIAL AREA SPECIFICATIONS.
   (a)   An exception to §
1024.01 obtains when a new “black top” (asphalt concrete) surface has been
constructed or is to be constructed adjacent to the sidewalk line, in which
case the asphalt surface may be extended to the curbing, provided that the
existing sidewalk is removed and the area between the sidewalk and the curb is
excavated so that beneath a three-inch asphalt surface there will be six inches
of compacted aggregate base conforming to State of Ohio Department of
Transportation Construction and Material Specifications Item 304 and extending
from the property line to the street or curb line.
   (b)   A concrete sidewalk placed adjacent to an asphalt concrete surface
shall be six inches thick.  This exception shall apply only in conjunction with
a parking area or driving area connected to and necessary for the orderly
operation of a business enterprise conforming to the Zoning Code.
   (c)   Any “black top” surface going to the street or curb shall be properly
lined to delineate the proper sidewalk dimension. Such marked sidewalk area
shall be kept free of snow, ice, and the like, as required by
Chapter 660 of the General Offenses Code.
(Ord. 1609, passed 5-21-1968)
§ 1024.03  SPECIFICATIONS FOR SIDEWALKS IN RESIDENTIAL AND INDUSTRIAL AREAS.
   All new sidewalks constructed in the municipality in an area zoned as
residential or industrial shall be five feet in width. Sidewalks constructed of
concrete shall be four inches thick, except at driveways where the thickness
shall be six inches in residential areas and eight inches reinforced in
industrial areas.
(Ord. 1609, passed 5-21-1968)
§ 1024.04  SPECIFICATIONS FOR CONCRETE SIDEWALKS.
   All concrete sidewalks shall hereinafter conform to the following
specifications.
   (a)   Forms.  Forms shall be of wood or metal, extend for the full depth of
the concrete and be of sufficient strength to resist the pressure of the
concrete without springing.
   (b)   Placing and finishing.  The subgrade shall be moistened thoroughly
immediately prior to placing the concrete. The concrete shall be deposited in a
single layer. It shall be struck off with a template and smoothed with a float
to obtain a sandy texture. No plastering will be permitted. All outside edges
and joints shall be edged with a one-quarter inch radius edging tool. The
surface of the walks shall be divided into equally spaced blocks at
approximately five-foot intervals to form square blocks. Construction joints
shall be formed around all appurtenances such as manholes or utility poles
extending into and through the sidewalk. Expansion joint filler shall be
installed at property lines and between the walk and any fixed structure,
extending the full depth of the walk. The surface of the walk shall have a
transverse slope of one-quarter inch per foot, with the low side adjacent to
the roadway.
   (c)   Concrete.  Concrete shall be Class C proportioned as follows for each
cubic yard.
 
Gravel         - Coarse Aggregate 305# Fine Aggregate 165#
Limestone      - Coarse Aggregate 285# Fine Aggregate 180#
Slag           - Coarse Aggregate 235# Fine Aggregate 195#
6.5 Sack (94#) - Cement           5.7 Gal. of Water (Max.)
 
   (d)   Air-entraining portland cement.  Air-entraining portland cement shall
conform to specification ASTM C-175. The percentage of entrained air shall be
from 6 to 9%.
   (e)   Membrane curing.  Immediately after the free water has disappeared on
the surface, the concrete shall be sealed by spraying as a fine mist a uniform
application of the curing material in such a manner as to provide a continuous,
uniform, water-impermeable film without marring the surface of the concrete.
The membrane curing shall be applied in one or more separate coats at the rate
of at least one gallon per 200 square feet of surface. Curing material shall be
thoroughly agitated before use.
(Ord. 1609, passed 5-21-1968)
§ 1024.05  REVIEW OF COMMERCIAL PROPERTY IMPROVEMENT PLANS BY PLANNING
COMMISSION.
   All persons contemplating improvement to commercial property which will
incorporate in the improvement any of the foregoing sections of this chapter
shall first submit plans of the improvement to the Planning Commission for its
recommendation to Council.
(Ord. 1609, passed 5-21-1968)
§ 1024.06  DEVIATIONS.
   Any deviation from the provisions of this chapter shall be at the discretion
of Council.
(Ord. 1609, passed 5-21-1968)
§ 1024.99  PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor for a first offense and shall be fined not more than one hundred
fifty dollars ($150.00).  For any subsequent offense, the offender is guilty of
a misdemeanor of the third degree and shall be fined not more than five hundred
dollars ($500.00) or imprisoned not more than 60 days, or both.  A separate
offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a violation
occurs or continues.
TITLE FOUR:  UTILITIES
CHAPTER 1040:  UTILITIES GENERALLY
Section
1040.01   Extension of service to nonresidents.
1040.02   Nonpayment of charges; shut-off of service.
1040.03   Security deposits.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Power to furnish light, power and heat - see Ohio R.C. 715.06, 717.01
   Compulsory sewer connections - see Ohio R.C. 729.06
   Gas, electric and water companies - see Ohio R.C. Ch. 4933
   Theft of utilities - see GEN. OFF.
672.06
   Municipal utility cuts - see S.U. & P.S.
1020.07
   Utilities in subdivisions - see P. & Z.
1250.24
§ 1040.01  EXTENSION OF SERVICE TO NONRESIDENTS.
   (a)   Annexation policy.  The long standing policy of the municipality, as
the same has been periodically expressed by way of motion and otherwise in the
minutes of the Council and other agencies of the municipal government,
requiring land contiguous or adjacent to the municipality to be annexed to the
municipality in order to be provided with municipal utility services, shall be
and hereby is reaffirmed.
   (b)   Limitation to surplus utilities.  Only surplus utilities may be
distributed outside the corporate limits of the municipality.
   (c)   Electric service.  Electric service may be distributed outside the
corporate limits at the discretion of the Manager at the prevailing rate as
charged within the corporate limits.
   (d)   Sanitary sewer and water service.
      (1)   All sanitary sewer and water service rates outside the corporate
limits shall be at a rate of 50% over the prevailing rate charged within the
corporate limits.
      (2)   Application of sanitary sewer and/or water service:
         A.   By resident freeholder.  Whenever an owner of real estate, which
is located outside the corporate limits and is so located that it should become
a part of the municipality, makes a binding commitment by a signed agreement on
behalf of himself or herself and subsequent owners, whereby it is agreed that
he or she or his or her successor sign any petition or other document necessary
to procure annexation of such real estate and do all other things necessary and
proper to bring about annexation of his or her land, then the Manager shall
report such fact, and his or her recommendation, to Council for its
consideration as to whether or not water service and/or sewer service shall be
furnished to such owner.
         B.   By nonresident freeholder.
            1.   An owner of real estate, which is located outside the
corporation limits and is so located that such real estate should become a part
of the municipality, may request an extension of water service upon the
condition that the owner and/or developer thereof provides for annexation by
means of a covenant placed in the chain of title of the real estate to be
served so that all subsequent resident freeholders upon purchase of such real
estate from the owner and/or developer are required to consent to and to
undertake annexation proceedings. Such covenant shall include a statement as to
the benefitted party and specify who may enforce the provisions thereof and
shall otherwise provide as follows:
         “The Grantee, by the acceptance of this Deed, and as a further part of
the consideration therefor, for himself or herself, his or her heirs,
executors, administrators, successors and assigns, hereby irrevocably consents
to the annexation of the property herein conveyed to the Municipality of
Columbiana, State of Ohio, and further binds himself or herself to join in any
proceedings to effect any such annexation and agrees that such Agreement shall
be a covenant running with the land and shall be binding upon such grantee, his
or her heirs, executors, administrators and assigns.”
            2.   The recorded plat must be presented to Council showing
evidence that the covenant as above stated has been recorded with such plat.
   (e)   Adjoining property.  All lands that abut and adjoin any proposed
utility must sign and become subject to this section before utilities can be
made available to such property.
   (f)   Cost of construction.  The cost of construction of any sewer and/or
water utility line outside the corporate limits shall be paid by the person or
persons requesting the utility, and the size and type, along with the design
and plan, must be approved by the Manager and shall be at least minimum
municipality size and standards. No water main shall be less than six inches
and no sanitary sewer shall be less than eight inches, all subject to
provisions of the subdivision regulations.
(Ord. 1672, passed 4-1-1969; Ord. 75-O-197, passed 11-18-1975; Res. 91-R-121,
passed 7-16-1991)
§ 1040.02  NONPAYMENT OF CHARGES; SHUT-OFF OF SERVICE.
   (a)   Water and sewers.
      (1)   If any user of the municipality water, storm sewer and/or sanitary
sewerage facilities fails or refuses to pay the charges for the same on or
before the due date appearing on the billing statement, then a written notice
may be sent to such user advising such user that the water service to such
user’s premises shall be shut off on or after the tenth day following the date
appearing upon such written notice unless all water and sewer charges owed by
such user are paid current, together with any penalties due and owing, within
such ten days.
      (2)   If such charges, together with any penalties due and owing, are not
paid in full within such ten days, such user’s water service shall be shut off
accordingly.
      (3)   If such user wishes to appeal to the municipality to reconsider a
pending shut off of such user’s water service, such user shall, within such ten
days, present his or her appeal, in writing, to the Manager, who shall review
the same and decide whether or not the shut off determination shall be modified
in any manner or form.
      (4)   If such user’s water service is shut off pursuant to this section,
a charge of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) shall be assessed by the municipality
for the reconnection of such service, and such reconnection charges, together
with any and all current billing charges, including penalties due and owing
thereon, shall be paid prior to the reconnection of such service.
   (b)   Electricity.
      (1)   If any user of electricity supplied by the municipality fails or
refuses to pay the charges for the same on or before the due date appearing on
the billing statement, then a written notice may be sent to such user advising
such user that the electric service to such user’s premises shall be shut off
on or after the tenth day following the date appearing upon such written notice
unless all electric charges owed by such user are paid current, together with
any penalties due and owing, within such ten days.
      (2)   If such charges, together with any penalties due and owing, are not
paid in full within such ten days, such user’s electric service shall be shut
off accordingly.
      (3)   If such user wishes to appeal to the municipality to reconsider a
pending shut off of such user’s electric service, such user shall, within such
ten days, present his or her appeal, in writing, to the Manager, who shall
review the same and decide whether or not the shut off determination shall be
modified in any manner or form.
      (4)   If such user’s electric service is shut off pursuant to this
section, a charge of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) shall be assessed by the
municipality for the reconnection of such service, and such reconnection
charges, together with any and all current billing charges, including penalties
due and owing thereon, shall be paid prior to the reconnection of such service.
   (c)   Enforcement.  The Manager is hereby authorized to take whatever steps
may be necessary to carry out the intent and purpose of this section.
   (d)   User defined.  “User,” as used in this section, means the party having
an interest in the premises serviced by the subject utilities as owner, part
owner, landlord or tenant in whose name the subject utility meter is registered
by the municipality.
(Ord. 82-O-624, passed 7-20-1982; Ord. 02-O-1957, passed 7-16-2002; Ord. 09-O-
2548, passed 11-17-2009)
§ 1040.03  SECURITY DEPOSITS.
   (a)   The amount charged for a security deposit for electric service to a
residence shall be seventy-five dollars ($75.00).
   (b)   The amount charged for a security deposit for water service to a
residence shall be sixty dollars ($60.00).
   (c)   Upon proof of ownership of property, such fees may be waived upon the
signing of a contract to guarantee payment by the owner thereof.
   (d)   A renter’s deposits may be waived by the signature of the owner to
guarantee the payment of utility bills.
   (e)   The Manager shall be and hereby is authorized to take whatever steps
may be necessary to carry out the intent and purpose of this section.
(Ord. 81-O-589, passed 12-15-1981; Ord. 02-O-1957, passed 7-16-2002)
CHAPTER 1042:  WATER
EDITOR’S NOTE:  Because of the frequency of change, water usage rates are not
codified.  Copies of the latest relevant legislation may be obtained, at cost,
from the Manager.
Section
1042.01   Water and Sewer Division Superintendent.
1042.02   Permit required for connection; fees.
1042.03   Qualified contractor to tap main.
1042.04   Water connection specifications and standards.
1042.05   Notice of intent to make water tap required.
1042.06   Permit for service line; specifications.
1042.07   Repairs.
1042.08   House service and water line defined.
1042.09   Bond required.
1042.10   Installation and extension requirements; inspections.
1042.11   Wells prohibited when water mains available.
1042.12   Service connection conditions; right of entry; faulty meters.
1042.13   Water service to contractors and builders.
1042.14   Use of water meters.
1042.15   Fire hydrants.
1042.16   Damage resulting from water supply failure.
1042.17   Service connection specifications.
1042.18   Billing; rates and charges.
1042.99   Penalty.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Compulsory water connections - see Ohio R.C. 727.05, 743.23
   Management and control of waterworks - see Ohio R.C. 743.02
   Regulation of price of water - see Ohio R.C. 743.26 et seq.
   Water pollution - see GEN. OFF.
660.04
   Water on sidewalks - see GEN. OFF.
660.15
   Water supply for new subdivisions - see P. & Z.
1250.18
   Construction of water line improvements - see P. & Z.
1250.19
   Sanitary standards for water lines - see B. & H.
1484.04
§ 1042.01  WATER AND SEWER DIVISION SUPERINTENDENT.
   The Water and Sewer Division Superintendent shall be designated by the
Manager. He or she shall supervise all residential, commercial and industrial
water connections and excavations for the purpose of installing or repairing
the same and shall have such further duties and authority as the Manager may
direct from time to time.
(Ord. 74-O-78, passed 2-19-1974)
§ 1042.02  PERMIT REQUIRED FOR CONNECTION; FEES.
   (a)   No person shall connect a residential, commercial or industrial
building to the city water system in any street, alley, easement or other
public right-of-way without first obtaining a written permit therefor from the
Department of Water and Sewer. The Department is hereby authorized to grant
such permits and to exact fees therefor in accordance with this chapter.
   (b)   The fee to be charged for a permit to connect a single family
residential building by way of a water line which shall be not less than three-
fourths inches in diameter to any water line shall be two thousand one hundred
dollars ($2,100.00), together with one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each
additional one-fourth inch over and above the aforesaid three-fourths inch
minimum diameter of the connecting waterline. In addition to the payment of the
permit fee, the person desiring such connection shall furnish all materials,
supplies and labor for the connection from the building, to the curb box at the
sole cost of such person.
   (c)   The fee to be charged for a permit to connect each unit of a multi-
family residential building, including a condominium building, by means of a
water line which shall be not less than three-fourths inch in diameter to any
existing water main shall be two thousand one hundred dollars ($2,100.00),
together with one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each additional one-fourth inch
over and above the three-fourths inch minimum diameter of the connecting water
line. The size of the connecting water line for four or more units shall be
determined by the City Water Department. In addition to the payment of the
permit fee, the person desiring such connection shall furnish all materials,
supplies and labor for the connection from the building to the curb box at the
sole cost of such person.
   (d)   The fee to be changed for a permit to connect any commercial or
industrial user by way of a water line which shall be not less than one inch in
diameter to any existing water main shall be two thousand two hundred dollars
($2,200.00), together with one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each additional
one-fourth inch beyond the one inch diameter of connecting water line. In
addition to the payment of the permit fee, the person desiring such connection
shall furnish all materials, supplies and labor from the building to the curb
box at the sole cost of such person, excluding the water meter and remote read-
out device for which such person shall pay the City of Columbiana the cost of
such meter and remote read-out device plus 20%.
(Ord. 99-O-1723, passed 1-5-1999; Ord. 04-O-2155, passed 12-7-2004)
§ 1042.03  QUALIFIED CONTRACTOR TO TAP MAIN.
   Whenever any permit for a tap to the municipal water main is issued under
this chapter, only a qualified water main contractor, plumber or designated
agent of the Division of Water and Sewer shall tap the water main of the
system. Where such tap is made, the work shall be approved by the inspecting
official designated by the municipality before it is covered.
(Ord. 74-O-78, passed 2-19-1974)
§ 1042.04  WATER CONNECTION SPECIFICATIONS AND STANDARDS.
   Unless otherwise provided by ordinance, the specifications for materials and
supplies for connection to a Municipal water main and for the construction of a
house or commercial or industrial water system, shall meet the standards
prepared by the municipality and administered by the inspecting official.
(Ord. 74-O-78, passed 2-19-1974)
§ 1042.05  NOTICE OF INTENT TO MAKE WATER TAP REQUIRED.
   Any person wishing to make a connection with a municipal water main shall
file a notice of intent to do so at the office of the Manager at least 24
hours, exclusive of Sundays and holidays, before such connection is made. Each
such connection shall be left uncovered until it has been inspected and
approved by the inspecting official designated by the municipality.
(Ord. 74-O-78, passed 2-19-1974)
§ 1042.06  PERMIT FOR SERVICE LINE; SPECIFICATIONS.
   (a)   No person shall lay, alter or disturb any house system or water line
connecting with any public water line belonging to the municipality without
first obtaining a permit therefor from the Division of Water and Sewer.
   (b)   Any person constructing or using a private water line connecting with,
or drawing from, any public water main belonging to the municipality shall
construct and use the same strictly in conformity with the specifications,
orders and directions of the inspecting official designated by the municipality
and in accordance with the ordinances of the municipality.
(Ord. 74-O-78, passed 2-19-1974)
§ 1042.07  REPAIRS.
   All repairs to service lines and connections thereto shall be at the expense
of the owner or tenant of the premises serviced, from the property line inward
to, and including within, the structure.
(Ord. 74-O-78, passed 2-19-1974)
§ 1042.08  HOUSE SERVICE AND WATER LINE DEFINED.
   “House service” and “water line,” as used in this chapter, mean any pipe
which carries municipal water to a house, apartment building, dwelling,
business place, hospital or other building in the municipality.
(Ord. 74-O-78, passed 2-19-1974)
§ 1042.09  BOND REQUIRED.
   Any person making an installation or extension of a water main within the
municipality shall, before commencing work, furnish the municipality with a
surety bond or performance  bond in an amount to be determined by the Engineer.
Such surety or performance bond shall be made payable to the municipality for
an injury to any person or property or the death of any person from any
accident that is directly or indirectly resultant from such an installation or
extension. Such person shall, further, by such bond, save, protect and render
the municipality harmless from all damages, costs or expenses, or suits or
causes of action, that may arise as a consequence of such installation or
extension or the use of defective materials or workmanship. Such bond shall
further stipulate that any change, deviation or violation in plans, as
submitted to the Mayor and Council for approval, shall be construed as creating
an immediate liability of the surety and the principal under such bond,
provided, however, that an opportunity shall be given to such person to rectify
such change, deviation or violation within a reasonable time set by the
Manager. However, the Mayor and Council may waive these requirements at their
own discretion.
(Ord. 74-O-78, passed 2-19-1974)
§ 1042.10  INSTALLATION AND EXTENSION REQUIREMENTS; INSPECTIONS.
   (a)   The sizes, types and kinds of fittings, couplings, pipes, unions,
tees, gate valves and other appurtenances used in water main extensions shall
conform to the  specifications approved by the Manager.
   (b)   Unless otherwise authorized in writing by the Planning Commission,
water mains in east and west streets or alleys shall be located in the north
side of the right-of-way and, in north and south streets or alleys, on the west
side of the right-of-way.
   (c)   The ground shall be excavated in open trenches or in tunnels, if
specified by the Manager, to a depth necessary to secure five feet of cover.
The bottom of  the trench shall not be less than five feet below the existing
ground level in the street, unless otherwise authorized by the Manager.
   (d)   No person shall make open cuts on any street for the installation of
lines, unless authorized by the Manager. If such authorization is not given,
the line shall be tunneled under the street as specified in division (c)
hereof.
   (e)   All lines and fittings shall be inspected under the direction of the
Manager. After all lines have been laid and fittings tightened, a test of the
lines at 100 pounds pressure shall be made, with full inspection for defects
and leaks. Any defects shall be corrected by the installer and another test of
the lines shall be made.
   (f)   After the final test and inspection of the lines have been made and
such lines are found to comply with the requirements set forth by the Mayor and
Council, the installer shall backfill the trenches and other openings for the
mains or lines and shall leave the ground surface in the same condition as it
was before such installation.
(Ord. 74-O-78, passed 2-19-1974)
§ 1042.11  WELLS PROHIBITED WHEN WATER MAINS AVAILABLE.
   (a)   When a dwelling or business building is to be erected within a
reasonable distance of an existing water main, an application shall be made for
water service. If the cost of a complete well installation, with all its
appurtenances, exceeds the applicant’s portion of the cost of extending the
water main, the distance shall be considered reasonable.  The well installation
cost shall be based upon the written estimate of a contractor acceptable to
both the municipality and the applicant.
   (b)   No owner, agent, lessee, tenant or occupant of any lot or land located
within the municipality shall establish, construct, maintain or permit to
remain in the municipality a well for human consumption if such lot or land is
within 100 feet of a water main constructed and used for the purpose of
conveying water. When such a water main is available or is hereafter made
available, a connection to the same shall be made and used within 60 days after
it is available by such owner, agent, lessee, tenant or occupant, who shall,
for such purpose, obtain a connection permit from the Division of Water and
Sewer.
(Ord. 74-O-78, passed 2-19-1974)
§ 1042.12  SERVICE CONNECTION CONDITIONS; RIGHT OF ENTRY; FAULTY METERS.
   (a)   Owners of dwellings abutting newly installed mains may request a
transfer of the connection to the new main by making an application therefor to
the Division of Water and Sewer.
   (b)   A resident, whether he or she is the owner or lessee, shall be
responsible for the maintenance and repair of all water lines and appurtenances
thereto located upon the property concerned. Such maintenance and repair work
shall be construed to include the prompt repair and elimination of any water
leaks. The costs of any change, replacement or repair is the responsibility of
the resident of such property and the municipality shall in no way be obligated
for any portion of such costs.
   (c)   The municipality is in no way obligated to furnish water to any
location where there is an unmetered leakage or usage of water, except as
provided in this section. If, in the opinion of the Manager, adequate and
prompt corrective action is not being taken where such unmetered water leakage
or usage is present, water service to the location shall be discontinued.
“Unmetered water,” as used in this section, means such water as is not metered
and recorded by a meter installed for the measurement of the quantity of water
furnished only to the property or residence involved.
   (d)   Every consumer of water shall afford the Division of Water and Sewer
and any person acting under the direction and authority of the Division or
Council free access to any water meter used by such consumer.
   (e)   If a meter is defective and the seal is intact, the consumer shall be
billed an  estimated charge based on the previous usage or the minimum charge,
whichever is higher.
   (f)   If a consumer questions the usage registered on the meter assigned to
his or her location, the consumer may request that a test be made to prove that
the meter is not functioning properly. The charge for the testing of a  meter
is twenty five dollars ($25.00), payable on the following water bill. If the
meter tested indicates a discrepancy of more than 2%, adjustments to bills
shall be made accordingly and the service meter replaced.
(Ord. 74-O-78, passed 2-19-1974)
§ 1042.13  WATER SERVICE TO CONTRACTORS AND BUILDERS.
   (a)   Whenever it is necessary for the municipality to furnish water meters
to a builder or contractor, such builder or contractor shall make a deposit of
fifty dollars ($50.00) for each meter installed to ensure the safe return of
such meter. The rental charge for each meter is one dollar ($1.00) for the
first day and ten cents ($0.10) per day thereafter until the meter is returned
to the municipality in good condition. Upon the return of the meter, if the
condition thereof is not impaired, the contractor shall be refunded the deposit
fee less any accrued charges for rental and water consumption.
   (b)   All such meters in service shall be read every 30 days and the billing
therefor immediately.
(Ord. 74-O-78, passed 2-19-1974)
§ 1042.14  USE OF WATER METERS.
   (a)   Except as stipulated in §
1042.17, no person shall be permitted to use water from the water system,
except through a meter obtained from the municipality, as provided in this
section, and sealed by the Division of Water and Sewer. Meters shall be
installed to register the quantity of water used or drawn on the premises and
shall be assigned to locations rather than to individuals. That is to say, an
individual moving from one business or residence in the municipality to another
location within the municipality shall not be entitled to take the meter from
the old location, but if water service is desired at a new location such person
shall be required to make application for the same as though he or she had not
previously received water service in the municipality.
   (b)   All water meters shall be installed by or under the direction of the
Division in a location where the same is readily accessible and shall be placed
in the building as near as possible to the point where the service line enters
the building or structure, so as to afford easy access for inspection and
reading. A stopcock or valve shall be placed in the water line just ahead of
the meter, with provisions for draining the meter. Any additional plumbing or
changes necessary to meet the approval of the Division shall be done at the
applicant’s expense.
   (c)   After the meter is placed and sealed, only members or employees of the
Division shall be allowed to repair, remove or in any way interfere with the
same.  All ordinary repairs and removal of meters shall be at the expense of
the municipality. The owner of the property in which the meter has been
installed shall at all times be responsible for any damage done by freezing,
hot water, fire or other breakage and shall be charged with the cost of repair
thereof, plus the cost of installation.
   (d)   If the meter is stolen, the owner of the property from which it is
stolen shall obtain a replacement meter from the municipality at the
municipality’s cost, payable in advance. Such replacement meter shall be
installed by the Division.
   (e)   No person shall injure, deface, mar, destroy or tamper with any water
meter.
   (f)   Every water consumer shall promptly notify the Division of all defects
in any meter or its failure to register properly the quantity of water passing
through the same.
(1974 Code, § 930.14(d))  (Ord. 74-O-78, passed 2-19-1974)
§ 1042.15  FIRE HYDRANTS.
   (a)   No person shall open any hydrant or standpipe to draw water therefrom
or in any manner or form tamper with, or place obstructions in, such hydrant or
standpipe. The use of hydrants or standpipes is restricted to members of the
Fire Department, in the discharge of their duties as firefighters, or to those
persons authorized by the Division of Water and Sewer.
   (b)   No person shall in any manner obstruct access to a hydrant, standpipe,
valve or any public faucet that permits drawing of the water, in any street,
alley or easement, which obstruction will in any manner hinder or delay the
members of the Fire Department in reaching such appurtenances.
   (c)   The Division of Water and Sewer is responsible for the maintenance of
fire hydrants. All hydrants shall be tested by the Division twice a year and
kept in good working order. Minor repairs or adjustments must be made at the
time of testing. All major repairs must be reported, in writing, to the
Manager.
   (d)   The Street Division shall keep hydrants clear of weeds such that the
hydrants will be visible from the street.
   (e)   The Division of Water and Sewer is responsible for the painting of
hydrants as the need arises. Such painting shall be done in accordance with the
hydrant identification code established by the Fire Department.
(Ord. 74-O-78, passed 2-19-1974)
§ 1042.16  DAMAGE RESULTING FROM WATER SUPPLY FAILURE.
   The municipality is not responsible for damage resulting from a failure in
its ability to supply water.
(Ord. 74-O-78, passed 2-19-1974)
§ 1042.17  SERVICE CONNECTION SPECIFICATIONS.
   (a)   Water service lines.  Water service lines shall be either copper pipe
or plastic pipe and shall have a three-quarter inch or larger inside diameter.
Plastic pipe shall be approved for potable water. All pipe intended for use
with potable water shall meet the requirements for that purpose specified by
the National Sanitation Foundation Testing Laboratory, Inc., or by another
organization accredited by federal or state public health agencies as having
requirements for that purpose which are no less stringent than those of the
National Sanitation Foundation Testing Laboratories, Inc. All such pipe shall
carry the seal of approval (or NSF mark) and must carry a rating for internal
pressures of 160 pounds per square inch.
   (b)   Stops.  Corporation cocks and curb stops shall be of brass and shall
be provided with outlets suitable for copper connections. Curb stops shall be
of the roundway type. Fittings for plastic pipe shall be of brass suitable to
make connections. Fittings for copper service shall be of copper and shall be
of the compression type or soldered-joint type.
   (c)   Service boxes.  Service boxes shall be of the spiral type, with the
base of the box of ample size to completely house the curb stop, and shall be
capable of extension from a minimum of four feet to a maximum of six feet.
Boxes shall be two and one-half inches in diameter for stops one and one-fourth
inches and smaller and shall be three inches in diameter for stops over one and
one-fourth inches.
   (d)   Installations.
      (1)   Each water service pipe shall be connected to the water main
through a brass corporation cock. The water main shall be tapped at an angle of
45 degrees, with the vertical angle and stop turned so that the “T” handle will
be on top.
      (2)   The service line shall be laid in the trench sufficiently to allow
not less than one foot extra length in its entire length. Such line shall be at
least four feet below the grade of the street or sidewalk.
      (3)   The curb stop shall be placed seven to ten feet streetward from the
end of the service line. The terminus of the service line shall be at the lot
line or as otherwise indicated on the plans therefor. The cast iron service box
shall be placed over the curb stop and held in a vertical position until
sufficient backfill has been placed to ensure a permanent vertical position.
The top of the box shall be set flush with the established ground surface
grade.
      (4)   In all cases, the service connection shall be located under the
direction of the Division of Water and Sewer and a record of the exact location
shall be made on the water map by a Division representative.
(Ord. 74-O-78, passed 2-19-1974)
§ 1042.18  BILLING; RATES AND CHARGES.
   (a)   Commencing on August 1, 1993, billing statements for water charges
shall be sent to each user (customer) by the municipality on a monthly basis,
and such billing statements shall advise each such user (customer) that the
monthly water charges reflected in such billing statement shall be paid within
15 days of the billing date appearing on such billing statement in order to
avoid a penalty amounting to 10% of the total amount billed, which penalty
shall be plainly noted on each such monthly billing statement, and in order to
avoid the termination of water service pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter.
   (b)   (1)   The rates charged to users (customers) of the municipal water
system, inside or outside of the municipality, shall be based on monthly water
usage metered or measured or a figure determined by any combination of the
foregoing, such figure to be determined from time to time by Council.
      (2)   Minimum monthly charges determined by Council shall be billed and
paid even if there is no monthly usage so long as the subject user’s
(customer’s) water service account remains open.
   (c)   Water sold for swimming pool or any other bulk use which is hauled by
truck shall be billed at rates to be determined from time to time by Council.
§ 1042.99  PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor for a first offense and shall be fined not more than one hundred
dollars ($100.00).  For any subsequent offense, the offender is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree and shall be fined not more than five hundred
dollars ($500.00) or imprisoned not more than 60 days, or both.  A separate
offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a violation
occurs or continues.
CHAPTER 1044:  SEWERS
EDITOR’S NOTE:  Because of the frequency of change, sewer usage rates are not
codified.  Copies of the latest relevant legislation may be obtained, at cost,
from the Manager.
Section
1044.01   Definitions.
1044.02   Administration.
1044.03   User classification; determination of sewer charges; analysis of
waste.
1044.04   Permit required for connection; fees.
1044.05   Qualified contractor to tap main.
1044.06   Sewer connection specifications and standards.
1044.07   Notice of intent to make connection required.
1044.08   Permit for service line; specifications.
1044.09   Repairs.
1044.10   Privies, cesspools prohibited when public sewers available.
1044.11   Downspouts, drains and sump pumps.
1044.12   Disposal of scavenger and septic tank wastes.
1044.13   Regulation of discharges; system standards.
1044.14   Billing; rates and charges.
1044.15   Storm drainage districts and drainage areas.
1044.16   Sanitary Sewer District No. 1.
1044.99   Penalty.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Sewerage rates - see Ohio R.C. 729.49, 729.52
   Regulations to control house sewers and connections - see Ohio R.C. 729.51
   Sewers in subdivisions - see P. & Z.
1250.20,
1250.22
   Bathroom facilities to be connected to approved sewer system - see B. & H.
1484.03
   Maintenance of utilities - see B. & H.
1486.24
§ 1044.01  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   “BOD (biochemical oxygen demand)” means the quantity of oxygen utilized in
the biochemical oxidation of organic matter, under standard laboratory
procedure, in five days at 20°C, expressed in milligrams per liter.
   “Building drain” means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a
drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and drainage
pipes and other similar connections, inside the walls of the building, and
conveys it to the building sewer beginning five feet (one and one-half meters)
outside the interface of the building.
   “Building sewer” means the extension from the building drain to the public
sewer or other place of disposal.
   “Commercial user” means any user who is not a residential or industrial
user.
   “Control manhole” means a structure that is accessible for the purposes of
maintaining, metering the flow in or collecting samples from a building sewer.
   “Cooling water” means the water discharge from any system of condensation,
air conditioning, cooling refrigeration or other source. Such water shall
contain no polluting substances which would produce BOD or SS each in excess of
ten parts per million by weight, toxic substances as limited in this chapter,
or other polluting substances which may be limited in this chapter.
   “Discharge” means sewage, water or other liquid flowing out of any
residential, commercial or industrial establishment.
   “Domestic sewage” and “sanitary sewage” mean sewage derived principally from
dwellings, business buildings, industries, institutions and the like,
originating as wastes from kitchens, water closets, lavatories, bathrooms and
showers.
   “Effluent” means sewage, water or other liquid, after some degree of
treatment, which is flowing out of any treatment device or facility.
   “Garbage” means solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation,
cooking and dispensing of food and from the handling, storage and sale of
produce.
   “Grease” and “fats” mean any material which is extractable from an acidified
sample of a waste by hexane or other designated solvent.
   “Ground garbage” means solid wastes from the preparation, cooking and
dispensing of food that has been shredded or comminuted to such a degree that
all particles will be carried freely in suspension in public sewers, with no
particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension.
   “Hauler” means any person engaged in the transportation or conveyance of
liquid wastes to the Municipal Treatment Plant for disposal.
   “House system” and “sewer service line” mean any system of sewers which
carries sanitary sewage from a house, apartment building, business place,
hospital or other building in the municipality.
   “Industrial user” means any manufacturing plant, place of business or
similar facility that discharges trade, process or toxic wastewater, or has a
daily average flow in excess of 25,000 gallons.
   “Influent” means sewage, raw or partly treated, flowing into any sewage
treatment device or facility.
   “Laboratory determination” means the measurements, tests and analyses of the
characteristics of waters and wastes in accordance with the provisions of 40
CFR, Part 136 - “Guidelines Establishing Test Procedures for the Analysis of
Pollutants” or in accordance with other equivalent methods approved by the
municipality. These methods are contained in the latest edition of the
following publications: Standard Methods for Examination of Water and
Wastewater, a joint publication of the American Public Health Association, the
American Water Works Association and the Water Pollution Control Federation;
ASTM Annual Book of Standards, Part 23 “Water Atmospheric Analysis, 1972,” a
publication of the American Society for Testing Materials; and EPA Methods,
which means Methods for Chemical Analyses of Water and Wastes, a publication of
the Environmental Protection Agency.
   “Meter measurement” means the act or result of determining the quantity of
water supplies to, or being discharged by, a user and determined by an
instrument or device used for such measurement and approved by the
municipality.
   “mg/l” means milligrams per liter.
   “NPDES (national pollutant discharge elimination system) permit” means the
same as such is defined in the Code of Federal Regulations, 40 C.F.R., Part
125, and in Pub. Law No. 92- 500, § 402 being 33 U.S.C. § 1342.
   “Operation and maintenance” means the process and act of keeping all
facilities used for the collecting, pumping, treating and disposing of sewage
in a good state of repair and functioning properly, including the replacement
of such facilities when necessary.
   “Owner” means the owner of record of the premises or the responsible person
in control of the premises (i.e. the lessee, and the like) if different than
the owner.
   “Person” means any individual, firm, company, premises, association,
society, corporation, municipality or group.
   “pH” means the negative logarithm of the hydrogen ion concentration in moles
per liter.
   “ppm” means parts per million by weight and/or milligrams per liter.
   “Premises accessible to the sanitary sewerage system” means any real estate,
building or premises which adjoins, abuts or is adjacent to the public sanitary
sewerage system, or any real estate which abuts upon a street, public way or
easement containing a public sanitary sewer accessible to the premises or to
any structure thereon.
   “Pretreatment facilities” means structures, devices or equipment used for
removing deleterious wastes from sewage generated from any premises prior to
its discharge into a public sewer.
   “Public Law 92-500 (Pub. Law No. 92-500, being 33 U.S.C. § 1342)” means the
1972 Amendments to the Federal Water Pollution Control Act.
   “Public Law 95-217 (Pub. Law No. 95-217, being 33 U.S.C. § 1342)” means the
1977 Amendments to the Federal Water Pollution Control Act.
   “Public sewer” means a sewer which is owned and/or controlled by public
authority.
   “Residential user” means any place of permanent residence, including single-
family houses, duplexes, apartments, condominiums, and the like, but excluding
temporary residences such as motels, hotels, boarding houses, campgrounds, and
the like.
   “Sampling” means the periodic collection of sewage as it flows from any
premise through a building sewer.
   “Scavenger waste” means any liquid waste from sources such as septic tanks,
package plants or industrial processes, which waste is removed from premises by
means other than a sewer or building drain.
   “Sewage” means a combination of water-carried wastes from residences,
business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments, together with
such ground, surface and storm waters as may be present.
   “Sewage flow meter” means a device that measures and records the flow of
sewage. Such device may also measure the rate of flow.
   “Sewage treatment plant” means any arrangement of devices and structures
used for treating sewage.
   “Sewer” means a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
   “Sewerage” means all facilities used for the collecting, pumping, treating
and disposing of sewage.
   “Slug” means any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste which, in
the concentration of any given constituent or in the quantity of flow, exceeds
for longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average 24 hour
concentration or flow during normal operation.
   “Storm drain” and “storm sewer” mean a sewer which carries storm and surface
waters and drainage, excluding sewage and industrial wastes, other than
unpolluted cooling water.
   “Surcharge” means that part of the sewer service charge which is applied to
extra strength wastes to cover added operation and maintenance costs.
   “Suspended solids (SS)” means solids that either float on the surface of, or
are in suspension in, water, sewage or other liquids and which are removable by
laboratory filtering.
   “System” means the sewerage system of the municipality, including all
treatment and disposal facilities, interceptor sewers owned and operated by the
municipality, all sewage collection systems and all appurtenances connected
thereto.
   “Testing” means the analysis of samples of sewage.
   “Toxic substance” means any substance, whether gaseous, liquid or solid,
which, when discharged to the sewerage system in sufficient quantities, may
tend to interfere with the sewage treatment process, or constitute a hazard to
human beings or animals, or inhibit aquatic life, or create a hazard to
recreation in the receiving waters of the effluent from the sewage treatment
plant.
   “Unpolluted water” means water discharged in its original state or water
discharged which, after use for any purpose, is at least equal chemically,
physically and biologically to the water from its original source, i.e. potable
water, ground water and river and stream water.
   “User” means any person or premises receiving waste treatment services.
   “User charge” means the charge assigned to each user which defrays a
proportionate share of the cost of the operation and maintenance of the
sewerage system.
   “Wastewater” means a combination of water-carried waste from residences,
buildings, institutions and industrial establishments, together with such
ground, surface or storm water as may be present.
(Ord. 73A-O-29, passed 5-1-1973; Ord. 80-O-477, passed 1-15-1980)
§ 1044.02  ADMINISTRATION.
   (a)   Administration by municipality.  The administration of this chapter
shall be by the staff of the municipality under the direction of the Manager
and Council.
   (b)   Administrative rules.  The municipality may adopt, amend and alter
written rules governing the administration of this chapter. Such rules shall
not conflict with or waive any of the provisions of this chapter, nor shall
such rules be the basis for any penalty for a violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter.
     (c)   Sewer Collection Coordinator.  There is hereby created the office of
Sewer Collection Coordinator. The Coordinator shall be appointed by the City
Manager. The Coordinator shall have a Class III license and shall be under the
supervision and direction of the Public Service Director and Manager. He or she
shall supervise all residential, commercial and industrial sewer connections
and excavations for the purpose of installing or repairing the same and shall
have such further duties and authority as the Manager may direct from time to
time.
(Ord. 80-O-477, passed 1-15-1980; Ord. 98-O-1696, passed 9-15-1998; Ord. 07-O-
2401, passed 9-4-2007)
§ 1044.03  USER CLASSIFICATION; DETERMINATION OF SEWER CHARGES; ANALYSIS OF
WASTE.
   (a)   User classification.  The municipality shall classify all users of its
facilities as residential, commercial or industrial users.
   (b)   Determination of the volume of waste discharged.  In order to
determine the volume and concentration of waste discharged by any person, for
the purpose of determining the applicable sewer service rate, the municipality
may use as the figure representing the number of gallons of sewage discharged
into the sewer system the amount of water supplied to the premises, the number
of gallons of sewage discharged into the sewerage system, as determined by
meter measurements taken at a control manhole installed by the owner at the
owner’s expense, or a figure determined by any combination of the foregoing.
   (c)   Analysis for industrial or high-strength discharges.
      (1)   Any user classified as an industrial user shall submit an analysis
of the discharge from such industry showing a determination of the
concentration of wastes contained in such discharge. The municipality retains
the right to sample and test, at the expense of the municipality, the discharge
from any user suspected of discharging a high-strength waste. If tests confirm
the presence of a high-strength discharge, the user shall be required to make
future samples and tests, at intervals determined by the municipality, at the
user’s expense.
      (2)   After the initial classification of a user by the municipality, the
municipality may from time to time request a repeat analysis of any user in
order to ensure the accuracy of sewer service charges.
   (d)   Validation of analysis by municipality.  The municipality shall have
the right to make its own analysis of a user’s discharge in order to validate
the analysis submitted by such user.
   (e)   Special charges for high-strength wastes (surcharges).  The
municipality may impose special charges over and above the user charges set out
in §
1044.14 if a particular waste causes additional expense to the municipality in
its handling and treatment of such waste. To determine the acceptability of any
such waste and the charge for treatment thereof, the municipality shall require
persons wishing to discharge such wastes to submit a written analysis of the
characteristics of such wastes. Such analysis may be validated by the
municipality as provided for in division (d) hereof.
   (f)   Method of analysis.  The handling, storage and analysis of all samples
for the determination of the characteristics of the waste shall be performed by
laboratory determinations.
   (g)   Industrial Cost Recovery System.  The Industrial Cost Recovery System
(ICRS) Regulations, as published by the U. S. Environmental Protection Agency,
are hereby adopted by the municipality in their entirety. An ICRS shall be
implemented, when necessary, by the municipality, pursuant to the applicable
agency regulations.
(Ord. 80-O-477, passed 1-15-1980)
§ 1044.04  PERMIT REQUIRED FOR CONNECTION; FEES.
   (a)   No person shall connect a residential, commercial or industrial sewage
system to the sanitary sewers in any street, alley, easement or other public
right-of-way without first obtaining a written permit therefor from the
Department of Water and Sewer. The Department is hereby authorized to grant
such permits and to exact a fee therefor in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter.
   (b)   The fee to be charged for a permit to connect a residential building
by way of a sewer line not less than six inches in diameter to any existing
sewer line shall be one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00), which shall
include a fifty dollar ($50.00) inspection fee, together with a fee of one
thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) for each residential unit beyond the
first unit served by such connection. In addition to the payment of the permit
fee, the person desiring such connection shall make the tap to the main sewer
line and furnish all materials, supplies and labor therefor at the sole cost of
such person.
   (c)   The fee to be charged a commercial or industrial user for a permit to
make a connection by way of a sewer line not less than six inches in diameter
to any existing sewer line shall be one thousand eight hundred dollars
($1,800.00), which fee shall include a fifty dollar ($50.00) inspection fee. In
addition to the payment of the permit fee, the person desiring such connection
shall make the tap to the main sewer line and furnish all materials, supplies
and labor therefor at the sole cost of such person.
(Ord. 99-O-1723, passed 1-5-1999; Ord. 04-O-2155, passed 12-7-2004)
§ 1044.05  QUALIFIED CONTRACTOR TO TAP MAIN.
   Whenever any permit for a connection with the sewerage system of the
municipality is issued hereunder, only a qualified sewer contractor or
designated agent of the Division of Water and Sewer of the municipality shall
tap the sewer main of the system, where such connection is to be made, and the
work shall be approved by the inspecting official designated by the
municipality before it is covered. 
(Ord. 73-O-29, passed 5-1-1973)
§ 1044.06  SEWER CONNECTION SPECIFICATIONS AND STANDARDS.
   Unless otherwise provided by ordinance passed and approved by the Mayor and
Council, the specifications for material and supplies for connection with any
public sewer and for the construction of the house, commercial and industrial
sewerage system shall meet standards prepared by the Municipal Engineer and
administered by the inspecting official.
(Ord. 73-O-29, passed 5-1-1973)
§ 1044.07  NOTICE OF INTENT TO MAKE CONNECTION REQUIRED.
   A written notice of intention to make a connection with a public sewer shall
be filed at the office of the Manager at least 24 hours, exclusive of Sundays
and holidays, before such connection is made. Every such connection shall be
left uncovered until it has been inspected and approved by the inspecting
official designated by the municipality.
(Ord. 73-O-29, passed 5-1-1973)
§ 1044.08  PERMIT FOR SERVICE LINE; SPECIFICATIONS.
   (a)   No person shall lay, alter or disturb any house system or sewer line
connecting with any public sewer belonging to the municipality without having
obtained a permit therefor from the Division of Water and Sewer.
   (b)   It shall be the duty of any person constructing or using any private
sewer connecting with or emptying into any public sewer belonging to the
municipality to construct and use the same strictly in conformity with the
specifications, orders and directions of the inspecting official designated by
the municipality and in compliance with the ordinances of the municipality.
(Ord. 73-O-29, passed 5-1-1973)
§ 1044.09  REPAIRS.
   All repairs to service lines and connections thereto shall be at the expense
of the owner or tenant of the premises serviced, from the main sewer line
inward to, and including within, the structure.
(Ord. 98-O-1696, passed 9-15-1998)
§ 1044.10  PRIVIES, CESSPOOLS PROHIBITED WHEN PUBLIC SEWERS AVAILABLE.
   (a)   No owner, agent, lessee, tenant or occupant of any lot or land located
within the municipality shall establish, construct, maintain or permit to
remain in the municipality a privy, cesspool or other receptacle for sewage or
excreta, for connection to a private sewer ditch or other outlet, if such lot
or land is within 300 feet of a public sewer constructed and used for the
purpose of conveying sewage. When such public sewer is available or is
hereafter made available, a connection to such public sewer shall be
established and used within 60 days after such public sewer is so available by
such owner, agent, lessee, tenant or occupant, who shall, for such purpose
obtain a connection permit from the Division of Water and Sewer. The Sewer
Inspector shall inspect and approve each connection for which a permit is
issued hereunder and shall maintain a record thereof.
   (b)   “Port-A-Jons” and/or other similarly structured toilets shall not be
located and/or used within the municipality except on construction sites while
construction is in progress or as authorized for temporary conditional use by
the affirmative vote of a majority of the members of the City Planning
Commission in the Site Plan Review process set forth in City Code §
1260.32 or at fairs, festivals, activities approved by the Park Recreation and
Cemetery Board which are thereby deemed to require the use of the same and
other such special events, and upon the conclusion of such events the same
shall be forthwith removed from the municipality by the event sponsor or the
construction site owner.
(Ord. 98-O-1696, passed 9-15-1998; Ord. 02-O-1971, passed 10-1-2002; Ord. 04-O-
2173, passed 12-21-2004; Ord. 16-O-2860, passed 4-5-2016)
§ 1044.11  DOWNSPOUTS, DRAINS AND SUMP PUMPS.
   No building permit application will be accepted, nor any permit issued for
the construction of any building or structure, unless plans and specifications
therefor are in compliance with the following requirements.
   (a)   Downspouts.  No downspout or roof drain shall be connected to the
sanitary sewer.
   (b)   Footing drains.  Footing drains shall be connected to sump pumps and
discharge shall be made into storm sewers or drainage ditches. No footing drain
or drainage tile shall be connected to the sanitary sewer.
   (c)   Sump pumps.  Sump pumps installed to receive and discharge ground
waters or other storm waters shall be connected to the storm sewer or
discharged into a drainage ditch.
(Ord. 73-O-40, passed 8-7-1973)
§ 1044.12  DISPOSAL OF SCAVENGER AND SEPTIC TANK WASTES.
   (a)   Purpose.  The purpose of this section is to establish regulations for
the disposal of scavenger and septic tank wastes delivered by private haulers
to the municipal treatment facilities.
   (b)   Permission required.  No hauler of scavenger or septic tank wastes and
wastes from package sewage treatment plants or other mechanically operated
sanitary sewage treatment plants shall dispose of such wastes at the municipal
treatment facilities without first obtaining the permission of the municipality
by making an application therefor to the Manager.
   (c)   Deposit required.  All haulers of scavenger or septic tank wastes and
wastes from package sewage treatment plants or other mechanically operated
sanitary sewage treatment plants who have obtained permission to dispose of
such wastes at the municipal treatment facilities, in accordance with division
(b) hereof, shall, prior to disposing of such wastes at such facilities,
deposit with the municipality fifty dollars ($50.00) for each vehicle intended
for the hauling of such wastes for disposal at such facilities as a guarantee
of payment of treatment charges for the disposal of such wastes. Monies so
collected by the municipality shall be kept in a special account and withdrawn
only if treatment charges are not paid. Whenever the municipality is required
to so withdraw funds, the hauler shall not be permitted to dispose of wastes at
such facilities until his or her deposit has been re-established and all
outstanding charges have been paid.
   (d)   Refusal of services.  The municipality may refuse the services of its
facilities if the scavenger waste material to be delivered to the treatment
facility is determined to:
      (1)   Be deleterious to the treatment facility or appurtenances thereto;
      (2)   Cause unusual expense in the handling and treatment thereof unless
provisions are made in accordance with §
1044.03(e);
      (3)   Inhibit the performance of the treatment process; or
      (4)   Cause the plant to fail to meet effluent limits set by state and
federal regulatory agencies.
   (e)   Disposal point.  The only permitted location for the disposal of any
septic tank waste or other scavenger waste is at the Municipal Sewage Treatment
Plant. No hauler shall discharge any septic tank waste or other scavenger waste
into any sewer, manhole, catch basin or any appurtenance thereto or into any
natural watercourse.
   (f)   Reporting information.  All haulers of septic tank waste or other
scavenger waste may be required from time to time to report to the municipality
information pertaining to the source of such waste or other information which
may be necessary for the proper  administration of this chapter.
   (g)   Treatment charges for septic tank waste.  Treatment charges for
acceptable septic tank wastes or other scavenger wastes from package sewage
treatment plants or other mechanically operated sanitary sewage treatment
plants are established in §
1044.14.
   (h)   Forfeitures of service for noncompliance.  Haulers of septic tank
wastes or other scavenger wastes shall forfeit the right to use the services of
the municipal treatment facilities for noncompliance with any of the provisions
of this chapter.
   (i)   Rate of discharge.  The rate of discharge of septic tank wastes and
other scavenger wastes shall at no time exceed 10% of the influent flow to the
treatment plant.
(Ord. 80-O-477, passed 1-15-1980)
§ 1044.13  REGULATION OF DISCHARGES; SYSTEM STANDARDS.
   (a)   Purpose.  The purpose of this section is to establish rules and
regulations concerning discharges to the sewerage system, including determining
the acceptability or unacceptability of such discharges and the pretreatment
thereof, establishing specific limitations on certain discharges and
establishing certain other system standards.
   (b)   Right of entry; construction of manholes.  The municipality shall at
all reasonable times have free access to the premises of any user of its
facilities and to the premises of any person reasonably believed by the
municipality to be a user or a possible user of its facilities, for the
purposes of inspecting, sampling or testing the discharge emanating therefrom,
or any discharge which may emanate therefrom, in order to determine whether
such discharge or potential discharge is acceptable or unacceptable to the
municipality. Where necessary, the municipality may require the owner of any
premises which discharges to the system to install a suitable control manhole
together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the building
sewer to facilitate the observation, sampling and measurement of the discharge
or potential discharge. Such a manhole, when required, shall be constructed in
accordance with plans approved by the municipality. The manhole shall be
installed at the owner’s expense and shall be maintained by the owner so as to
be safe and accessible at all times.
   (c)   Determination of acceptability or unacceptability of discharges.  The
municipality shall determine the acceptability or unacceptability of any
discharge to the sewerage system. Such a determination shall be made on the
basis of sound engineering and operational evaluations and take into
consideration the nature and concentration of the discharge, its point of entry
into the system, its compatibility with other discharges in the system and the
treatment facility receiving it, and all other factors pertinent to the effect
of the discharge on any part of the system or treatment process.
   (d)   Unacceptable discharges.  Unacceptable discharges shall include those
which have been determined by the municipality to:
      (1)   Contain materials or substances which would constitute a hazard to
life and limb or personnel engaged in the inspection, maintenance and operation
of the system;
      (2)   Contain materials or substances which are toxic;
      (3)   Contain materials or substances which are in any way deleterious to
any part of the system;
      (4)   Contain concentrations of any toxic or deleterious materials or
substances in excess of any limits set thereon in accordance with this chapter
or state or federal regulations;
      (5)   Cause the municipality to incur excessive expenses in the handling
or treatment thereof;
      (6)   Be incompatible with the treatment process or inhibit the
performance of the treatment process at the municipal treatment facility;
      (7)   Be of such volume or contain such BOD, suspended solids or other
material load (slug) as would cause the treatment facility to exceed its design
capabilities;
      (8)   Cause the treatment facility to fail to meet effluent requirements
set by state and federal regulatory agencies or cause such effluent to have a
degrading effect on the receiving body of water;
      (9)   Contain viable pathogenic organisms in such quantities as to be a
hazard to public health; or
      (10)   Cause the treatment facility to fail to meet effluent requirements
as established under its NPDES permit.
   (e)   Refusal of service.  The municipality may refuse the service of the
municipal treatment facilities to any person whose discharge is determined by
the municipality to be unacceptable in accordance with this section.
   (f)   Pretreatment permitted.  Any person whose discharge has been
determined by the municipality to be unacceptable in accordance with this
section may apply to the municipality for permission to pretreat such discharge
by the use of a method of pretreatment designed to render such discharge
acceptable.
   (g)   Pretreatment methods.  The acceptability of a pretreatment method for
any given discharge, an application for which has been made in accordance with
division (f) hereof and the terms for the installation and use thereof shall be
reviewed by the municipality. Such a review shall be made on the basis of sound
engineering and operational evaluations and take into consideration all factors
pertinent to the effect of the discharge, both before and after pretreatment,
on any part of the system.
   (h)   Inspection of pretreatment facilities.  Pretreatment facilities shall
at all times be subject to inspection by the municipality in order to determine
if such facilities are efficiently performing the function for which they are
installed.
   (i)   Cost of pretreatment.  All costs incident to pretreatment and all
expenses incident to the acquisition, installation, operation, maintenance and
repair of pretreatment facilities shall be borne by the user. In addition, any
extraordinary administrative or investigative expenses incurred by the
municipality, as a result of the installation and use of pretreatment
facilities, shall be charged to the user.
   (j)   Discharge of certain materials and substances prohibited.  No person
shall release or cause to be released or allow to run, leak or escape into the
sewerage system  any discharge containing any materials or substances
considered by the municipality to be toxic or in any way deleterious to any
part of the sewerage system or treatment process. Certain materials shall, by
their nature, be considered by the municipality to be toxic or deleterious,
except in small quantities or concentrations. Such materials or substances
include, but are not necessarily limited to, the following:
      (1)   Construction materials, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings,
metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastic, wood, paunch manure, fur, wax or
any other solid or viscous substance capable of causing obstruction to the flow
in sewers or other interference with the proper operation of the sewerage
system;
      (2)   Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid or gas;
      (3)   Steam or hot water above 150°F (65°C);
      (4)   Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease or oils, whether
emulsified or not, in excess of 50 mg/l or containing substances which may
solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 33°F or 150°F (165°C,
respectively);
      (5)   Any water or waste having a pH lower than 5.0 or higher than 9.5 or
having any other corrosive property apt to cause damage or hazard to
structures, equipment of the sewerage system or personnel employed in the
operation of the system;
      (6)   Any water or waste containing readily releasable cyanide (cyanide
released at a temperature of 150°F (65°C) and a pH of 2.5) in excess of two mg/
l or any water or waste containing total cyanide in excess of five mg/l;
      (7)   Coal tar, its derivatives or waste;
      (8)   Any liquid or waste containing toxic or poisonous substances in
sufficient quantities or at a rate of flow so as to injure or interfere with
any of the sewage treatment processes, to constitute a hazard to human beings
or animals or to create any hazard in the receiving waters; or
      (9)   Any substance in quantities limited by any U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency pretreatment regulation.
   (k)   Conditionally permitted discharges.  Certain toxic substances and
pathogenic  bacteria, the admission of which into the sewerage system would
otherwise be prohibited, shall be acceptable in a discharge if such substances
and bacteria are reduced by treatment at the source to a point that will meet
the general purposes of this chapter, or are discharged in such small
concentrations so as not to be injurious to personnel, sewers, any biochemical,
biological or other sewage treatment process, or receiving waters. Such
substances include, but are not necessarily limited to, the following:
      (1)   Any alcohol, antibiotic, arsenic, arsenical, bromine, iodine,
chlorine, copper, copper salt, creosol, creosote, fluorine, formaldehyde,
mercury, mercurial, phenol, phenol derivative, silver, silver compound,
silvermide, toxic dye (organic and mineral), zinc, cadmium, nickel or iron;
      (2)   Any strong oxidizing agent, such as a chromate, dichromate,
permanganate or peroxide;
      (3)   Any chemical compound producing toxic, flammable or explosive
gases, either upon acidification, alkalization, oxidation or reduction;
      (4)   Any strong reducing agent, such as a nitrite, sulphide, sulfite or
thiosulfate; or
      (5)   Any waste from industrial processes, hospital procedures or
commercial processes containing viable pathogenic organisms.
   (l)   Limitations on concentration and quantity discharges.  Certain
substances or materials shall be considered by the city to be toxic or
deleterious in nature so as to require specific limitations on their
concentration or quantity in any discharge to the sewerage system, whether or
not such discharge has been subjected to any form of pretreatment. Such
substances or materials and their allowable concentrations or quantities
include, but are not necessarily limited to, the following:
 
Substance or Material Concentration mg/L
BOD                           200
Solids(Total Suspended)       200
Solids(Total Dissolved)       1,500
Total Phosphorous as P        10
Oil and Grease(Freon Soluble) 50
Arsenic                       3.5
Benzene                       1.0
Cadmium(Total)                0.160
Chromium(Total)               3.590
Chromium(Hexavalent)          .0380
 
 
Substance or Material Concentration mg/L
Copper(Total)   0.610
Cyanide(Total)  1.360
Ethylbenzene    1.0
Lead(Total)     2.450
Mercury(Total)  0.010
Nickel(Total)   5.560
PCB’S(Total)  0.02
Selenium(Total) 0.360
Toluene         1.0
Xylene          1.0
Zinc            0.960
 
   (m)   Discharges containing ground garbage; approval of grinders required. 
Any discharge to the sewerage system containing garbage may be made acceptable
by means of grinding and dilution, provided, however, that the installation and
operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths
horsepower (0.76 horsepower metric) or greater shall be subject to review and
approval by the municipality prior to such installation and operation and to
periodic inspection by the municipality thereafter.
   (n)   Discharges containing acids and bases.  Any water or waste which is
unacceptable pursuant to division (j) (5) hereof shall be neutralized, diluted
or subjected to some other acceptable method of pretreatment in order to render
it acceptable to the municipality, in accordance with this section, prior to
its discharge to the sewerage system. If necessary, the use of automatically
operating diluting or neutralizing and monitoring equipment shall be required.
If, upon neutralization, the discharge is sufficiently high in ionic strength
as to continue to be unacceptable, further pretreatment shall be required.
   (o)   Discharge of odors.  The owner shall, at all times, eliminate or
control the emission of offensive odors from building sewers to the sewerage
system, or the development of offensive odors in the system as the result of a
discharge. Whenever the municipality determines that offensive odors emanating
from a building sewer or resulting from a discharge are present in the system,
it shall require the owner to take whatever steps are necessary to eliminate
such odors from the system. The cost of any devices which may be necessary to
eliminate or control such odors and all attendant expenses shall be borne by
the owner.
   (p)   Accidental release of unacceptable substances.  No person shall
connect to the sewerage system any vessel, tank, container or receptacle of any
kind used to receive, hold, store or in any other way handle any toxic or
deleterious material or substance,  the discharge of which is prohibited by
divisions (j) through (l) hereof, through which quantities of such material or
substance could accidentally or otherwise be discharged directly or indirectly
into the system. Persons who, in the course of their business or otherwise,
transport, store, receive, ship or in any other way handle or process any such
material or substance shall take precautions to prevent accidental spillage of
such substances to any connection to the system by way of floor drains, basins,
catch basins, gutters, manholes or any other such connection. Whenever the
municipality determines that accidental spillage has occurred through any such
connection to the system, it shall require the owner to eliminate the
connection.
   (q)   Notification of accidental releases; costs.  In case of an accidental
release to the sewerage system of an unacceptable discharge or of any substance
or material considered by the municipality to be toxic or deleterious, as
provided in this section, the user shall notify the municipality immediately
and in no case later than one hour following such a discharge so that remedial
action can be taken. Costs incurred to correct any damage resulting from such a
discharge shall be charged to the user. Failure to report such a discharge
shall result in a charge of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) in addition to the
costs of correction and in addition to the penalty provided in §
1044.99. Each such discharge shall be considered separately and the costs and
charges therefor shall be levied accordingly. A separate discharge shall be
deemed made each day during or on which such discharge continues and charges
therefor shall be levied accordingly. Such charges shall be collected by the
municipality in the same manner as all other charges set by the municipality.
   (r)   Special agreements.  Whenever necessary or expedient to carry out the
provisions of this chapter, the municipality may enter into a special agreement
with a user of the treatment facilities setting forth terms under which the
discharge of such user will be acceptable to the municipality.
   (s)   Discharge of unpolluted water.  All unpolluted water, including storm
water,  surface water, ground water, roof run-off, uncontaminated cooling
water, subsurface drainage or unpolluted industrial process water, shall be
discharged to storm sewers, drainage ditches or natural watercourses. Whenever
any such unpolluted water is found to be discharged to the sanitary sewer, the
municipality shall require such discharge to be  disconnected at the expense of
the user.
   (t)   Standards for construction of extensions to the system.  Any person
wishing to construct an extension to the sewerage system shall comply with all
applicable Ohio Environmental Protection Agency and municipal standards for new
construction. Before approving any extensions to the system, the municipality
shall ensure that downstream capacity is available.
(Ord. 80-O-477, passed 1-15-1980; Ord. 98-O-1696, passed 9-15-1998; Ord. 07-O-
2401, passed 9-4-2007)
§ 1044.14 BILLING; RATES AND CHARGES.
   (a)   Commencing on August 1, 1993, billing statements for sewer charges
shall be sent to each user (customer) by the municipality on a monthly or
quarterly basis, and such billing statements shall advise each such user
(customer) that the monthly sewer charges reflected in such billing statement
shall be paid within 15 days of the billing date appearing on such billing
statement in order to avoid a penalty amounting to 10% of the total amount
billed, which penalty shall be plainly noted on each such monthly billing
statement.
   (b)   The rate charged to users (customers) of the municipal sewer system
shall be based on monthly water usage metered or sewer discharge or a figure
determined by any combination of the foregoing, and the same shall be as
determined from time to time by Council.
   (c)   The monthly charges provided for in division (b) hereof shall be
deemed minimum monthly charges, and the same shall be billed and paid even if
there is no monthly usage so long as the subject user’s (customer’s) water
service account remains open.
   (d)   Any users (customers) of the municipal sewer system discharging high-
strength wastewater shall be charged an additional fee for the added cost of
handling the unusual waste and the same shall be as follows.
      (1)   Biochemical Oxygen Demand (BOD) - surcharge as determined by
Council.
      (2)   Suspended Solids (SS) - surcharge as determined by Council.
   (e)   Any user (customer) of the municipal sewer system or any other person
dumping septic tank or scavenger wastes at the municipal wastewater treatment
plant or at any other place designated for such dumping will be charged a fee
for the handling of those wastes as determined from time to time by Council.
§ 1044.15  STORM DRAINAGE DISTRICTS AND DRAINAGE AREAS.
   (a)   There shall be established within the municipality four storm water
drainage districts and 23 drainage areas for the purpose of preparing an
adequate storm drainage system to serve the immediate and future requirements
of the municipality.
   (b)   The four storm drainage districts shall be known and numbered as: 1,
2, 3 and 4, and the 23 drainage areas shall be known as 1-A, 1-B, 1-C, 1-D, 1-
E, 2-A, 2-B, 2-C, 2-D, 2-E, 3-A, 3-B, 3-C, 3-D, 3-E, 3-F, 3-G, 3-H, 3-I, 4-A,
4-B, 4-C and 4-D.
   (c)   The drainage districts and drainage areas established in division (a)
hereof are fully described in an engineering survey by Morris E. Nall and
Associates, Registered Engineers, which survey is hereby incorporated by
reference.  A copy of the engineering survey shall be placed on file with the
Clerk of Council and also in the Columbiana County Law Library, for purposes of
public inspection. Copies of such survey shall be available at cost from the
Clerk of Council.
(Ord. 1514, passed 3-7-1967)
Cross-reference:
   Storm Water Management and Erosion and Sedimentation Control Regulations,
see Ch. 1045
§ 1044.16  SANITARY SEWER DISTRICT NO. 1.
   (a)   Pursuant to Ohio R.C. 727.44, a district is hereby established to be
known as Columbiana Sanitary Sewer District No. 1.
   (b)   The general plan heretofore prepared and on file with the Clerk of
Council for the sanitary sewerage system of Columbiana Sanitary District No. 1,
as established in division (a) hereof,  is hereby adopted and approved.
(Ord. 73-O-12, passed 3-20-1973)
§ 1044.99  PENALTY.
   (a)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree and shall be fined not more than one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisoned not more than six months, or both for each
offense.  A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on
which a violation occurs or continues.
(Adopting Ordinance)
   (b)   A failure to comply with any provision of §
1044.13 shall result in a charge against the person or premises so failing to
comply in the amount of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each offense.  In
addition, such person or premises shall be liable for any damage that occurs to
the system as a result of such failure to comply.  Each such failure is hereby
declared to be a separate and distinct offense and charges shall be levied
accordingly.  Such charges shall be collected by the municipality in the same
manner as all other charges set by the municipality.
(Ord. 98-O-1696, passed 9-15-1998)
CHAPTER 1045:  STORM WATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION
AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL REGULATIONS
Section
Drainage Design and Control
1045.01   Purpose.
1045.02   Disclaimer of liability.
1045.03   Storm water management report required.
1045.04   General requirements.
1045.05   Storm sewer systems and roadway drainage.
1045.06   Storm water control methodology.
1045.07   Storm water runoff control standards.
Post Construction Storm
Water Quality Requirements
1045.08   Overview.
1045.09   Post construction water quality calculations.
1045.10   Water quality BMP installation and maintenance.
1045.11   Compliance with state and federal regulations.
Storm Water Pollution Prevention
Plan for Earth Disturbing Activities
1045.12   General requirements.
1045.13   Application, narrative and site description.
1045.14   Site construction plans, drawings and details.
Performance and Design Standards
1045.15   Notification.
1045.16   Protection and adjacent properties.
1045.17   Soil stabilization.
1045.18   Storm water runoff controls.
1045.19   Sediment basins/traps.
1045.20   Installation of sediment controls.
1045.21   Storm sewer inlet protection.
1045.22   Cut and fill slopes.
1045.23   Stabilization of waterways and outlets.
1045.24   Working in or crossing watercourses.
1045.25   Maintenance of temporary measures.
1045.26   Disposition of temporary measures.
1045.27   Construction entrances.
1045.28   Other pollutant controls.
1045.29   Silt fence and diversions.
1045.30   Compliance with other requirements.
1045.31   Trench and ground water control.
Administrative
1045.32   Inspection and compliance.
1045.33   Variance.
1045.34   Appeals.
1045.35   Maintenance and final inspection approval.
Appendix A   Storm Water Drainage/Detention Facilities Operation and
Maintenance Regulations
Appendix B   Drive and Yard Pipe Policy
DRAINAGE DESIGN AND CONTROL
§ 1045.01  PURPOSE.
   The intent of this policy is to establish consistent, technically feasible
and operationally practical standards to achieve a level of storm water
management that will minimize damage to public and private property and the
degradation of water resources, and will promote and maintain the health,
safety and welfare of the resident of the city.
(Ord. 15-O-2820, passed 5-19-2015)
§ 1045.02  DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   (a)   This policy outlines the basic requirement of storm water management
plans.  It is not intended as an all inclusive list of work required to prepare
the plans, specifications, reports and calculations for such projects.  The
designer shall follow generally accepted standards for surveyors, architects
and/or engineers.
   (b)   Neither submission of a plan under the provisions herein, nor
compliance with the provisions of these regulations, shall relieve any person
or entity from responsibility for damage to any person or property that is
otherwise imposed by law; nor shall it create a duty by the city to those
damaged by storm water or soil sediment pollution.
(Ord. 15-O-2820, passed 5-19-2015)
§ 1045.03  STORM WATER MANAGEMENT REPORT REQUIRED.
   All new and redeveloped commercial sites, industrial sites, institutional
sites, condominium developments, planned urban developments, and subdivisions
are required to submit a storm water management report to the city.  The storm
water management report must be signed and stamped by a registered professional
engineer licensed to practice in the State of Ohio.
(Ord. 15-O-2820, passed 5-19-2015)
§ 1045.04  GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   The policies contained herein outline the requirements for a storm
water management report. Not all of the sections of this outline may apply to a
proposed development. Applicable sections will depend on the size of the
proposed development, the existing site conditions, and the proposed land use
of the development.
   (b)   These guidelines shall not limit the right of the city to impose at
any time additional, more stringent requirements based on the site
circumstances. Nor, shall these guidelines limit the right of the city to
waive, in writing, individual requirements based on the site circumstances.
   (c)   The storm water management report (SWMR) should be submitted with the
site plan for commercial, institutional and industrial sites, and the SWMR
should be submitted with the construction drawings for condominium
developments, planned developments and subdivisions.
   (d)   The SWMR should contain a description of the existing conditions on
site, land usage, ground cover conditions, soil types, etc. The SWMR should
explain the proposed improvements and the intent of the storm water management
measures being proposed. The SWMR should provide maps and drawings, as
necessary, to support the report's calculations. The SWMR should verify that
the information contained on such maps and drawings corresponds to the
information provided in the rest of the SWMR.
   (e)   As a minimum general requirement, the proposed storm water management
measures shall be designed such that the runoff from the site shall not flood
existing or proposed structures, cause the loss of property, endanger
individuals, or cause the loss of life.
(Ord. 15-O-2820, passed 5-19-2015)
§ 1045.05  STORM SEWER SYSTEMS AND ROADWAY DRAINAGE.
   Storm sewer systems and roadway drainage including catch basins, pipes,
culverts, swales, ditches, and other open channels shall be designed in
accordance with the latest editions of the Ohio Department of Transportation's
Location and Design Manual, Volume Two - Drainage Design and Construction and
Materials Specifications.
   (a)   Provide calculations for the storm sewer systems. All storm sewer
systems shall be designed to flow just full for a 10-year frequency storm,
except where more stringent requirements are noted in the Location and Design
Manual. For roadway pipe design, check the hydraulic grade line does not exceed
the grate elevations based on a 25-year frequency storm.
   (b)   Provide calculations for the inlet spacing and pavement spread.
Allowable pavement spread shall be six feet from the curb for a 10-year
frequency storm.
   (c)   All commercial, institutional and industrial sites, condominium
developments, planned urban developments and subdivisions shall be designed
with supplemental conveyance systems (i.e. swales, ditches, channels, roadway,
etc.) to convey up to the 100-year frequency storm flow, in conjunction with
the designed storm sewers, to the proposed detention or retention systems.
   (d)   Provide a storm sewer system and roadway drainage drawing. Perform
field surveying as necessary to insure that this drawing is an accurate
representation of actual field conditions. The scale of this drawing must be
sufficient to clearly present the following information:
      (1)   Existing and proposed elevation contours at an interval of two feet
or less. Contour lines shall be labeled frequently enough to be easily read and
interpreted.
      (2)   All of the individual surface areas that drain to each intercepting
structure or the storm sewer system must be submitted. The areas must be
numbered or labeled to match the calculations.
      (3)   The path used to calculate the time of concentration for each
individual drainage area. Indicate the types of flow and provide calculations.
   (e)   An adequate outlet must be provided for all proposed drainage systems,
such as an existing ditch, stream, river, storm sewer, pond, lake or proposed
detention/retention facility. The downstream outlet must be able to accommodate
the flow of storm water from the proposed drainage system.
   (f)   Provide headwalls, energy dissipaters, rip-rap, erosion control mats,
and other measures, as necessary, at all outlets to prevent erosion.
   (g)   (1)   Storm sewer and drainage system materials and construction shall
be in accordance with the latest edition of Ohio Department of Transportation
(ODOT) Construction and Materials Specifications (CMS) for pipe, catch basins,
manholes, excavation, rock channel protection and seeding and mulching.
      (2)   Storm sewers beneath pavement and five feet outside the edge of
pavement shall be ODOT CMS Item 611, Conduit, Type "B".
      (3)   Storm sewer five feet outside of the edge of pavement shall be ODOT
CMS Item 611 Conduit, Type "C".
(Ord. 15-O-2820, passed 5-19-2015)
§ 1045.06  STORM WATER CONTROL METHODOLOGY.
   (a)   The peak discharge rate of runoff from the critical storm and all more
frequent storms occurring under post-development conditions shall not exceed
the peak discharge rate of runoff from a 2-year frequency, 24-hour storm
occurring on the same development drainage area under pre-development
conditions.
   (b)   Storms of less frequent occurrence (longer return periods) than the
critical storm up to the 100-year storm have a peak runoff discharge shall have
rates no greater than the peak runoff rates from equivalent size storms under
pre-development conditions. Consideration of the 1-, 2-, 5-, 10-, 25-, 50- and
100-year storms will be considered adequate in designing and developing to meet
this standard.
   (c)   The critical storm for a specific development drainage area is
determined as follows:
      (1)   Use the SCS TR-20 Hydrologic Analysis Model or other appropriate
and approved hydrologic simulation model along with 24-hour rainfall data
obtained The Rainfall Frequency Atlas of the Midwest as authored by Huff &
Angel, to determine the total volume (acre-feet) of runoff from a 2-year
development. Include clearly in the calculations the coverage assumptions used
for full build out of the proposed condition. Curve numbers for the pre-
development condition must reflect the average type of land use over the past
ten years and not only the current land use.
         A.   For sites which are currently developed and are scheduled to be
redeveloped, the pre-developed condition shall be defined to be 100% of the
site as grassland for critical storm and volume storage calculations.
         B.   From the volumes determined in division (c)(1) of this section,
determine the percent increase in volume of runoff due to development. Using
this percentage, select the 24 hour critical storm from the following table:
 
TABLE 1: CRITICAL STORM DETERMINATION TABLE
If the Percentage of Increase in Volume of Runoff
is:                                               The Critical Storm Will Be:
Equal to or Greater Than: Less Than
— 10  1-Year
10  20  2-Year
20  50  5-Year
50  100 10-Year
100 250 25-Year
250 500 50-Year
500 — 100-Year
 
(Ord. 15-O-2820, passed 5-19-2015)
§ 1045.07  STORM WATER RUNOFF CONTROL STANDARDS.
   Storm water runoff from a proposed development site such shall be controlled
to meet the following criteria:
   (a)   Two methods for calculating storm water runoff volumes and control
measures are approved. They are the modified rational method and the soil
conservation service method.  Either may be used for sites up to six acres in
size.  The soil conservation method must be used for all sites six acres or
larger.
   (b)   Provide a drainage area map (or maps) for the pre-developed and post
developed sites. Perform field surveying as necessary to insure that this
drawing is an accurate representation of actual field conditions. The scale of
this drawing must be sufficient to clearly present the following information:
      (1)   Existing and proposed elevation contours, at an interval of two
feet or less. Contour lines shall be labeled frequently enough to be easily
read and interpreted.
      (2)   Hydrologic boundaries of watersheds, including areas outside the
proposed development that flow into the project area.
      (3)   Points of analysis, or the location where the drainage is being
evaluated, for each watershed.
      (4)   The path used to calculate the time of concentration for each
watershed. Indicate types of flow and provide calculations.
      (5)   Delineate and label the types of land use, surface features, ground
cover, soil types, etc. used to determine the runoff coefficients or curve
numbers for the project areas.
      (6)   Show the proposed development layout.
      (7)   Provide a USGS Topographic Map copy indicating the proposed
development area and 1,000 feet beyond the proposed development limits in each
direction.
   (c)   Calculations.
      (1)   Provide routing calculations for each drainage area and drainage
structure and their corresponding inflow and outflow hydrographs for the 2-year
storm up through the 100-year storm. Prepare a summary table of results of the
routing calculations. The table shall include, at a minimum, peak inflow, peak
outflow, water surface elevations, and storage volume requirements.
      (2)   Provide pond volume -vs- elevation summaries.
      (3)   Provide calculations for the inlet/outlet works including weirs,
orifices, culverts, spillways, grates, etc. Show their capacities and stage-
discharge calculations, including tailwater assumptions.
      (4)   Verity capacities of receiving drainage features such as ditches,
storm sewers, ponds, streams, etc. to verify sufficient capacity to accommodate
the runoff of the development. The receiving drainage feature must be approved
by the Planning and Zoning Department. Check all storms with a return frequency
of 100-years or less.
      (5)   Provide runoff coefficients or curve number calculations for each
watershed or sub-area, including impervious calculations.
      (6)   Provide time of concentration calculations for each watershed or
sub-area.
      (7)   Calculate hydraulic grade line for outlet structures with pipes.
      (8)   Determine velocities of discharged waters and show details to
control erosion.
      (9)   Provide narratives, as needed, to describe the methods,
assumptions, formulas, and intent of the calculations.
   (d)   Detention basins.
      (1)   The minimum length of width ratio of the basin shall be two-to-one.
      (2)   The grading of an open detention basin shall be such that it
reflects the surrounding topography. The embankment slopes for the detention
basin should be four feet horizontal to one foot vertical preferred or a
maximum of two feet horizontal to one foot vertical.
      (3)   The maximum water depth shall not exceed ten feet.
      (4)   The minimum top width of the side embankments shall be eight feet
for non-vehicular traffic and 12 feet for vehicular traffic. The embankment
shall be set at an elevation of at least 12 inches above the emergency
spillway.
      (5)   Principal outlet (or outlets in a multi-stage configuration) shall
have the capacity to pass the 100-year design storm flow.
      (6)   Outlet pipes shall have a minimum diameter of six inches. Orifice
plates must be used for restrictions of smaller diameter. Consideration should
be given to removable trash racks or other means to prevent clogging.
      (7)   Access to entire outlet structure for maintenance and inspection
shall be provided and shall follow current OSHA Standards.
      (8)   An emergency spillway shall be provided, emergency spillways shall
be designed to pass the 100-year storm frequency flow without the principal
outlet capacity (in the event the principal outlet becomes plugged). The
location of the emergency spillway shall be such that its overflow can be
directed to an acceptable location. Permanent erosion control measures at the
emergency spillway may be required by the city based on potential erosion at
the site.
      (9)   Dry type detention structures shall be graded to drain to the
outlet structure. The minimum grade in an earthen pond shall be 1%.
      (10)   All pipes through the embankment shall have anti-seep collars.
      (11)   Soil borings and testing may be requested by the city, such
testing shall be performed by an approved soils testing laboratory. Submit a
report certifying suitability of the soils on-site for embankment and basin
construction.
   (e)   In certain applications, alternative detention facilities may be
permitted and encouraged.  These methods may be especially useful on small
sites or where the increase in runoff is small. They may also be useful in
conjunction with these methods described above. Requests for alternative
detention facilities shall be submitted to the Planning and Zoning Department
within the appropriate design standards.
      (1)   Infiltration basin, dry wells and infiltration ditches:
         A.   Soil borings and testing shall be performed by an approved soils
testing laboratory. Submit a report certifying the suitability of the soils on-
site for infiltration.
         B.   Infiltration measures must make provisions for overflow to a
suitable area.
      (2)   Underground detention tanks or pipes:
         A.   May be used for commercial, institutional or industrial sites.
         B.   Must provide access for inspection and maintenance.
         C.   Must have sufficient load bearing capacity for proposed surface
uses.
      (3)   Detention areas in parking lots using catch basins may be used
providing the following criteria can be met:
         A.   A maximum water depth of 12 inches in parking areas may be used.
         B.   Maximum water depth shall not exceed six inches below the
finished floor elevations of the existing or proposed structures.
         C.   Slopes for parking lots used for this purpose shall be a minimum
of 0.75% and a maximum of 10%.
      (4)   Retention basins:  soils report will be required to determine
suitability.
   (f)   Maintenance of storm water management practices.
      (1)   The city shall approve an inspection and maintenance agreement
binding on all subsequent owners of lands served by the planned storm water
management practices before the city accepts the final plat or plan of the
proposed project.
      (2)   All inspection and maintenance agreements shall do the following:
         A.   Designate the party responsible for maintenance of structural and
nonstructural storm water management practices including, mowing and ensuring
outlet structures are clear and in good repair. Unless otherwise approved by
the city, this shall be an entity of common ownership within the proposed
subdivision (such as an association) or the owner on an industrial or
commercial site.
         B.   Prohibit unauthorized alterations of structural and nonstructural
storm water management practices.
         C.   Provide access to storm water management practices for inspection
by the city to document the condition of the practices. Authorize the city to
make corrections to the facility, if deemed necessary, and assess the affected
property owners.
      (3)   The location, dimensions, and bearings (including the depth and
capacity) of all storm water management practices shall be incorporated on the
final plat or plan, prior to approval by the city, and reference thereon shall
be made to the entity or individual(s) responsible for maintenance.
   (g)   Inspection of storm water management practices.
      (1)   The city may inspect storm water management practices periodically.
      (2)   Upon finding a malfunction or other need for maintenance, the city
shall notify the responsible party of the need for maintenance.
      (3)   Upon notification, the responsible party shall have 15 workings
days, or other time stipulated by the city, to make repairs.
      (4)   Should repairs not be made within the time, or a plan approved by
the city for these repairs not be in place, the city may undertake necessary
repairs and assess the repair cost to the responsible party.
(Ord. 15-O-2820, passed 5-19-2015)
POST CONSTRUCTION STORM WATER QUALITY REQUIREMENTS
§ 1045.08  OVERVIEW.
   (a)   Post-construction runoff controls are permanent controls which are
intended and shall be designed to improve or maintain a receiving stream's
physical, chemical and biological characteristics. In addition, stream
functions are maintained and post-construction storm water practices shall
provide continued management of both quality and quantity facilities.
   (b)   Detailed drawings and maintenance plans shall be provided for all
post-construction Best Management Practices (BMP's). BMP's included in Ohio
Department of Natural Resources (ODNR) Rainwater and Land Development Manual
(latest edition) shall be considered to be the city's standards. Maintenance
plans shall also be provided by the permittee to the post-construction operator
of the site (including homeowner associations). The use of innovative and/or
emerging storm water management post-construction technologies shall be at the
discretion of the Planning and Zoning Department. The post-construction portion
of the storm water management plan shall include the following required
elements:
      (1)   Description of post-construction BMP's to be installed during
construction. Description shall include estimated installation schedule and
sequencing plan.
      (2)   Rationale for selection shall incorporate anticipated impacts on
the channel and flood plain, morphology, hydrology and water quality.
      (3)   Detailed post-construction BMP drawings shall be provided.
      (4)   BMP maintenance plan shall be developed for all BMP's selected and
presented to post-construction operator.
      (5)   Maintenance plan shall include a disposal statement for structural
BMP's. Ensure pollutants collected within structural BMP's are disposed of in
accordance with local, state and federal regulations.
      (6)   Linear projects:  Linear projects, such as utility line
installations with no net increase in impervious areas, do not need to comply
with OEPA's General Permit.  Linear projects must minimize number of stream
crossings and width of disturbance. Construction erosion and sedimentation
controls are required for all projects, see storm water pollution prevention
regulations. Linear projects shall be required to document land disturbance
area estimates and develop an erosion/sedimentation control plan.
(Ord. 15-O-2820, passed 5-19-2015)
§ 1045.09  POST CONSTRUCTION WATER QUALITY CALCULATIONS.
   (a)   Using the following equations: CPWQv = C * P * A/12
      Where:   CPWQv      =   Channel protection and water quality volume in
acre-feet
            C      =   Runoff coefficient appropriate for storm less than 1
inch (See Table 2)
            P      =   0.75 inch precipitation depth
            A      =   Area divining into the BMP in acres.
   TABLE 2: RUNOFF COEFFICIENTS BASED ON TYPE OF LAND
   USE FOR CPWQv CALCULATION
 
Land Use                                           Runoff Coefficient
Industrial & Commercial                            0.8
High Density Residential (>8 dwellings/acre)       0.5
Medium Density Residential (4 to 8 dwellings/acre) 0.4
Low Density Residential (<4 dwellings/acre)        0.3
Open Space and Recreational Areas                  0.2
 
Where the land use will be mixed, the runoff coefficient should be calculated
using a weighted average. For example, if 60% of the contributing drainage area
to the storm water treatment structure is low density residential, 30% is high
density residential, and 10% in open space, the runoff coefficient is
calculated as follows: (0.6)(0.3) + (0.3)(0.5) + (0.1)(0.2) = 0.35
   (b)   An additional volume equal to 20% of the CPWQv shall be incorporated
into the BMP for sediment storage and/or reduced infiltration capacity during
construction.
   (c)   BMP's shall be designed such that the drain time is long enough to
provide treatment, but short enough to provide storage available for successive
rain events as described in Table 3 below.
   (d)   Commercial, institutional and industrial sites that are currently
developed are only required to provide 20% of the calculated CPWQv upon re-
development, alternatively the re-development site may provide a 20% net
reduction in impervious area.
   TABLE 3: TARGET DRAW DOWN (DRAIN) TIMES FOR STRUCTURAL
   POST-CONSTRUCTION TREATMENT CONTROL PRACTICES
 
Best Management Practice (BMP)              Drain Time of CPWQv
Infiltration                                24 - 48 Hours
Vegetated Swale or Filter Strip             24 Hours
Extended Detention Basins (Dry Basins)      48 Hours
Retention Basins (Wet Basins)*              24 Hours
Constructed Wetlands (above permanent pool) 24 Hours
Media Filtration, Bioretention              40 Hours
 
(Ord. 15-O-2820, passed 5-19-2015)
§ 1045.10  WATER QUALITY BMP INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE.
   (a)   A description of the post-construction BMP's that will be installed
during construction for the site and the rationale for their selection in
protection of channels from erosion and pollution prevention from sediment
deposition must be provided. All pond designs must provide a minimum one foot
of freeboard. When designing storm water ponds, the applicant must consider
public safety as a design factor for the pond and alternative designs must be
implemented where site limitations would preclude a safe design.
   (b)   Maintenance plans shall be provided for all post-construction BMP's.
Maintenance plans shall be provided by the permittee to the post-construction
operator of the site upon completion of construction activities and should be
included in the inspection and maintenance agreement. All storm water
management facilities shall be cleaned and maintained such that the full water
quality volume is available and that the facility functions as designed.
(Ord. 15-O-2820, passed 5-19-2015)
§ 1045.11  COMPLIANCE WITH STATE AND FEDERAL REGULATIONS.
   Approvals issued in accordance with this regulation do not relieve the
applicant of responsibility for obtaining all other necessary permits and/or
approvals from the Ohio EPA, the US Army Corps of Engineers, and other federal,
state and/or county agencies not listed herein. If requirements vary, the most
restrictive requirement shall prevail. These permits may include but are not
limited to those listed below. Proof of compliance with these state and federal
regulations is required to be submitted with the storm water management and
sediment control plan before the Planning and Zoning Department will approve or
recommend approval.
   (a)   Ohio EPA NPDES Permits authorizing storm water discharges associated
with construction activity or the most current version thereof: Proof of
compliance with these requirements shall be a copy of the Ohio EPA Director's
Authorization Letter for the NPDES Permit, Ohio EPA NPDES Permit Number for the
project, or a letter from the site owner explaining why the NPDES Permit is not
applicable.
   (b)   If there is any indication or reasonable evidence that disturbance of
an existing watercourse, or potential wetland might occur, one or all of the
following may be required depending on the extent and type of disturbance:
      (1)   Jurisdictional determination. Proof of compliance shall be a copy
of the Jurisdictional Determination from the US Army Corps of Engineers
affirming the findings of a qualified professionals survey and report of the
site.
      (2)   Section 404 of the Clean Water Act. Proof of compliance shall be a
copy of the US Army Corps of Engineers Individual Permit Applications, if an
Individual Permit is required for the development project, public notice or
project approval. If an Individual Permit is not required, the site owner shall
submit proof of compliance with the US Army Corps of Engineers Nationwide
Permit Program. This shall include the following:
         A.   A site plan showing that any proposed fill of waters of the
United States conforms to the general and specific conditions specified in the
applicable nationwide permit. Wetlands, and other waters of the United States,
shall be delineated by protocols accepted by the US Army Corps of Engineers at
the time of application of this regulation.
      (3)   If a Section 404 Permit or Jurisdictional Determination is not
required because wetlands or watercourses are not present on the property and
there is no indication or reasonable evidence that disturbance will occur, a
letter from the site owner verifying that a qualified professional has surveyed
the site and found no waters of the United States are present or will be
affected must be provided.
      (4)   Ohio EPA Isolated Wetland Permit. Proof of compliance shall be a
copy of Ohio EPA's Isolated Wetland Permit application, public notice or
project approval, or a letter from the site owner verifying that a qualified
professional has surveyed the site and found no isolated wetlands are present
on the site. Isolated wetlands shall be delineated by protocols accepted by the
US Army Corps of Engineers at the time of application of this regulation.
      (5)   Section 401 of the Clean Water Act. Proof of compliance shall be a
copy of the Ohio EPA Water Quality Certification application, public notice, or
project approval, or a letter from the site owner verifying that a qualified
professional has surveyed the site and found no water of the United States are
present or will be affected by the project. Wetlands, and other waters of the
United States, shall be delineated by protocols accepted by the US Army Corps
of Engineers at the time of applications of this regulation.
   (c)   Ohio Dam Safety Law. Proof of compliance shall be a copy of the ODNR
Division of Water permit application, a copy of the project approval letter
from the ODNR Division of Water, or a letter from the site owner explaining why
the Ohio Dam Safety Law is not applicable.
(Ord. 15-O-2820, passed 5-19-2015)
§ 1045.12  GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   The storm water pollution prevention plan (SWP3) shall incorporate
measures as recommended by the most current edition of the Rainwater and Land
Development Manual, as published by the Ohio Department of Natural Resources
(ODNR).
   (b)   A registered professional engineer or certified professional erosion
control specialist (CPESC) must certify storm water and sediment and erosion
control calculations, designs and plan sheets. To the extent necessary, a
registered professional surveyor may be required to certify boundary lines,
measurements or land surfaces.
   (c)   A registered professional engineer, certified professional erosion and
sediment control specialist (CPESC), or otherwise qualified person may select
BMP's for sediment and erosion control. Projects exempt from professional
design, include:
      (1)   All soil disturbing activities related to single-family residential
development on individual lots; or
      (2)   All soil disturbing activities on residential parcels less than one
acre and not part of a larger common plan of development on land used or being
developed for all building lots.
   (d)   The city at its discretion may require an exempt project to provide
erosion and sediment controls.
   (e)   Projects with earth disturbing activities anticipated to exceed one
acre must file a notice of intent (NOI) with the Ohio EPA General Permit
Program.
   (f)   All earth disturbing projects regardless of size must have a storm
water pollution prevention plan (SWP3) for control of erosion and sediment;
this plan must be submitted to the Planning and Zoning Department for approval,
prior to beginning any work.
(Ord. 15-O-2820, passed 5-19-2015)
§ 1045.13  APPLICATION, NARRATIVE AND SITE DESCRIPTION.
   The SWP3 plan must contain an application, narrative report and site
description with the following information provided:
   (a)   Site type (i.e. residential, commercial, institutional, subdivision,
industrial, multi-family, apartment, condominium, mobile home park, or
manufactured home park).
   (b)   Phase (if applicable).
   (c)   Ohio EPA NPDES Permit Number.
   (d)   Location - include address or description and which township, city, or
village it is located within (include sublot number if applicable).
   (e)   Geographic coordinates (i.e. latitude and longitude).
      (1)   Site location.
   (f)   Total acreage of entire site.
   (g)   Total acreage to be disturbed as part of the project. Include and list
all areas where clearing, grubbing, excavating, filling, grading, including
off-site borrow areas will occur. This includes the location and plan for off-
site borrow areas.
   (h)   List the number of sublots if project is a subdivision.
   (i)   Provide the percentage of disturbed area in relation to the entire
development area.
   (j)   The aerial extent (plan view) and description of wetlands (including
size and Ohio EPA category 1, 2, or 3) or other special aquatic sites on or
near the site and whether or not disturbance of any are anticipated which will
receive discharges from the disturbed areas of the project.
   (k)   A list including the name and/or location of watercourses located on
the property, immediate receiving watercourses or surface water(s) and the
first subsequent named receiving water(s).
   (l)   List of any conservation easements or other restrictive uses of the
property on record.
   (m)   Contact information, including company name, contact name, addresses,
and phone number of the following:
      (1)   Professional engineer certifying the plans and/or other preparer of
the erosion and sediment control portion of the submittal.
      (2)   Owner of the development site.
   (n)   (1)   An inspection and maintenance agreement binding the owner and
all subsequent owners of lands where a storm water management facility is to be
constructed. Such agreements/deed restrictions/restrictive covenants shall
designate and minimally provide the following and be recorded with the deed of
the property:
         A.   The party(s) responsible for long-term maintenance including
repairs, as necessary for the facility(s).
         B.   Prohibit unauthorized alternation of the facility(s) without
prior written approval from the city.
         C.   Allow the city personnel or agents access to the storm water
management facility(s) at reasonable times for inspections to document the
facilities condition and ensure its originally designed function.
      (2)   Alterations to these stipulations or termination of any of these
requirements are prohibited in the document and must run with the land. The
document must clearly identify each facility and its location. The owner may
provide a draft for review as part of the submittal. Once the draft is
approved, a recorded copy of the entire document must be submitted to the city
to receive final inspection approval of the site.
   (o)   Storm water runoff estimations and calculations (including runoff
coefficients) for pre-and post-development peak discharges and the volume for
channel protection and water quality. Include critical storm determination and
demonstrate that runoff from upper watershed areas have been considered in
calculations.
   (p)   An estimate of the impervious area and percent imperviousness created
by the soil disturbing activity.
   (q)   A description of prior land uses at the site.
   (r)   An implementation schedule which describes in detail the sequence of
major construction operations (i.e., grubbing, excavating, grading, utilities
and infrastructure installation) and the implementation of erosion, sediment
and storm water management practices or facilities to be employed during each
operation of the sequence.
   (s)   For subdivided developments where SWP3 plan does not call for a
centralized sediment control capable of controlling multiple individual lots, a
detail drawing of atypical individual lot erosion and sediment control practice
including designation of specific erosion and sediment control practices for
critical areas such as steep slopes, watercourse banks, drainage ways and
riparian zones.
   (t)   Prior to construction commencing or before the pre-construction
meeting, the following must additionally be provided:
      (1)   Primary operator or contractors name, address and phone that is
responsible for the development area.
      (2)   List of all contractors/subcontractors contact information involved
in the implementation of the SWP3 plan.
(Ord. 15-O-2820, passed 5-19-2015)
§ 1045.14  SITE CONSTRUCTION PLANS, DRAWINGS AND DETAILS.
   The SWP3 plan shall include construction plan sheets containing drainage,
erosion and sediment control measures, and storm water control for proper
management of the site during and after construction. A detail listing of the
components required are as follows:
   (a)   Vicinity map. A map should be shown on the plans indicating the site
in relation to the surrounding area.
   (b)   Site plan. A plan sheet indicating all temporary and permanent BMP's
proposed to be used during all phases of construction shall be provided. It is
preferred that the entire site be contained on one sheet, if possible, to
permit an entire view of the site for analysis. If a smaller scale is used to
permit inclusion of the entire site on one sheet, separate sheets providing an
enlarged view of areas on individual sheets should be additionally provided.
The following items shall be provided within the plans:
      (1)   The limits of clearing, grading, excavation or any other soil
disturbing activities, including off-site spoil and borrow areas must be
provided with final contours shown.
      (2)   Soil type and then boundaries, including locations of unstable or
highly erodible soils.
      (3)   Surface water locations including springs, wetlands, watercourses,
lakes, water wells, etc., on or within 20 feet of the site, including the
boundaries of wetlands or watercourses and first subsequent named receiving
water(s) the applicant intends to fill or relocate for which the applicant is
seeking approval from the US Army Corp of Engineers and/or Ohio EPA.
      (4)   Existing and proposed two foot contours with both labeled
accordingly.
      (5)   Sediment ponds and or sediment traps, including their dimensions
and the calculation of the available sediment settling volume and the
contributing drainage area.
      (6)   Location of all erosion and sediment control practices, including
location of areas likely to require temporary stabilization during the course
of site development.
      (7)   Areas designated for the storage or disposal of solid and liquid
wastes, including dumpster areas, areas designed for cement truck washout and
vehicle fueling.
      (8)   The location of any activities in watercourses including
watercourse crossings.
      (9)   Existing and planned location of buildings, roads, parking
facilities and utilities.
      (10)   Detail drawings of all permanent and temporary structural storm
water management and erosion control methods must be provided.
      (11)   Description and specifications for stabilization of all disturbed
areas of the site and guidance to which method of stabilization should be
employed for any time of the year shall be provided. Such practices may
include: temporary seeding, permanent seeding, mulching, matting, sod
stabilization, vegetative buffer strips, phasing of construction operations,
the use of construction entrances, and the use of alternative ground cover.
      (12)   The plan must make use of non-structural practices that preserve
the existing natural condition to the maximum extent practicable. Such
practices may include preserving riparian areas, preserving existing vegetation
and vegetative buffer strips, phasing construction operation in order to
minimize the amount of disturbed land at any one time, and designation of tree
preservation areas or other protective clearing or grubbing practices.
      (13)   Construction schedule clearly identifying the appropriate erosion,
sediment or storm water control method and the general sequence during the
construction process when each specific method will be implemented and the
contractor responsible for implementation.
      (14)   General notes must be provided to clearly indicate the methods,
timing and implementation of all temporary and permanent storm water
management, erosion and sediment control items. The following notes or similar
but not less restrictive should be provided:
         A.   "Minimize tracking of sediments by vehicles by utilizing the
construction entrance as the only entrance for vehicles. Maintain this entrance
with stone as needed to prevent dirt and mud from tracking onto the roadway.
Regular sweeping of the roadway may be necessary to ensure roadway does not
build up with sediments."
         B.   "The owner of record must provide regular inspection and
maintenance for all erosion and sediment control practices. Permanent records
of all maintenance and inspections must be kept throughout the construction
period, inspection must be made a minimum of once every seven (7) days and
immediately after storm events greater than 0.5 inches of rain within a 24-hour
period. The name of owner's designated inspector, major observations, date of
inspections and corrective measures taken must be noted on all inspections."
         C.   "Other erosion and sediment control items may be necessary due to
environmental conditions and may be required at the discretion of the City of
Columbiana or agents, Ohio EPA or County SWCD."
         D.   "Sediment/storm water ponds and erosion and sediment controls
shall be implemented as the first step of grading and within 7 days from the
start of grubbing. Upon completion of construction of ponds, seeding and
mulching shall immediately follow to aid in the stabilization and minimize
erosion and sediment transport of the soil before water leaves the pond. All
erosion and sediment controls shall continue to function until disturbed areas
are restabilized."
         E.   "No solid or liquid waste shall be discharged into storm water
runoff.  (This includes washing out of cement trucks.) Designated wash pit
areas are shown on the plans and are preset for this purpose away from areas of
storm water runoff."
         F.   "Site stabilization either permanent or temporary must follow the
requirements as applicable on the following Table 3 or Table 4:"
(Ord. 15-O-2820, passed 5-19-2015)
Performance and Design Standards
§ 1045.15  NOTIFICATION.
   A storm water pollution prevention plan (SWP3) must be reviewed and found in
compliance with these regulations by the Planning and Zoning Department prior
to the commencement of any soil disturbing activities. The owner of a site with
this approved SWP3 must notify the Planning and Zoning Department within 48
hours before initiating any soil disturbing activities. The Planning and Zoning
Department shall also be notified upon project completion to grant final site
approval of the project and ensure associated long-term maintenance agreement
has been submitted and recorded for any storm water management facilities and
built for the project.
(Ord. 15-O-2820, passed 5-19-2015)
§ 1045.16  PROTECTION AND ADJACENT PROPERTIES.
   (a)   Properties adjacent to the site, including public land and waters of
the state shall be protected from sediment deposition resulting from land
disturbance during construction. This may be accomplished by preserving a well
vegetated buffer strip around the lower perimeter of the land disturbance, by
installing perimeter controls such as sediment barriers, filters or dikes, or
sediment basins, or by a combination of such measures.
   (b)   When water must be pumped for the purposes of dewatering such as
culvert construction, storm sewer construction or pond maintenance/
construction, this water must pass through a filtering device or onto well
vegetated soil on the property where construction is occurring before entering
adjacent properties or drainage ways.
(Ord. 15-O-2820, passed 5-19-2015)
§ 1045.17  SOIL STABILIZATION.
   (a)   Permanent soil stabilization. All areas of final grade must be
permanently stabilized within seven days of reaching final grade. This is
usually accomplished by using seed and mulch, but special measures are
sometimes required. Permanent stabilization must be specified and performed as
listed in Table 3 below:
   TABLE 3: PERMANENT STABILIZATION
 
Area Requiring Permanent Stabilization   Time Frame to Apply Erosion Controls
Any area that will lie dormant for one   Within 7 days of the most recent
year or more.                            disturbance.
Any area within 50 feet of a watercourse Within 2 days of reaching final grade.
and at final grade.
Any area at final grade.                 Within 7 days of reaching final grade
                                         within that area.
 
      (1)   For slopes steeper than 3:1, erosion control netting, placement of
seed and mulch with tackifier, retaining walls, and/or other comparable method
shall be utilized. All drainage ditches shall be designed and stabilized with
rock riprap, sod, or erosion control matting, as appropriate. If failures occur
within these created channels, immediate repair and/or revised design is
required. Soil stabilization measures should be selected to be appropriate for
the time of year, site conditions, and estimated length of use should include
the use of the addition of topsoil, erosion control matting, rock riprap, and/
or retaining walls. Permanent seeding should be done March 1 to May 31 and
August 1 to September 30. Dormant seeding can be done from November 20 to March
15. At all other times of the year, the area should be temporarily stabilized
until a permanent seeding can be applied.
      (2)   A permanent vegetative cover shall be established on denuded areas
not otherwise permanently stabilized. Permanent vegetation shall not be
considered established until an 80% ground cover is achieved that is mature
enough to control soil erosion satisfactorily and to survive severe weather
conditions.
   (b)   Temporary soil stabilization. Temporary soil stabilization is the most
effective BMP during construction. The goal of temporary stabilization is to
provide cover, quickly. This is accomplished by seeding with fast growing
grasses then covering with straw mulch. Apply only mulch between November 1 and
March 31. To minimize costs of temporary stabilization, leave natural cover in
place for as long as possible. Only disturb areas where work is anticipated
within the next 21 days. Temporary soil stabilization is required and NOT an
option. Temporary stabilization must be specified and performed as listed in
Table 4 below:
   TABLE 4:  TEMPORARY STABILIZATION
 
Area Requiring Temporary Stabilization    Time Frame to Apply Erosion Controls
Any disturbed area within 50 feet of a    Within 2 days of the most recent
watercourse and not at final grade.       disturbance, if that area will remain
                                          idle for more than 21 days.
For all construction activities, any
disturbed area, including soil            Within 7 days of the most recent
stockpiles, that will be dormant for more disturbance within the area.
than 21 days but less than one year, and
not within 50 feet to a watercourse.
Disturbed areas that will be idle over    Prior to November 1.
the winter.
NOTE: Where vegetative stabilization techniques may cause structural
instability or are otherwise unobtainable, alternative stabilization techniques
must be employed. These techniques may include mulching, erosion matting, or
placement of stone.
 
   (c)   Soil stockpiles. Soil stockpiles shall be stabilized with temporary
seed and mulch or have perimeter silt fencing place to prevent soil loss. All
stockpiles shall be located at least 100 feet from all watercourses, drainage
ways, wetlands and site drainage exit points.
(Ord. 15-O-2820, passed 5-19-2015)
§ 1045.18  STORM WATER RUNOFF CONTROLS.
   (a)   Runoff control practices and associated details must be provided to
control the flow of runoff from disturbed areas to prevent erosion. Such
practices may include rock check dams, pipe slope drains, and diversions to
direct flow away from exposed soil and protective grading practices. These
practices shall divert runoff away from the disturbed areas and steep slopes
where practicable.
   (b)   Control of storm water runoff requires that use of grassed/vegetated
areas, or sedimentation basins, to removed sediment and/or contaminants.
      (1)   Vegetated filter strips, a minimum of 15 feet in width, can be
utilized when sheet or overland flow is planned (storm water is not collected).
If at any time it is found that a vegetated filter strip along is ineffective
in stopping sediment movement onto adjacent property, additional perimeter
controls shall be provided.
      (2)   Grassed swales can be utilized for treatment if the development
site is not conductive to more diffuse overland flow. A minimum ratio of 100
linear feet of grassed swale per acre of impervious area is required. When
possible, swales should be designed to minimize the velocity of runoff to less
than two feet per second from a 10-year, 24-hour storm. If failures occur
within these swales, immediate repair and/or revised design is required.
(Ord. 15-O-2820, passed 5-19-2015)
§ 1045.19  SEDIMENT BASINS/TRAPS.
   (a)   Sediment control practices and construction details of these practices
must be provided for all structural practices that shall store runoff, allowing
sediments to settle and/or divert flows away from exposed soils or otherwise
limit runoff from exposed areas.
   (b)   Structural practices shall be used to control erosion and trap
sediment from a site remaining disturbed for more than 14 days. Such practices
may include, among others: sediment settling ponds and earth diversion dikes or
channels which direct runoff to a sediment steeling pond. All sediment control
practices must be capable of ponding runoff in order to be considered
functional. Where five acres or more, of development area are disturbed in one
watershed, storm water runoff from that watershed shall pass through a sediment
basin or other suitable sediment trapping facility with equivalent or greater
storage capacity. All sediment basins and/or traps must provide a minimum
storage of 67 cubic yards per acre of total contributing drainage area. The use
of a dewatering device must be provided on the outlet structure to allow
dewatering of the facility and ensure adequate time for sediment settlement.
When determining the total contributing drainage area, off-site areas and areas
which remain undisturbed by construction activity must be included unless
runoff from these areas is diverted away from the sediment settling pong and is
not co-mingled with sediment laden runoff. The depth of the sediment settling
pond must be less that or equal to five feet. The configuration between inlets
and outlets of the basin must provide at least two units of length for each one
unit of width (>2:1 length: width ratio). Sediment must be removed from the
sediment settling pond when the design capacity has been reduced by 40%. (This
is typically reached when sediment occupies one-half of the basin depth). Any
dredged sediments placed on site must be immediately seeded and mulched or
hauled off site to an appropriate location. When designing sediment settling
ponds, the applicant must consider public safety as a design factor for the
sediment basin and alternative sediment controls must be used where site
limitations would preclude a safe design. The use of a combination of sediment
and erosion control measures in order to achieve maximum pollutant removal is
encouraged.
   (c)   The city may require sediment settling basins or traps for smaller
disturbed areas where deemed necessary. Sediment settling basins or traps
whether permanent or temporary must be provided and continue to function until
final stabilization of the site is achieved. Temporary sediment settling basins
or traps may be removed following final stabilization of the site.
(Ord. 15-O-2820, passed 5-19-2015)
§ 1045.20  INSTALLATION OF SEDIMENT CONTROLS.
   Sediment basins and traps, diversion dikes, sediment barriers, and other
measures intended to trap sediment on-site shall be constructed as a first step
in grading and be made functional before upslope land disturbance takes place.
Earthen structures whether permanent or temporary such as dams, dikes, sediment
basins, storm water basins and diversions shall be seeded and mulching within
seven days after installation is complete.
(Ord. 15-O-2820, passed 5-19-2015)
§ 1045.21  STORM SEWER INLET PROTECTION.
   Storm sewer inlet protection must be provided to minimize sediment laden
water from entering storm drain systems, unless the storm drain system drains
to a sediment settling pond. All storm sewer inlets/catch basins that are made
operable during construction shall be protected so that sediment laden water
will not enter the conveyance system without first being filtered or otherwise
treated to remove sediment. Provisions shall be made for these inlets/catch
basins to operate and be maintained before, during and after the final surface
is applied around it, such as concrete, asphalt or grass. This may require a
provision for an alternate method of inlet protection such as the use of a
"Dandy Bag" or approved equal. Water should pond around the inlet when it
rains. Silt fence alone cannot be utilized as inlet protection. A sturdy frame
must be constructed such as wood 2x4's to support silt fence around inlets. The
storm sewer inlet/catch basin protection should encircle the entire basin and
be properly entrenched if silt fence is to be utilized. Sediment must be
removed on a regular basis around the inlet and properly spread, seeded and
mulching or disposed of appropriately off-site.
(Ord. 15-O-2820, passed 5-19-2015)
§ 1045.22  CUT AND FILL SLOPES.
   Cut and fill slopes shall be designed and constructed in a manner that will
minimize erosion. Consideration should be given to the length and steepness of
the slope, the soil type, upslope drainage area, groundwater conditions, and
other applicable factors. Slopes should be no steeper than 2:1 and preferably
3:1. Slopes that are found to be eroding excessively during the first year
after construction shall be provided with additional slope stabilizing measures
by the developer until the problem is corrected.  The following guidelines are
provided to aid in developing an adequate design:
   (a)   Roughened soil surfaces are generally preferred to smooth surfaces on
slopes. Tracking should be done perpendicular to the direction of flow to
retard runoff.
   (b)   Diversions should be constructed at the top of long steep slopes that
have significant drainage areas above the slope. Diversions or terraces may
also be used to reduce slope length.
   (c)   Concentrated storm water should not be allowed to flow down cut or
fill slopes unless contained within an adequate channel, flume, or slope drain
structure.
   (d)   Wherever a slope face crosses a water seepage plane that endangers the
stability of the slope, adequate drainage or other protection should be
provided.
(Ord. 15-O-2820, passed 5-19-2015)
§ 1045.23  STABILIZATION OF WATERWAYS AND OUTLETS.
   (a)   Permanent stabilization of conveyance channels must be shown for all
channels and outfalls to prevent erosive flows. Measures may include erosion
control matting, sodding, or rock riprap. All on-site storm water conveyance
channels, except roadway ditches, shall be minimally designed and constructed
to withstand the expected velocity of flow from a 10-year, 24 hours frequency
storm without erosion. Stabilization adequate to prevent erosion shall also be
provided at the outlets of all pipes and paved channels. Permanent
stabilization of ALL non-paved channels carrying storm water including roadside
ditches must consist of excelsior matting in the bottom of the channel.
   (b)   All constructed waterways/drainage ways not directed to a sediment
basin must be stabilized either temporarily or permanently immediately
following construction to prevent scour and erosion from occurring. All culvert
outlets must have rock channel protection placed immediately following
construction.
(Ord. 15-O-2820, passed 5-19-2015)
§ 1045.24  WORKING IN OR CROSSING WATERCOURSES.
   (a)   Construction vehicles should be kept out of watercourses to the extent
possible. Where in-channel work is necessary, precautions shall be taken to
stabilize the work area during construction to minimize erosion. The channel
(including bed and banks) shall always be restabilized immediately after in-
channel work is completed. An Ohio EPA 401 Permit and/or a US Army Corp of
Engineers, Section 404 Permit may be necessary to perform projects within
watercourses.
   (b)   Where a live (wet) watercourse will be crossed by construction
vehicles regularly during construction, a temporary vehicular watercourse
crossing shall be provided.
   (c)   If construction activities will disturb areas adjacent to
watercourses, structural practices shall be designed and implemented on site to
protect all adjacent watercourses from the impacts of sediment runoff. No
structural sediment controls (e.g. the installation of silt fence or a sediment
settling pond in watercourses) shall be used in a watercourse. For all
construction activities immediately adjacent to surface waters of the state, it
is recommended that a setback of at least 25 feet, as measured from the
ordinary high water mark of the surface water, be maintained in its natural
state as a permanent buffer.
(Ord. 15-O-2820, passed 5-19-2015)
§ 1045.25  MAINTENANCE OF TEMPORARY MEASURES.
   All temporary and permanent erosion and sediment control practices shall be
maintained and repaired as needed to assure continued performance of their
intended function throughout the course of soil disturbing activities and until
any up slope development area is restabilized. As construction progresses and
the topography is altered, appropriate controls must be constructed or existing
controls altered to address the changing drainage patterns. If periodic
inspections or other information indicated a control has been used
inappropriately or incorrectly, the applicant must replace or modify the
control for site conditions. Other erosion and sediment control items may be
necessary due to environmental conditions and may be required at the discretion
of the city or its representatives. The owner will be responsible for such
maintenance until final inspection approval by the city.
(Ord. 15-O-2820, passed 5-19-2015)
§ 1045.26  DISPOSITION OF TEMPORARY MEASURES.
   All temporary erosion and sediment control measures shall be disposed of
within 30 days after final stabilization of the site is achieved and approved
by the city or after the temporary measures are no longer needed, unless
otherwise authorized by the city.  Trapped sediment and other disturbed soil
areas resulting from the disposition of temporary measures shall be permanently
stabilized to prevent further erosion and sediment accumulation.
(Ord. 15-O-2820, passed 5-19-2015)
§ 1045.27  CONSTRUCTION ENTRANCES.
   Good housekeeping practices must be implemented to ensure sediment is not
tracked off-site. Construction entrances shall be installed and maintained to
minimize off-site tracking of sediments. A stone access drive should be
installed at every point where vehicles enter or exit the site. Maintenance of
the stone access drive with additional stone throughout construction to ensure
mud is not tracked out onto the roadway is required. The length of the
construction stone entrance must be at least 70 feet in length (30 feet for an
individual sublot) and 14 feet in width.
(Ord. 15-O-2820, passed 5-19-2015)
§ 1045.28  OTHER POLLUTANT CONTROLS.
   No solid (other than sediment) or liquid waste, including building
materials, shall be discharged in storm water runoff. Wash pit areas must be
constructed in pre-designated areas as shown on the plans. The applicant must
implement all necessary BMP's to prevent the discharge of non-sediment
pollutants to the drainage system of the site or surface waters of the state.
Under no circumstances shall concrete trucks wash out directly into a drainage
channel, storm sewer or surface waters of the state. No exposure of storm water
to waste materials is recommended.
(Ord. 15-O-2820, passed 5-19-2015)
§ 1045.29  SILT FENCE AND DIVERSIONS.
   Sheet flow runoff from denuded areas shall be intercepted by silt fence or
diversions to protect adjacent properties and water resources from sediment
transported via sheet flow.
   (a)   Where intended to provide sediment control, silt fence shall be placed
on a level contour and not placed where concentrated flow is directed toward
it. Silt fence shall be pulled tight and trenched at least four inches to six
inches into the ground and backfilled to prevent runoff from cutting underneath
the fence. Sections of silt fence shall be joined so there are no gaps in the
fence. The ends of the silt fence shall be brought upslope of the rest of the
fence to prevent runoff from going around the ends. Silt fence shall not
control large drainage areas. The relationship between the maximum drainage
area to silt fence for a particular slope range is shown in the table below.
   TABLE 5: MAXIMUM DRAINAGE AREA TO SILT FENCE
 
Maximum Drainage Area (in acres) to 100 Range of Slope for a Particular
Linear Feet of Silt Fence               Drainage Area (in percent)
0.5                                     <2%
0.25                                    2% but <
1.125                                   20% but < 50%
 
   (b)   The use of combination barrier constructed of silt fence supported by
straw bales or silt fence embedded within rock check dams may be effective for
use in roadside ditches and on-site diversion swales and ditches. Storm water
diversion practices shall be used to keep runoff away from disturbed areas and
steep slopes where practicable. Such devices, which include swales, dikes or
berms, may receive storm water runoff from areas up to ten acres.
(Ord. 15-O-2820, passed 5-19-2015)
§ 1045.30  COMPLIANCE WITH OTHER REQUIREMENTS.
   The SWP3 plan shall be consistent with applicable state and/or local waste
disposal, sanitary sewer or septic system regulations, including provisions
prohibiting waste disposal by open burning and shall provide for the proper
disposal of contaminated soils to the extent these are located within the
permitted area.
(Ord. 15-O-2820, passed 5-19-2015)
§ 1045.31  TRENCH AND GROUND WATER CONTROL.
   These shall be no turbid discharges to surface waters of the state resulting
from dewatering activities. If ground water or a trench contains sediment, it
must pass through a sediment settling pond or equally effective sediment may be
removed by settling in place or by dewatering into a sump pit, filter bag or
comparable practice. Ground water dewatering which does not contain sediment or
other pollutants is not required to be treated prior to discharge. However,
care must be taken when discharging ground water to ensure that it does not
become pollutant laden by traversing over disturbed soils or other pollutant
sources.
(Ord. 15-O-2820, passed 5-19-2015)
Administrative
STORM WATER POLLUTION PREVENTION
PLAN FOR EARTH DISTURBING ACTIVITIES
§ 1045.32  INSPECTION AND COMPLIANCE.
   (a)   The Planning and Zoning Department or agents will make regular
inspections of development areas to determine compliance with these rules and
regulations and a report sent to the commissioners of the sites compliance
status. All construction activities, including permanent storm water
facilities, will be constructed in conformity with approved SWP3 plans. If it
appears that a violation of these regulations has occurred, the owner or his
appointed representative shall be notified of the deficiencies or non-
compliance by the city in writing. If within two weeks after the date of the
proof of mailing receipt, the deficiency or non-compliance has not been
corrected, or plans have not been approved by the city for its correction, said
deficiency or non-compliance shall be reported to the Planning and Zoning
Department for consideration of a "finding of violation".
   (b)   If, in the opinion of the Planning and Zoning Department, immediate
and irreparable damage will occur because of the violations, the Planning and
Zoning Department may approach the Law Director for consideration without
delay.
   (c)   If the city determines that a violation exists and requests the
prosecuting attorney of the county of jurisdiction in writing, the prosecuting
attorney shall seek an injunction or other appropriate relief to abate
excessive erosion or sedimentation and secure compliance with these
regulations. In granting relief, the court may order the construction of
sediment control improvements or implementation of other control measures.
(Ord. 15-O-2820, passed 5-19-2015)
§ 1045.33  VARIANCE.
   (a)   The Planning and Zoning Department may grant a variance to these
regulations where the owner or his appointed representative can show that a
hardship exists whereby compliance with these regulations is not appropriate,
based upon the following:
      (1)   That exceptional topographic or other physical conditions exist
that are peculiar to the particular parcel of land.
      (2)   That the peculiar condition in division (a) of this section did not
result from previous actions by the owner.
      (3)   That a literal interpretation of these regulations would deprive
the owner of rights enjoyed by other property owners.
   (b)   Adverse economic conditions shall not be considered as a valid reason
or hardship for a variance request to be granted. No variances will be granted
where activities occur that will defeat the purposes of these regulations.
   (c)   The request for a variance shall be submitted to the Planning and
Zoning Department and shall state the specific variances sought and include
sufficient data to justify the granting of a variance.
(Ord. 15-O-2820, passed 5-19-2015)
§ 1045.34  APPEALS.
   Any person aggrieved by any order, requirement, determination, or any other
action or inaction by the city in relation to these regulations, may appeal to
the Court of Common Pleas. Such an appeal shall be made in conformity with the
Ohio Revised Code. Written notice of appeal shall be served on the Planning and
Zoning Department.
(Ord. 15-O-2820, passed 5-19-2015)
§ 1045.35  MAINTENANCE AND FINAL INSPECTION APPROVAL.
   (a)   To receive final inspection and acceptance of any project the
following must be provided or completed:
      (1)   Disposition of all temporary erosion and sediment control measures.
      (2)   Final stabilization and all permanent erosion and sediment control
measures must be established.
      (3)   Permanent storm water management facilities must be installed and
made functional per the approved plans.
      (4)   At the discretion of the Planning and Zoning Department, an "As-
Built" survey may be requested; said survey must be certified (sealed, signed
and dated) by an Ohio Registered Surveyor and/or Engineer, as applicable with a
statement certifying that the storm water facilities, as designed and installed
meet the requirements of the plans originally found in compliance by the
Planning and Zoning Department. This may include a new set of storm water
facility calculations to be provided if the design was altered significantly.
The "As-Built" survey must minimally provide the location, dimensions, and
bearing of such facilities and reference the entity or individual(s)
responsible for long term maintenance.
   (b)   The above listed items must be received by the Planning and Zoning
Department prior to receiving approval for the maintenance period inspection
for subdivisions and prior to receiving final inspection approval of all other
construction sites.
(Ord. 15-O-2820, passed 5-19-2015)
Appendix "A" to Columbiana SWMR
City of Columbiana, Ohio
Storm Water Drainage/Detention Facilities
Operation and Maintenance Regulations
Storm water drainage/detention facilities will be maintained by the property
owner(s) or their heirs or assigns. Property owner(s) will be responsible for
facility maintenance, on owner's land, until such facility is connected to an
approved storm water facility within a public right-of-way or easement.
Operation and maintenance of storm water drainage/detention facilities shall be
as follows:
   Catch Basins:
      Inspect catch basins 2 (two) times per year, preferably Spring and Fall.
      Remove any accumulated debris from grates and sumps and legally dispose
of.
      Inspect catch basin interior to ensure conduits are not blocked and
conduits are mortared into structure, repair as necessary.
      Do not use catch basins as disposal areas for yard waste, leaves, oils,
or any chemical waste.
   Culverts:
      Inspect culverts 2 (two) times per year, preferably Spring and Fall.
      Remove any obstructions, debris, or accumulated sediment and legally
dispose of.
      Repair any erosion damage at the inlet and outlet of the culvert.
   Surface Detention Facility:
      Inspect facility 3 (three) times per year, Spring, Summer and Fall, or
after any rain event of 1 inch per a 24 hour period.
      Mow earthen/vegetated facilities and spillways a minimum of once each
month during the growing season.
      Inspect slopes for signs of erosion, settlement or seepage.
(Ord. 15-O-2820, passed 5-19-2015)
Appendix "B" to Columbiana SWMR
City of Columbiana, Ohio
Drive and Yard Pipe Policy
GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
All driveway and yard section installation requests must be submitted to the
City Street Superintendent for review and approval.
Upon receiving said approval, the property owner shall purchase pipe and
materials and install according to City Policy.
      All pipes will be hydraulically sized for a minimum 10 year storm
capacity.
      The pipe flow line shall match flush with the existing roadside ditch
elevation and gradient or connecting pipes.
      Excavation, bedding, laying, joining, and back filling shall be as per
Item 611 of the Ohio Department of Transportation (ODOT), Construction and
Material Specifications.
      The City Street Superintendent or City Manager may modify these
requirements at their discretion, should the conditions warrant modifications.
DRIVEWAY PIPE:
A driveway pipe is designed to carry water from one side of the driveway to the
other.
      Minimum pipe diameter shall be 12 inches or larger, as requested by the
City.
      Minimum length of pipe shall be 20 feet. Longer pipes may be necessary
due to width of driveways or tie-ins to existing driveways.
      Acceptable pipe materials shall be reinforced concrete, corrugated double
wall polyethylene pipe, as per AASHTO M 294 or polyvinyl chloride (PVC) ASTM F
758 PS46 minimum.
      Plastic pipe shall be permitted only when 12" minimum cover is available
or as directed by the City.
      Corrugated plastic tubing, spiral metal pipes, water line and sanitary
sewer pipe will NOT be permitted.
NOTE:      It is the option of the property owner to have the City's Street
crew perform the driveway culvert installation or to hire a private contractor
to do the work. The City crew will install driveway culverts as their schedule
permits. It will be the responsibility of the property owned to pay for the
pipe and backfill materials.
         Any installation by a private contractor must follow the City's
Driveway and Yard Pipe Policy.
         OUPS (Ohio Utilities Protection Service) must be notified and the work
area marked before any installation work will be performed. OUPS will need two
(2) working day's notification in advance.
YARD SECTION PIPE:
A yard section pipe is designed to carry water from one side of the property to
the other and into the roadside ditch line, yard pipes must be hydraulically
sized to a minimum 10 year storm event capacity.
      A minimum 8" deep ditch or swale must be maintained over the top of the
yard pipe to carry road and yard runoff, see Figure "A".
      Yard section pipe shall be joined or sealed.
      A standard surface catch basin with an adequate opening and grate shall
be placed on the upstream side of all drives. The City may require additional
surface water inlets or catch basins if conditions exist that require drainage
from other sources; catch basins shall be installed at least every 200 feet or
less, if required by the City.
      Any other pipes or tiles that need to enter yard pipe (such as curtain
drains, down spout drains, etc.) must have approved connected fittings. At no
time will the yard pipe be allowed to have holes cut into the side of it and
lateral tiles inserted.
      Acceptable materials shall be reinforced concrete, polyvinyl chloride
(PVC) ASTM  F 758 PS 46 minimum or corrugated double wall polyethylene pipe, as
per AASHTO M 294, a 12" minimum diameter or greater if required by the City.
      Catch basins shall be a minimum of ODOT Standard 2-2-B, for pipes larger
than 18" a larger catch basin will be needed.
      All yard pipes and catch basins must be installed by the property owner
and approved by the City or designated representatives.
      Once facilities are installed within City right-of-way and approved by
the City, responsibility for maintenance and/or replacement will be by the
City. The City will have no responsibility for pipes outside of the right-of-
way.
      All material and installation costs of a yard pipe and catch basins shall
be the responsibility of the property owner; City personnel WILL NOT install
yard pipes and catch basins.
      All pipe and catch basin installations shall be in accordance with ODOT
Construction and Materials Specifications.
   Figure "A" - Yard Pipe Detail
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/0e290f4930aa9d300d35a8df8a0eb049dd62f83c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3692.jpg]
 
(Ord. 15-O-2820, passed 5-19-2015)
CHAPTER 1046:  GAS
Section
1046.01   Overview.
1046.02   Description of services.
1046.03   Determination of rates.
1046.04   Plan for providing op-out notice.
1046.05   Process for determining the pool of customers.
1046.06   Customer billing procedures.
1046.07   Credit and deposit policies.
1046.08   Governmental aggregator’s customer service procedures and dispute
resolution.
1046.09   Members moving into/within the aggregation (new account number).
1046.10   Members moving within the aggregation (same account number).
1046.11   Joining the program at a later date (opting in).
1046.12   Definitions.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Regulations of electricity, gas and water rates - see Ohio R.C. 743.26,
743.28, 4909.34 et seq.
   Gas contract restrictions - see Ohio R.C. 743.33
   Compulsory gas connections - see Ohio R.C. 743.37
   Contract for gas - see Ohio R.C. 743.38
   Gas, electric and water companies - see Ohio R.C. Ch. 4933
   Prosecutions for theft of utilities - see GEN. OFF.
672.06
   Utilities generally - see S.U. & P.S.
Ch. 1040
§ 1046.01  OVERVIEW.
   (a)   At the May 6, 2003 general election, local residents authorized the
City of Columbiana (the city) to create a municipal opt-out natural gas
aggregation program (the aggregation program) in compliance with Ohio R.C.
4929.26. Under the opt-out natural gas aggregation program, all eligible
natural gas consumers within the city’s corporation limits will be
automatically included in the aggregation program initially. However, all
consumers will also be given the opportunity to opt-out or decline
participation in the aggregation program as detailed herein.
   (b)   The city’s purpose in creating the aggregation program is to represent
local consumer interests in emerging competitive natural gas markets by
aggregating natural gas loads within the city’s corporation limits (including
municipal facilities) and negotiating affordable, reliable natural gas supplies
and other related services on behalf of local consumers. The city may pursue
this purpose individually or in cooperation with other entities.
   (c)   Many small commercial and residential natural gas consumers lack the
leverage to effectively negotiate natural gas supply rates and services. A
governmental aggregation program provides them with an option for professional
representation and the bargaining power of a larger, more diverse consumer
group that may be more attractive to suppliers, allowing them to effectively
participate in the competitive process and achieve benefits.
(Ord. 05-O-2198, passed 6-7-2005)
§ 1046.02  DESCRIPTION OF SERVICES.
   (a)   The aggregation program is designed to reduce the amount a consumer
pays for natural gas energy, and to gain other favorable economic and non-
economic terms in service contracts. The city will not buy and resell natural
gas, but will represent collective consumer interests to set terms and
conditions for service. Through a negotiation process, the city will develop a
contract with a competitive retail natural gas services provider (CRNGS
provider) or providers for firm all-requirements natural gas service. Once the
contract has been finalized, it will be submitted to the Columbiana City
Council for approval.
   (b)   The aggregation program covers the natural gas supply portion only of
a participant’s natural gas bill. Columbia Gas of Ohio (COH) will continue to
deliver natural gas to aggregation program participants’ homes and businesses
through its natural gas distribution system as a monopoly function regulated by
the Public Utilities Commission of Ohio (PUCO). COH will also continue to
install, operate and maintain its system of pipelines, rights-of-way, meters
and other natural gas distribution components. Aggregation program participants
should continue to call COH if their natural gas is interrupted or if they have
billing questions. The PUCO will continue to oversee COH natural gas safety and
reliability service standards.
   (c)   Oversight of the aggregation program will be the responsibility of the
City Manager, who shall report to the City Council. The City Manager, subject
to City Council approval, will have the authority to develop specifications for
the aggregation program, to appoint an aggregation program manager, and to
select, hire and manage the CRNGS provider. The CRNGS provider and the
aggregation program manager will work under the direction of the City Manager
with the advice and counsel of the City Attorney.
   (d)   Due to the complexity of the natural gas utility industry and the
uncertainties of its associated restructuring activities, the City of
Columbiana may contract with a consultant or consultants to provide the
necessary expertise to represent the city’s interest in legislative and
regulatory matters and/or to serve as the aggregation program Manager. Such
services may include, but are not limited to, facilitating consumer enrollment
and opt-out, assisting with consumer education, addressing consumer questions
and concerns, providing reports on program operation, enrollment and savings,
negotiating future CRNGS provider contracts, and representing the city in
dealings with CRNGS providers, COH, the Ohio Legislature, the PUCO and the Ohio
Consumer’s Counsel (OCC).
   (e)   The city deems any and all information related to an eligible customer
to be confidential and proprietary trade secret information. The CRNGS provider
shall keep all eligible customer information provided to it by the city or COH
in supplying eligible customers within the city’s corporation limit
confidential and shall not disclose such information to any third party, unless
such disclosure is required to serve any eligible customer, the third party
agrees to keep such eligible customer information confidential, and the city
consents to the disclosure of such information to the third party.
   (f)   The city will require any CRNGS provider to disclose any
subcontractors that it uses in fulfillment of the services described herein.
   (g)   The CRNGS provider will provide a local or toll free telephone number
for participant questions and concerns about enrollment, opt-out provisions,
billing and other aggregation program issues.
   (h)   The CRNGS provider will develop internal controls and processes to
help ensure that the city remains in good standing as a governmental aggregator
that complies with all laws, rules and regulations regarding the same as they
may be periodically amended.
   (i)   Natural gas service reliability is an essential to aggregation program
participants. The city will strive to provide high-quality service and
reliability through provisions of the CRNGS provider contract, through
traditional proceedings related to COH distribution services; and through
direct discussions with COH concerning specific or general problems related to
quality and reliability of its distribution system.
   (j)   If for any reason a CRNGS provider fails to provide uninterrupted
service, the city will attempt to acquire an alternative natural gas supply. If
this attempt fails, participants will default to COH established tariff rates.
In no case will participants be without natural gas as the result of the CRNGS
provider’s failure to provide uninterrupted service. The city will seek to
minimize this risk by contracting only with reputable CRNGS providers that
demonstrate reliable service. The city also intends to include conditions in
its CRNGS provider contract that will indemnify participants against risks or
problems with natural gas supply service and price.
   (k)   All aggregation program participants shall enjoy the protections of
law afforded to consumers as they currently exist or as they may be amended
from time to time. These include rights to question billings or service quality
or service practices. All program participants shall also enjoy the individual
right to decline participation in the aggregation program subject to the terms
and conditions contained herein.
   (l)   All aggregation program participants will be treated equitably. They
will be guaranteed the right to raise and resolve disputes with the CPSNGS
provider, be provided all required notices and information; and always retain
the right to opt-out of the aggregation program or switch suppliers subject to
the terms and conditions contained herein.
   (m)   All consumers within the city’s corporation limits shall be eligible
to participate in the aggregation program subject to the terms and conditions
described herein, Ohio law, PUCO rules and regulation governing natural gas
service, and COH approved tariffs.
   (n)   Service under the aggregation program shall include all eligible
customer classes in adherence with universal service principles and
requirements, and the traditional nondiscriminatory practices of local
government. CRNGS provider contracts shall contain provisions to maintain these
principles and equitable treatment of all customer classes.
   (o)   Low-income consumers shall remain subject to all provisions of Ohio
law and PUCO rules and regulations as they may be amended from time to time
regarding their rights to return to COH general service and participation in
the aggregation program.
   (p)   The city developed this plan of operation and governance in compliance
with Ohio law regarding municipal opt-out aggregation of natural gas consumers,
including two public hearings prior to its adoption.
   (q)   The Columbiana City Council shall approve through resolution or
ordinance the aggregation program’s plan of operation and governance in
accordance with Ohio R.C. 4929.26. Amendments to the plan of operation and
governance may be subject to Columbiana City Council approval and filing with
the PUCO.
   (r)   After adoption of the plan of operation and governance, the city will
file with the PUCO for governmental aggregator certification and also register
as a governmental aggregator with COH.
   (s)   Aggregation program participants are subject to the same standards and
responsibilities as other natural gas consumers, including payment of billings
and access to metering and other equipment necessary to carry out utility
operations.
   (t)   The aggregation program may be discontinued upon the termination or
expiration of the CRNGS provider contract without any extension, renewal or
subsequent contract being executed. In the event of aggregation program
termination, each participant will receive notification at least 60 days prior
to such program termination and could return to COH general service rate or
select another approved CRNGS provider.
(Ord. 05-O-2198, passed 6-7-2005)
§ 1046.03  DETERMINATION OF RATES.
   (a)   The city will not buy and resell natural gas to aggregation program
participants. The city will aggregate natural gas loads within the city’s
corporation limits including municipal facilities. Through a competitive
selection process, the city will develop and negotiate a contract with a CRNGS
provider or providers for firm, all-requirements service. The contract will
contain mutually agreeable price terms for affordable, reliable natural gas
supplies and other related services. The city may pursue this purpose
individually or in cooperation with other entities. Contracts will be monitored
by the city on behalf of consumers.
   (b)   CRNGS providers will supply information on natural gas supply charges
by COH customer rate classification or other appropriate pricing category as
approved by the city. All natural gas supply charges will be fully and
prominently disclosed in consumer enrollment materials and will be subject to
approval by the Columbiana City Council.
   (c)   The city will contract only with a CRNGS provider or providers that
meet at a minimum the following criteria:
      (1)   Certified CRNGS provider by the PUCO;
      (2)   Registered with COH;
      (3)   Have a service agreement under COH gas transportation service
tariff;
      (4)   Successfully completed electronic data interchange (EDI) computer
system testing with COH and that CRNGS provider’s EDI computer system is
capable of effectively processing aggregation program EDI transactions in a
timely manner;
      (5)   Meet standards of creditworthiness established by the city;
      (6)   Have a customer call center capable of effectively handling
participants’ questions, concerns and disputes in a timely manner using a toll-
free telephone number; and
      (7)   Hold the city harmless from any financial obligations arising from
offering natural gas and/or energy-related services to aggregation program
participants.
   (d)   The CRNGS provider’s contract will contain all pricing, charges, early
termination, fees, and the like, in clear and easily understood terms, and it
will include a sales tax instead of a gross receipts tax.
   (e)   The CRNGS provider’s rates will include an administrative fee, which
shall (if implemented) be collected on behalf of the city to fund the
implementation and administration of the city’s aggregation program. The
administrative fee will be adjusted annually to cover the city’s cost of
administering the program. The fee will be reviewed annually to ensure that the
amounts collected do not exceed the cost of administering the aggregation
program.
   (f)   COH assigns customer rate classifications, character of service and
associated regulated rates subject to PUCO approved tariffs. In addition to the
CRNGS provider’s gas service charges, consumers will continue to be billed for
COH service and delivery charges. Although the city may participate in
regulatory proceedings and represent the interests of consumers regarding these
regulated rates, it cannot assign or alter customer rate classifications.
(Ord. 05-O-2198, passed 6-7-2005)
§ 1046.04  PLAN FOR PROVIDING OP-OUT NOTICE.
   (a)   Initially, each eligible consumer within the city’s corporation limits
will be automatically included in the aggregation program. However, prior to
actual enrollment, each consumer will receive a notice from the city detailing
the aggregation program’s rates, terms and conditions.
   (b)   Each consumer will then have a 21-day period to opt-out of or decline
to participate in the aggregation program without charge. Consumers opting out
of the program will remain on Columbia Gas of Ohio’s (COH) established tariff
rates until such time as they select an approved CRNGS provider. A similar opt-
out period will be offered every two years during which time consumers can
leave the aggregation program without paying an early termination fee.
(Ord. 05-O-2198, passed 6-7-2005)
§ 1046.05  PROCESS FOR DETERMINING THE POOL OF CUSTOMERS.
   (a)   After contract approval by the Columbiana City Council, the CRNGS
provider will work with the city and COH to identify all eligible consumers
within the city’s corporation limits.
   (b)   All eligible consumers will be notified of the rates, charges and
other terms and conditions of participation in the aggregation program and that
they will be automatically enrolled in the aggregation program unless they “opt
out” or decline participation in the program. Consumers will be given a 21-day
period in which to notify the city that they wish to opt out or decline
participation in the aggregation program.
   (c)   After the initial 21-day opt-out period has elapsed, all eligible
consumers who have not notified the city of their desire to opt out of the
aggregation program will be enrolled by the CRNGS provider at the earliest date
practicable.
   (d)   Consumers enrolled in the aggregation program by the CRNGS provider
will receive a letter from COH notifying them of their enrollment. Consumers
will have seven calendar days to notify COH of any objection to their
enrollment in the aggregation program. COH will notify the CRNGS provider of
consumer objections or any reason that a consumer was not enrolled in the
aggregation program.
   (e)   Customers who meet the following criteria will become members of the
aggregation program:
      (1)   Are not currently buying gas from another supplier;
      (2)   Are up to date with their bill payments;
      (3)   Have not opted out of the program;
      (4)   Currently have service with COH;
      (5)   Are classified as non-mercantile;
      (6)   Have not exercised their right of rescission: or
      (7)   Are not on the percentage of income payment plan (PIPP).
   (f)   New members may opt into the program upon contract expiration with an
alternate supplier. These members will need to contact the CRNGS provider for
enrollment information. The CRNGS provider has a right of refusal in accordance
with criteria described in this plan.
   (g)   The CRNGS provider will build and maintain a database of all
aggregation program participants. The database will include the name, address
and COH account number and may include other pertinent information as agreed
upon by the city and the CRNGS provider. Such information may include the CRNGS
provider’s account number (if different from COH account number), rate code,
rider code (if applicable), most recent 12 months of natural gas consumption,
and meter reading cycle. The aggregation program database will be updated at
least quarterly. The city will have the right to access information in the
database for purposes of auditing.
   (h)   The CRNGS provider will report to the city the status of aggregation
program enrollment on at least a monthly basis.
   (i)   Participants who wish to leave the aggregation program may do so:
      (1)   During the initial 21-day opt-out period;
      (2)   During the seven day rescission period;
      (3)   During subsequent opt-out period offered by the city at least every
two years; or
      (4)   At any other time; however an early termination fee may be
assessed.
   (j)   In addition to the initial 21-day opt-out period described above, each
participant will be given an opportunity to opt out of the aggregation program
every two years without paying an early termination fee. Consumers who choose
to opt out of the aggregation program at any time other than during the initial
21-day opt-out period or during subsequent opt-out periods offered by the city
may be subject to an early termination fee.
   (k)   Any consumer who opts out of the aggregation program will be returned
to COH established tariff rates until such time as the consumer selects another
approved CRNGS provider.
(Ord. 05-O-2198, passed 6-7-2005)
§ 1046.06  CUSTOMER BILLING PROCEDURES.
   The city plans to utilize COH consolidated billing service in which each
consumer account receives one bill itemizing the CRNGS provider’s natural gas
supply charges and COH delivery, transition and other PUCO-approved charges.
The billing statement will be consistent with applicable PUCO rules and
regulations. The city will consider other billing options, including CRNGS
provider consolidated billing, if and when they become available and if it
appears advantageous to do so.
(Ord. 05-O-2198, passed 6-7-2005)
§ 1046.07  CREDIT AND DEPOSIT POLICIES.
   Collection, credit and deposit procedures remain the responsibility of the
local utility, the selected supplier and the individual member. Members are
required to remit and comply with the payment terms of the local utility. This
program will not be responsible for late or no payment on the part of any of
its members. The municipality will have no separate credit or deposit policy.
The selected supplier shall not charge more than 1-1/2% per month for overdue
balances owed to the selected supplier.
(Ord. 05-O-2198, passed 6-7-2005)
§ 1046.08  GOVERNMENTAL AGGREGATOR’S CUSTOMER SERVICE PROCEDURES AND DISPUTE
RESOLUTION.
   The aggregation program only impacts the source of natural gas supply. COH
will continue to deliver the natural gas purchased through the aggregation
program to participants’ homes and businesses through its natural gas
distribution system. Participants with questions or concerns regarding service
delivery or safety, such as a natural gas outage or odor of gas should continue
to contact COH at 800-344-4077. Meter reading or other billing questions should
also be directed to COH at the same number. Questions regarding aggregation
program enrollment or opting out should be directed to the CRNGS provider.
General questions and concerns should be directed to either the office of the
City Manager, City of Columbiana, or the General Manager at AMPO, Inc. Disputes
unresolved by the aforementioned parties, should be directed to either the Ohio
Consumer’s Counsel or the Public Utilities Commission of Ohio. The following
table gives toll-free telephone numbers for use by consumers.
 
Question or Concern Contact Telephone Number
Natural gas outage or  COH                              800-344-4077
interruption
Turn natural gas on or COH                              800-344-4077
off
Meter reading/billing  COH                              800-344-4077
To enroll in or opt-   CRNS provider — Interstate Gas 800-280-4474
out of the aggregation Supply
program                Hours: Mon. - Fri. 8:00 a.m. -
                       5:00 p.m.
Aggregation Program    AMPO, Inc.                       614-339-6222
Questions or concerns                                   gslone@amp-ohio.org
Unresolved disputes    Ohio Consumer’s Counsel        877-742-5622
(residential                                            occ@occ.state.oh.us
customers)
resolved disputes (all Public Utilities Commission of   (800)-686-7826 (voice)
customers)             Ohio                             (800)-686-1570 (TDD)
 
(Ord. 05-O-2198, passed 6-7-2005)
§ 1046.09  MEMBERS MOVING INTO/WITHIN THE AGGREGATION (NEW ACCOUNT NUMBER).
   (a)   Consumers who move into the city after the initial opt-out period will
be not be automatically included in the program, but will be afforded an
opportunity to enroll. However, the city cannot guarantee that the rates, terms
and conditions to consumers enrolling in the aggregation program after the
initial 21-day opt-out period will match those of the initial enrollees.
   (b)   The same rule will apply to participants who move within the city
after the initial opt-out period, if they are given a new account number by
COH. That is, they will not be automatically included in the program, but will
be given an opportunity to re-enroll under a new set of rates, terms and
conditions.
(Ord. 05-O-2198, passed 6-7-2005)
§ 1046.10  MEMBERS MOVING WITHIN THE AGGREGATION (SAME ACCOUNT NUMBER).
   Participants who relocate within the city limits and retain the same COH
account number, will be allowed to continue in the aggregation program at their
new location under the same terms and conditions as at their former location,
subject to any switching fees imposed by COH.
(Ord. 05-O-2198, passed 6-7-2005)
§ 1046.11  JOINING THE PROGRAM AT A LATER DATE (OPTING IN).
   Residents of the city who initially choose to opt-out of the program, for
whatever reason, and wish to enroll at a later date, will be treated the same
as a new resident. That is, they will not automatically become part of the
existing program, but will be given an opportunity to enroll. However, the city
cannot guarantee that rates, terms and conditions to consumers enrolling in the
aggregation program after the initial 21-day opt-out period will match those of
the initial enrollees.
(Ord. 05-O-2198, passed 6-7-2005)
§ 1046.12  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   “Aggregation” means combining the natural gas loads of multiple customers
for the purposes of supplying or arranging for the supply of competitive retail
natural gas service to those customers.
   “Aggregation program manager” means the person or entity designated by the
city to oversee the operation and management of the city of Columbiana’s
municipal natural gas aggregation program.
   “Competitive retail natural gas service (CRNGS)” means a component of retail
natural gas service deemed competitive under the Ohio Revised Code or pursuant
to an order of the PUCO. This includes but is not limited to the services
provided by competitive retail natural gas service providers, natural gas
marketers, aggregators and governmental aggregators.
   “Competitive retail natural gas service provider (CRNGS provider)” means a
person or entity certified by the PUCO and registered with COH who supplies or
offers to supply a competitive retail natural gas service over the COH natural
gas distribution system. This term does not apply to COH in its provision of
standard offer natural gas service.
   “Consumer” means any person or entity that is an end user of natural gas and
is connected to any part of COH natural gas distribution system within the City
of Columbiana’s corporation limits.
   “Delivery charge” means the charge imposed by COH for delivering natural gas
to a consumer’s home or business. The charge includes meter reading, billing,
transition costs, maintaining natural gas system reliability and responding
during emergencies and outages (also called the distribution charge).
   “Distribution” means the delivery of natural gas to a home or business
through COH owned pipelines, meters and other equipment. COH distribution
system operations will remain regulated by the PUCO.
   “Governmental aggregator” means an incorporated village or city, township or
county acting as an aggregator for the provision of a CRNGS under authority
conferred under Ohio R.C. 4929.26.
   “Mercantile customer” means a customer that consumes, other than for
residential use, more than 500,000 cubic feet of natural gas per year at a
single location within the state; or a customer that has three or more
locations within the state that consume natural gas, other than for residential
use.
   “Natural gas related service” means service directly related to the
consumption of natural gas at a consumer’s home or business. This may include,
but is not limited to, the installation of metering, remote reading indices,
regulation; the maintenance, repair or replacement of appliances and other
energy-consuming devices at a consumer’s premises, and the provision of energy
consumption measurement and billing services.
   “Natural gas supply charge” means all charges related to the acquisition of
natural gas by the CRNGS provider, and its delivery to the city’s distribution
system.
   “Ohio Consumers’ Counsel (OCC)” means the Ohio Consumers’ Counsel (OCC),
established by the Ohio Legislature in 1976, represents the interests of Ohio’s
four million residential utility customers served by investor-owned utilities
in proceedings before the PUCO, other regulatory agencies and in the courts.
The OCC also educates consumers about utility issues and resolves complaints
individuals have with investor-owned utility companies.
   “Participant” means a consumer enrolled in the City of Columbiana’s
municipal natural gas aggregation program.
   “Public Utilities Commission of Ohio (PUCO)” means the state agency charged
with assuring all consumers (residential commercial and industrial) served by
investor-owned utilities have access to adequate, safe, and reliable utility
services at fair prices. The PUCO regulates a wide variety of investor-owned
utilities, including natural gas, electricity, pipeline, heating/cooling, local
telephone, long distance telephone, waterworks, wastewater, railroad, household
goods carriers, water transportation, hazardous materials carriers, and
commercial transportation carriers.
(Ord. 05-O-2198, passed 6-7-2005)
CHAPTER 1048:  ELECTRICITY
Section
1048.01   Rate schedule; penalty for late payments.
1048.02   Billing period.
1048.03   Mutual aid agreements.
1048.04   Electric line extensions.
1048.05   Specifications for underground installation.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Regulation of electricity, gas and water rates - see Ohio R.C. 743.26,
743.28, 4909.34 et seq.
   Contracts for electricity - see Ohio R.C. 743.38, 4933.04
   Power to require permit for facility construction or location - see Ohio
R.C. 4905.65
   Gas, electric and water companies - see Ohio R.C. Ch. 4933
   Prosecutions for theft of utilities - see GEN. OFF.
672.06
   Utilities generally - see S.U. & P.S.
Ch. 1040
   National Electrical Code - see B. & H.
Ch. 1426
§ 1048.01  RATE SCHEDULE; PENALTY FOR LATE PAYMENTS.
   (a)   The rates charged for electric service provided by the municipality
shall be as set forth in the Fee Schedules (Exhibits A through G) attached to
Ordinance 17-O-2933.
     (b)   The aforesaid rates shall become effective for the electricity
distributed during the billing cycle that includes September 1, 2014 and
billable on October 1, 2014 and shall become effective for the electricity
distributed during the billing cycle that includes June 1, 2017 and billable on
July 1, 2017 and shall become effective for the electricity distributed during
the billing cycle that includes October 1, 2017 and billable on November 1,
2017.
   (c)   The monthly billing statements sent to each such consumer by the
municipality shall advise the consumer that the aforesaid monthly electric
charges shall be paid within 15 days of the billing date appearing on such
statement in order to avoid a penalty amounting to 10% of the total bill, which
penalty is hereby authorized and approved, and such penalty shall be plainly
noted on each such monthly billing statement.
   (d)   The Manager is authorized to take whatever steps may be necessary to
carry out the intent and purpose of this section, including, but not limited
to, the alteration or modification of monthly billing statements.
(Ord. 83-O-705, passed 1-3-1984; Ord. 91-O-1248, passed 9-3-1991; Ord. 01-O-
1883, passed 4-17-2001; Ord. 02-O-1975, passed 11-5-2002; Ord. 14-O-2773,
passed 7-15-2014; Ord. 17-O- 2916, passed 5-2-2017; Ord. 17-O-2933, passed 9-5-
2017)
§ 1048.02  BILLING PERIOD.
   All electric users shall be billed monthly.
(Ord. 78-O-421, passed 12-19-1978; Ord. 14-O-2773, passed 7-15-2014)
§ 1048.03  MUTUAL AID AGREEMENTS.
   (a)   The Manager is hereby authorized and directed to enter into mutual aid
contracts with various municipal electric systems in the state for emergency
repair service and for emergency equipment, personnel and supplies in case of
emergencies, and to approve invoices for the same.
   (b)   Such mutual aid agreements shall contain, inter alia, terms which
provide as follows:
      (1)   In the event of an electrical emergency, each party may request, in
writing, aid from the other in the form of additional manpower and/or
equipment.
      (2)   Each request for aid shall specify, to the extent practicable, the
assistance required and an estimate of the length of time the assistance may be
needed.
      (3)    Each responding community need only respond to the extent
consistent with the proper operation of its own electrical system.
      (4)   The community rendering aid should be reimbursed by the community
requesting such aid as follows:
         A.   A charge for labor and equipment at two times the actual cost for
the total number of man hours expended rendering aid (including travel) by
employees of the aiding community;
         B.   A materials and supplies charge equal to the actual cost of
materials and supplies expended rendering such aid, including expenses incurred
in traveling to and from the site of such aid; and
         C.   The actual cost of the loss or damage to the equipment of the
aiding community not recovered from insurance.
      (5)   Payment for such aid, determined in accordance with division (b)(4)
hereof, shall be rendered upon presentation of an invoice detailing the same,
or within 30 days.
      (6)   Personnel of the aiding community shall be considered acting within
the scope of their employment, to the same extent as if they were performing
their regular duties, while engaged in such aid.
      (7)   Under no circumstances shall the responding party or its employees
be liable to the requesting party, its inhabitants or others for any damages
arising in any way as a result of the rendering of such aid or the failure to
respond to a call for such aid.
      (8)   Under no circumstances shall the party requesting such aid be
liable to the party responding, its inhabitants or others for any damages
arising in any way from the response to such a request for aid or the rendering
thereof, except as outlined in division (b)(4)C. hereof.
      (9)   Each contract shall be in effect for one year, with a provision for
automatic renewal unless cancelled by a 30-day notice.
(Ord. 84-O-754, passed 6-19-1984; Ord. 14-O-2773, passed 7-15-2014)
§ 1048.04  ELECTRIC LINE EXTENSIONS.
   (a)   Single-family housing developers/builders that develop (plat) more
than one lot will make a one time flat fee payment of two hundred and fifty
dollars ($250.00) for each single-family lot in a development.
   (b)   Multi-family housing developers/builders who develop units that are
individually metered, will make a one time flat fee payment of two hundred
dollars ($200.00) for each unit.
   (c)   Commercial/industrial developers/builders that develop (plat) a lot
will make a one time flat fee payment of five hundred dollars ($500.00) for
each lot.
   (d)   Commercial/industrial developers/builders that develop units that are
individually metered, will make a one time flat fee payment of two hundred
fifty dollars ($250.00) for each unit.
   (e)   The city, before any extension, must receive payment for the
extensions.
(Ord. 03-O-2032, passed 5-20-2003; Ord. 14-O-2773, passed 7-15-2014)
§ 1048.05  SPECIFICATIONS FOR UNDERGROUND INSTALLATION.
   (a)   The developer shall provide the city with a plat map showing all lots
and or buildings a minimum of 90 days before installation.
   (b)   Open all trenches; to a minimum depth of three feet with a minimum of
24 hours notice to the city.
   (c)   All wire within the right-of-way shall be in conduit.
   (d)   Wire (conduit) shall be covered with sand or suitable material
approved by the electric department at a minimum six inches cover over wire.
Install safety tape and then complete backfilling.
   (e)   Finish grade for transformers, deferral cabinets, and the like must be
determined by the developer before the equipment is installed.
   (f)   Secondary wire for street lights shall be placed in conduit.
(Ord. 03-O-2032, passed 5-20-2003; Ord. 14-O-2773, passed 7-15-2014)
CHAPTER 1050: USE OF PUBLIC WAYS BY SERVICE PROVIDERS
Section
1050.01   Scope of chapter; definitions.
1050.02   Consent to occupy or use the public right-of-way; initial
registration.
1050.03   Annual registration of service providers.
1050.04   Insurance, bond and indemnification.
1050.05   General public right-of-way use regulations.
1050.06   Location, relocation and removal of facilities.
1050.07   Notice of work, routine maintenance and emergency work.
1050.08   Construction permits and standards.
1050.09   Miscellaneous provisions.
1050.99   Penalties and other remedies.
§ 1050.01  SCOPE OF CHAPTER; DEFINITIONS.
   (a)   The purpose and intent of this chapter is to:
      (1)   Manage reasonable access to the city's public right-of-way by
utility and other service providers and ensure their compliance with the
ordinances, rules and regulations of the city.
      (2)   Conserve the limited physical capacity of the public right-of-way
held in trust by the city for the benefit of the public.
      (3)   Assure that the city fairly and responsibly protects the public
health, safety and welfare.
      (4)   Enable the city to discharge its public trust consistent with
rapidly evolving federal and state regulatory policies, industry competition
and technological development.
   (b)   For the purpose of this chapter, and the interpretation and
enforcement thereof, the following words and phrases shall have the following
meanings, unless the context of the sentence in which they are used shall
indicate otherwise:
      (1)   “Above-ground facilities” means that portion of a service
provider's facilities located on and up to eight feet above the surface of the
public right-of-way outside of a public street, but not including overhead
facilities.
      (2)   “Affiliate” means a person that (directly or indirectly) owns or
controls, is owned or controlled by, or is under common ownership or control
with another person.
      (3)   “Capital improvement” means an addition made to enhance the value
or extend the useful life of an existing system or facilities, including
construction, reconstruction, installation, rehabilitation, renovation,
improvement, enlargement and extension of facilities, but not including routine
maintenance, new service orders and work immediately related to an emergency.
      (4)   “City” means the City of Columbiana, Ohio.
      (5)   “City Manager” means the City Manager or his or her designee.
      (6)   “Construct, constructing, construction, etc.” means installing,
repairing, replacing or removing any facility, regardless of the methods
employed, including excavation.
      (7)   “Construction permit” or “permit” means a permit issued pursuant to
§
1050.08 of this chapter.
      (8)   “Emergency” means an unforeseen occurrence or condition calling for
immediate action.
      (9)   “Excavate, excavating or excavation” means cutting, sawing,
breaking, drilling into, boring under, or otherwise altering any public street
or sidewalk pavement, and/or digging, drilling into or boring under any unpaved
portion of the public right-of-way, including any other work or activity which
disturbs the existing surface or subsurface structure, composition, or soil
compaction.
      (10)   “Excess capacity” means the volume or capacity in any existing or
future facility in the public right-of-way that is or will be available for use
for additional facilities, which arc compatible with the existing use and
ordinarily are related to fiber optic and telecommunications equipment.
      (11)   “Facilities” or “facility” means the plant, equipment and
property, including but not limited to, cables, fibers, wires, lines, pipes,
conduits, ducts, pedestals, antennae, electronics, poles, pipes, mains, plant,
equipment and other appurtenances located under, on or above the surface of the
ground in the public right-of-way of the city and used or to be used to operate
a system to transmit, receive, distribute, provide or offer a service, publicly
or privately.
      (12)   “Lane obstruction” means the blocking or diverting of vehicular
traffic from a public street for the purpose of constructing, excavating,
maintaining or operating any facility, including but no limited to (a) the
lifting or removing of manhole or handhole covers, and (b) the opening or
accessing of at-grade or pole-mounted cabinets, pedestals, transformers, power
supplies, amplifiers, splice enclosures, traps or other facilities.
      (13)   “New service orders” means the connection from the service
provider's existing facilities on private property for the purpose of providing
a new service to a customer in the city.
      (14)   “Occupancy,” “occupy” or “use” means, with respect to the public
right-of-way, to place a tangible thing in the public right-of-way for any
purpose, including, but not limited to, constructing, repairing, positioning,
maintaining or operating lines, poles, pipes, conduits, ducts, equipment or
other structures, appurtenances or facilities necessary to operate, or relating
to, a system for the delivery of services or private services over the public
right-of-way.
      (15)   “ODOT” means the Ohio Department of Transportation.
      (16)   “Other ways” means the highways, streets, alleys, utility
easements or other rights-of-way within the city, but under the jurisdiction
and control of a governmental entity other than the city.
      (17)   “Overhead facilities” means utility poles that extend more than
eight feet above the surface of the public right-of-way and wires, cables and
other such equipment running between and on such poles more than eight feet
above the surface of the public right-of-way, including the underground
supports and foundations for such facilities.
      (18)   “Person” means and includes corporations, companies, associations,
joint stock companies or associations, firms, partnerships, limited liability
companies, trusts and individuals and includes their lessors, trustees and
receivers.
      (19)   “Public easement” means any easement under the jurisdiction and
control of the city and acquired, established, dedicated or devoted for public
purposes, including utility purposes.
      (20)   Public right-of-way means the surface of, and the space within,
through, on, across, above or below, any public street, public road, public
highway, public freeway, public lane, public path, public alley, public court,
public sidewalk, public boulevard, public parkway, public drive, public
easement and any other land dedicated or otherwise designated for a compatible
public use, which is owned or controlled by the city but excludes a private
easement.
      (21)   “Public street” means the paved and unpaved portion of any street,
road, boulevard, drives, highway, freeway, parkway, lane court, alley or other
public right-of-way in which the city has an interest in law or equity and
which has been acquired, established, dedicated or devoted to street purposes.
      (22)   “PUCO” or “Public Utilities Commission of Ohio” means the state
administrative agency, or lawful successor, authorized to regulate and oversee
certain public service providers and services in the state of Ohio.
      (23)   “Reconstruct, reconstruction, etc.” means substantial physical
change to or capital improvement of all or a portion of an existing system or
facilities including, but not limited to, the addition or alteration of
facilities to accommodate the provision of an additional service or services,
and a change in location, or additional locations, of facilities along the same
public right-of-way involving construction in public streets, utility
easements, or public right-of-way.
      (24)   “Routine maintenance” means repair, upkeep, replacement or
restoration of existing facilities located in the public right-of-way for the
purpose of preventing deterioration or performance deficiencies, maintaining
appearance, or securing the original level of performance, and which that
requires no more than three working days to complete, is not an emergency and
does not include excavation of the public right-of-way.
      (25)   “Service” means the offering of water, sanitary sewer, storm
sewer, electric, gas, telephone, telecommunications, cable television, video,
information or other utility-like service directly to the public, or to such
classes of users as to be effectively available to the public, or a class of
private users, regardless of the facilities used.
      (26)   “Service provider” means any person who, pursuant to the consent
to occupy or use the public right-of-way pursuant to §
1050.02 of this chapter, directly or indirectly owns, controls, operates or
manages facilities within the city's public right-of-way, used or to be used
for the purpose of operating a system to: (a) offer service to the public
within the city or outside of the city's boundaries or (b) transmit, receive,
distribute or provide telecommunications or other services between or among
private buildings or facilities where there is no service offered to the
public.
      (27)   “State” means the State of Ohio.
      (28)   “Surplus space” means that portion of the usable space on a
utility pole that has the necessary clearance from the facilities of other
public service providers using the pole, as required by the orders and
regulations of PUCO and other applicable state and local orders and
regulations, to allow its use by an additional service provider for a pole
attachment.
      (29)   “System” means a network of facilities for the transmission and/or
distribution of a particular service.
      (30)   “Trenchless technology” means techniques for utility line
installation, replacement, rehabilitation, renovation, repair, inspection,
location and leak detections, with minimum excavation from the ground surface,
including the use of directional boring, horizontal drilling and micro-
tunneling and other techniques in the construction of underground portions of
facilities that result in the least amount of disruption and damage to the
public right-of-way as possible.
      (31)   “Underground facilities” means that portion of a system located
under the surface of the ground, excluding the underground foundations or
supports for overhead facilities.
      (32)   “Usable space” means the total distance between the top of a
utility pole and the lowest possible attachment point that provides the minimum
allowable vertical clearance as specified in the orders and regulations of the
PUCO.
      (33)   “Utility Easement” means any easement owned by a service provider
and acquired, established, dedicated or devoted for the purpose of providing
service to the public.
(Ord. 08-O-2455, passed 3-18-2008)
§ 1050.02  CONSENT TO OCCUPY OR USE THE PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY; INITIAL
REGISTRATION.
   (a)   Consent required to occupy public right-of-way. No person shall occupy
or use the public right-of-way without obtaining prior consent from the city to
do so, except as otherwise provided for those service providers with initial
presumed consent pursuant to §
1050.02(c).
   (b)   Persons required to apply for consent to occupy or use public right-
of-way.
      (1)   The following persons shall apply to the city for consent to occupy
or use the public right-of-way on a form provided by the City Manager if such
person:
         A.   Does not currently have an existing system or facilities in the
city's public right-of-way and desires to construct a system or facilities in
the public right-of-way;
         B.   Had an existing system or facilities in the public right-of-way
on July 2, 2002 and does not have presumed initial consent under §
1050.02(c)(1) below; or
         C.   Has initial presumed consent or city consent to occupy or use the
public right-of-way for an existing system or facilities, but is planning to
construct additional facilities or an additional system anywhere in the city.
   (c)   Initial consent presumed.
      (1)   A person with an existing system in the public right-of-way on July
2, 2002 shall be conclusively presumed to have initial consent for that system
to occupy or use the public right-of-way if such person:
         A.   Is subject to jurisdiction by the PUCO;
         B.   Has a valid franchise agreement with the city to provide cable
services or other services in the city, and/or
         C.   Is any other person whose existing facilities lawfully occupied
the public right-of-way on July 2, 2002.
      (2)   Initial presumed consent for occupancy or use of the public right-
of-way is limited to the service provider's existing system on the effective
date of this chapter.
      (3)   Any service provider with initial presumed consent to occupy or use
the public rights-of-way shall file an initial registration with the city
within 90 days of the effective date of this chapter, on a form provided by the
City Manager, which shall include the information required by §
1050.02(d) of this chapter.
      (4)   A person with initial presumed consent must comply with the
requirements of this chapter with respect to the ongoing occupancy or use of
the public right-of-way including, but not limited to, the insurance,
indemnity, performance bond and registration requirements of §§
1050.04(a), (b) and (c) and §
1050.05 of this chapter.
   (d)   Application for consent to occupy or use the public right-of-way;
initial registration of service providers with initial presumed consent. The
application for consent to occupy or use the public right-of-way and/or initial
registration pursuant to §
1050.02(c) for service providers with initial presumed consent to occupy or use
the public right-of-way shall include the following information with respect to
the applicant's or service provider's planned or existing system and/or
facilities in the public right-of-way as well as plans for any planned capital
improvements for the following 12 months:
      (1)   The identity, legal status and federal tax identification number of
the applicant, including all affiliates of the applicant or service provider
that will use or occupy the public right-of-way or are in any way responsible
for facilities located in the public right-of-way.
      (2)   The name, address and telephone number of the local officer, agent
or employee responsible for the accuracy of the application or initial
registration and available at all reasonable times to be notified in case of
emergency.
      (3)   A general description of the service provided or to be provided by
the applicant or service provider over its system or facilities. Where services
are or will be provided by a nonaffiliated provider with authorized physical
access to the applicant's or service provider's facilities, the applicant or
service provider shall identify that provider.
      (4)   A current list of any contractors used by, or approved for use by,
the applicant or service provider to work on its facilities.
      (5)   A description of the type of transmission medium used, or to be
used, by the applicant or service provider to operate a system.
      (6)   A map and description of the existing or proposed facilities in the
city's public right-of-way
         A.   The map and description shall be in sufficient detail to
identify:
            1.   The location and route of the applicant's or service
provider's facilities or proposed facilities.
            2.   The location of all known existing above-ground, overhead and/
or underground facilities in the public right-of-way along the route or
proposed route of the applicant's or service provider's facilities or proposed
facilities that is sufficient to show the impact of the applicant's facilities
on other existing facilities.
            3.   The location of all known overhead and underground utility
easements.
         B.   Upon written request of a service provider, the City Manager may
modify the requirements of this division (d)(6), if in his or her reasonable
discretion such modification serves the purposes of this chapter and the city's
need to manage its public rights-of-way.
         C.   A service provider may designate any portion or portions of the
maps and/or information provided pursuant to this division (d)(6) as
proprietary and/or trade secret so as to remain confidential. In this event,
the city shall seek to maintain the confidentiality of such maps and/or
information; provided, however, that such information is subject to applicable
public records laws and exceptions thereto. The city shall provide a service
provider with written notice of any proposed inspection or disclosure prompted
by a public records request related to the service provider's maps and/or
information the service provider has designated to be confidential. The service
provider shall have three business days from the written notice to object to
any public records disclosure and to agree in writing to defend and indemnify
the city with respect to any litigation under the Ohio Public Records Act to
compel disclosure and all related costs.
      (7)   Evidence that the applicant or service provider has complied, or
will comply, with the indemnification, insurance and performance bond
requirements of this chapter.
      (8)   Information sufficient to determine that the applicant or service
provider has received any certificate of authority required by the PUCO, FCC or
other applicable state or federal agency to operate a system and provide
services in the city.
      (9)   Written acknowledgment of receipt of a copy of this chapter.
      (10)   Such other information as the City Manager may reasonably require
relevant to the provider's use or intended use of the public right-of-way.
   (e)   City consent or denial for occupancy or use of the public right-of-
way.
      (1)   The city shall grant or deny, in writing, a person's application
for consent to occupy or use the public right-of-way within 60 days of the date
on which the person filed the application with the city.
         A.   The city may withhold, deny or delay its consent to a person's
application to occupy or use the public right-of-way based on the person's
failure to possess the financial, technical and managerial resources necessary
to protect the public health, safety and welfare, or for other reasons based on
the health, safety and welfare of the city and in accordance with Ohio law.
         B.   If the city denies a person's application to occupy or use the
public right-of-way, the city shall provide its reasons in writing for denying
the application, and shall provide any information reasonably requested by that
person necessary to obtain the city's consent to occupy or use the public
right-of-way.
      (2)   The city's grant of consent for a person to occupy or use the
public right-of-way shall be in the form of a public right-of-way occupancy
certificate which shall set forth the specific terms of the city's consent for
such person to occupy or use the public right-of-way.
   (f)   Application to existing franchise and pole attachment agreement. For
purposes of this chapter, a franchise (ordinance or agreement) or pole
attachment agreement with the city shall be deemed consent authorizing the
provider's occupancy or use of the public right-of-way to the extent described
in the franchise or pole attachment agreement. The provider's use of the public
right-of-way beyond that authorized by the franchise or pole attachment
agreement shall require additional consent for such additional occupancy or
use. Providers shall comply with all other provisions of this chapter except
that if there is a direct conflict between a specific provision in the
franchise or pole attachment agreement and the provisions of this chapter, the
franchise or pole attachment agreement shall control.
(Ord. 08-O-2455, passed 3-18-2008)
§ 1050.03  ANNUAL REGISTRATION OF SERVICE PROVIDERS.
   (a)   Annual registration required. All service providers with consent to
occupy or use the public right-of-way as provided in §
1050.02 shall register with the city each calendar year between January 1 and
January 31 on a form provided by the City Manager. Service providers who file
an initial registration after the effective date of this chapter but before
December 31, 2007 need not file an annual registration for calendar year 2008.
   (b)   Purpose of annual registration. The purpose of annual registration is
to assist the city in monitoring use of the public right-of-way; to maintain an
accurate and current database of information concerning service providers that
occupy or use the public right-of-way; and to assist the city in managing the
public right-of-way in a manner that best serves the public health, safety and
welfare.
   (c)   Information required for annual registration. Registration forms will
be provided by the city and shall require the following information:
      (1)   Any material changes to the information the service provider
provided the city in the application for consent to occupy or use the public
right-of-way or initial registration, including, but not limited to:
         A.   The identity, legal status, and federal tax identification number
of the service provider, including any affiliates that will use or occupy the
public right-of-way or are in any way responsible for facilities located in the
public right-of-way.
         B.   The name, address and telephone number of the local officer,
agent or employee responsible for the accuracy of the service provider's
registration statement and available at all reasonable times to be notified in
case of emergency.
      (2)   A current list of contractors used by, or approved for use by, a
service provider to work on its facilities.
      (3)   Evidence that the service provider is in compliance with the
insurance, indemnity and performance bond requirements pursuant to §
1050.04 of this chapter.
      (4)   Information regarding, and a preliminary construction schedule and
completion date for, any capital improvements the service provider plans in the
public right-of-way for the following 12 months.
      (5)   Any other information the City Manager may reasonably require
relevant to the service provider's occupancy or use of the public right-of-way.
   (d)   Service provider's facilities maps.
      (1)   The city shall have the right to access and review all the service
provider's maps and/or as-built plans showing the location of its facilities in
the city's public rights-of-way, upon ten days notice to the service provider.
      (2)   Upon written request by the City Manager, each service provider
shall work in good faith with the City Manager to provide, in a reasonable time
and manner, maps and/or as built plans in a format compatible with the city's
current and/or future mapping system.
      (3)   The service provider may designate any portion or portions of the
maps and/or as-built plans provided under this division (d) as proprietary and/
or a trade secret so as to remain confidential. In this event, the city shall
seek to maintain the confidentiality of such maps and/or as-built plans;
provided, however, that such information is subject to applicable public
records laws and exceptions thereto. The city shall provide a service provider
with written notice of any proposed inspection or disclosure prompted by a
public records request related to the service provider's maps and/or as-built
plans the service provider has designated to be confidential. The service
provider shall have three business days from the written notice to object to
any public records disclosure and to agree in writing to defend and indemnify
the city with respect to any litigation under the Ohio Public Records Act to
compel disclosure and all related costs.
   (e)   Registration to be kept current. Each service provider shall keep the
registration information required in §
1050.03(c)(1) and (2) above and shall provide the city with notice of changes
to that information within 15 days of the service provider's notice of such
change. A service provider shall update any other required registration
information within 15 days of a written request from the City Manager.
(Ord. 08-O-2455, passed 3-18-2008)
§ 1050.04  INSURANCE, BOND AND INDEMNIFICATION.
   (a)   Service provider insurance. As a condition of the consent to occupy or
use the public right-of-way, a service provider must secure and maintain, at a
minimum, the following liability insurance policies insuring the service
provider and naming the city, its elected and appointed officers, officials,
agents, employees and representatives as additional insureds:
      (1)   Comprehensive general liability insurance with limits not less
than:
         A.   Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for bodily injury or death
to each person;
         B.   Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for property damage
resulting from any one accident; and
         C.   Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for all other types of
liability.
      (2)   Automobile liability for owned, non-owned and hired vehicles with a
limit of three million dollars ($3,000,000.00) for each person and three
million dollars ($3,000,000.00) for each accident.
      (3)   Worker's compensation within statutory limits and employer's
liability insurance with limits of not less than one million dollars
($1,000,000.00).
      (4)   Comprehensive form premises-operations, explosions and collapse
hazard, underground hazard and products completed hazard with limits of not
less than three million dollars ($3,000,000.00).
      (5)   The liability insurance policies required by this section shall be
maintained by the service provider throughout the period of time during which
the service provider is occupying or using the public right-of-way, or is
engaged in the removal of its facilities. Each such insurance policy shall
contain the following endorsement:
   "It is hereby understood and agreed that this policy may not be canceled nor
the intention not to renew be stated until 60 days after receipt by the city,
by registered mail, of a written notice addressed to the City Manager of such
intent to cancel or not to renew."
      (6)   Within 60 days after receipt by the city of said notice, and in no
event later than 30 days prior to said cancellation, the service provider shall
obtain and furnish to the city replacement insurance policies meeting the
requirements of this section.
      (7)   Upon written application to, and written approval by, the City
Manager, a service provider may be self-insured to provide all of the same
coverages as listed in this section; except that all coverages for workers'
compensation shall be in compliance with state law. No approval for self-
insurance shall be given until the City Manager has made a review of the
service provider's financial ability to provide such self-insurance. As part of
the review process, the City Manager may require, and the self-insurance
applicant shall provide, financial documents sufficient to make a valid
determination of the applicant's ability to meet the requirements of this
chapter.
   (b)   General indemnification. Each application for consent to occupy or use
the public right-of-way, and each annual registration, shall include, to the
extent permitted by law, the service provider's express undertaking to defend,
indemnify and hold the city and its elected and appointed officers, officials,
employees, agents, representatives and subcontractors harmless from and against
any third party claims (including all damages, losses and expenses, reasonable
attorney's fees and costs of suit or defense) arising out of, resulting from or
alleged to arise out of or result from the negligent, careless or wrongful
acts, omissions, failures to act or misconduct of the service provider or its
affiliates, officers, employees, agents, contractors or subcontractors relating
to the service provider's occupancy or use of the public right-of-way, whether
such acts or omissions are authorized, allowed or prohibited by this chapter. A
service provider, however, will have no obligation to defend, indemnify or hold
the city and its elected and appointed officers, officials, employees, agents,
representatives and subcontractors harmless from their own negligence.
   (c)   Performance bond. As a condition of consent to occupy or use the
public right-of-way, and to ensure the full and complete compliance with, and
performance under this chapter, including any costs, expenses, damages or loss
the city pays or incurs because of any failure attributable to the service
provider to comply with the codes, ordinances, rules, regulations or permits of
the city, each service provider shall, in the amount of fifty thousand dollars
($50,000.00) or such lesser amount as the City Manager may determine to be
necessary (i) provide an unconditional letter of credit, or other instrument
acceptable to the city, or (ii) furnish and file with the city a performance
bond running to the city in the required amount from a company licensed to do
business in the state of Ohio; which performance bond or letter of credit or
other instrument shall be maintained at the sole expense of the service
provider so long as any of the service provider's facilities are located within
the city's public right-of-way.
      (1)   Before claims are made against the performance bond or letter of
credit or other instrument, the city shall give written notice to the service
provider:
         A.   Describing the act, default or failure to be remedied, or the
damages, cost or expenses which the city has incurred by reason of the service
provider's act or default;
         B.   Providing a reasonable opportunity for the service provider to
remedy the existing or ongoing default or failure, if applicable;
         C.   Providing a reasonable opportunity for the service provider to
pay any monies due the city before the city makes a claim against the
performance bond or letter of credit or other instrument;
         D.   That the service provider will be given an opportunity to review
the act, default or failure described in the notice with the City Manager.
      (2)   Service providers shall maintain the full value of the performance
bond or letter of credit or other instrument regardless of claims against the
performance bond or letter of credit or other instrument made by, or paid to,
the city.
(Ord. 08-O-2455, passed 3-18-2008)
§ 1050.05  GENERAL PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY USE REGULATIONS.
   (a)   Rights conveyed. Consent granted to or initially presumed of a service
provider to occupy or use the public right-of-way under §
1050.02:
      (1)   Shall be limited to a grant to occupy or use the specific public
right-of-way and defined portions thereof including the specific system or
facilities and location along the public right-of-way;
      (2)   Shall not confer any exclusive right, privilege, license or
franchise to occupy or use the public right-of-way of the city to operate a
system for delivery of services or any other purposes; and
      (3)   Shall not convey any right, title or interest in the public right-
of-way, but shall be deemed consent only to occupy or use the public right-of-
way for the limited purposes granted by the consent. Further, no consent shall
be construed as any warranty of title.
   (b)   Maintenance of facilities. Each service provider shall maintain its
system or facilities in good and safe condition and in a manner that complies
with all applicable federal, state and local requirements.
   (c)   Safety procedures. A service provider or other person acting on its
behalf shall use suitable barricades, flags, flagmen, lights, flares and other
measures as necessary and in accordance with applicable state and local
requirements for the safety of all members of the general public and to prevent
injury or damage to any person, vehicle or property by reason of such work in
or affecting such public right-of-way or property.
   (d)   Interference with the public rights-of-way. No service provider may
locate or maintain its facilities so as to unreasonably interfere, as
determined by the City Manager, with the use of the public right-of-way by the
city, by the general public or by other persons authorized to use or be present
in or upon the public right-of-way. All such facilities shall be moved by the
service provider, temporarily or permanently, as determined by the City
Manager.
   (e)   Damage to public and private property. No service provider nor any
person acting on the service provider's behalf shall take any action or permit
any action to be done which may impair or damage any city property, public
right-of-way, other ways or other public or private property located in, on or
adjacent thereto.
   (f)   Restoration of public right-of-way, other ways and city property.
      (1)   When a service provider, or any person acting on its behalf, does
any construction, reconstruction, excavation, routine maintenance, emergency
work or any other work in or affecting any public right-of-way, other ways or
city property, it shall, after the work is completed and at its own expense,
promptly remove any obstructions from and restore such ways or property, within
ten to 60 days, at the City Manager's discretion, to as good a condition as
existed before the work was undertaken, unless otherwise directed by the city.
      (2)   If weather or other conditions prevent the complete restoration
required by this section, the service provider shall temporarily restore the
affected ways or property as directed by the City Manager, at the service
providers' sole expense. The service provider shall promptly undertake and
complete the required permanent restoration when weather or other conditions no
longer prevent permanent restoration.
      (3)   If the service provider does not timely complete the required
temporary or permanent restoration as directed by the City Manager, the city
may complete the restoration at the service provider's expense and may draw
upon the performance bond to reimburse the city for its costs incurred in
performing the restoration.
   (g)   Duty to provide information. Within ten days of a written request from
the City Manager, each service provider shall:
      (1)   Furnish the city with documentation sufficient to show that the
service provider has complied with all requirements of this chapter.
      (2)   Make available for inspection by the city, at reasonable times, all
books, records, maps and other documents, maintained by the service provider
with respect to its facilities in the public right-of-way.
   (h)   Leased capacity. A service provider shall have the right, without
prior city approval, to lease capacity or bandwidth to an unaffiliated service
provider, provided that if the lessee has authorized physical access to the
service provider's facilities:
      (1)   The service provider shall notify the city of the lease agreement
within 30 days of such lease agreement; and
      (2)   The lessee has complied with the applicable requirements of this
chapter.
   (i)   Assignments or transfers of consent. Consent to occupy or use the
public right-of-way may be, directly or indirectly, transferred, assigned or
disposed of by sale, lease, merger, consolidation or other act of the service
provider, by operation of law or otherwise, without consent of the city;
provided that with respect to any transactions (including transactions between
affiliated entities) that singularly or collectively result in a change of 25%
or more of the ownership or ultimate working control of a service provider, of
the ownership or working control of the service provider's facility, or of
control of the capacity or bandwidth of the service provider's system,
facilities or substantial parts thereof, the transferor and transferee shall
comply with the following:
      (1)   Notify the city no later than 30 days after the date of transfer;
and
      (2)   The transferee shall fully comply with this chapter within 60 days
of the transfer, including, but not limited to providing the city with all
information required by the application for consent or initial registration
required by §
1050.02(d) of this chapter.
   (j)   Revocation of consent; suspension of registration. Subject to §
1050.05(k) and applicable state and federal law, the city may revoke consent
granted to occupy or use the city's public right-of-way, suspend a service
provider's registration and/or revoke a construction permit for any one of the
following reasons:
      (1)   Construction, reconstruction or operation or excavation at an
unauthorized location.
      (2)   Construction, reconstruction or operation in violation of city
safety and/or construction requirements.
      (3)   Material misrepresentation or lack of candor by or on behalf of a
service provider in any application or registration required by this chapter.
      (4)   Failure to relocate or remove facilities, or failure to restore the
public right-of-way, as required by this chapter.
      (5)   Insolvency or bankruptcy of the service provider.
      (6)   Violation of material provisions of this chapter.
   (k)   Notice of violation and duty to cure. In the event that the City
Manager believes that grounds exist for revocation of consent to occupy or use
the public right-of-way or construction permit, or suspension of registration,
he or she shall give the service provider written notice of the apparent
violation or noncompliance, providing a short and concise statement of the
nature and general facts of the violation or noncompliance, and providing the
service provider a reasonable period of time not exceeding 30 days to furnish
evidence:
      (1)   That corrective action has been, or is being actively and
expeditiously pursued, to remedy the violation or noncompliance;
      (2)   That rebuts the alleged violation or noncompliance; and/or
      (3)   That a lesser penalty or sanction would better serve the public
interest.
(Ord. 08-O-2455, passed 3-18-2008)
§ 1050.06  LOCATION, RELOCATION AND REMOVAL OF FACILITIES.
   (a)   Location of facilities. All facilities shall be constructed,
reconstructed, installed and located in accordance with the following terms and
conditions:
      (1)   Overhead facilities. A service provider with permission to install
overhead facilities shall install its facilities on pole attachments to
existing utility poles only, and then only if surplus space is available.
      (2)   Above-ground facilities. No above-ground facilities shall be
located in the public right-of-way, including any portion of underground
without the express written permission of, and pursuant to a plan approved by,
the City Manager.
         A.   Above-ground facilities shall not be located where those
facilities would pose an unreasonable hazard to the public's use of the public
right-of-way. An unreasonable hazard shall include a visual or physical
obstruction.
         B.   The City Manager's approval for above-ground facilities may
include appropriate landscaping, screening and/or other aesthetic requirements.
The City Manager may also suggest an alternate locations(s) for above-ground
facilities, the proposed location of which will, in the City's Manager's
reasonable judgment, cause realistic health, safety or aesthetic concerns.
      (3)   Underground facilities. Whenever the existing electric, cable,
telecommunications and other similar facilities are located underground in a
public right-of-way, a service provider with permission to occupy the same
public right-of-way with the electric, cable, telecommunications or other
similar facilities, must also locate its facilities underground. Facilities
shall be installed within an existing compatible underground duct or conduit
whenever excess capacity exists within such facility and where such
installation is appropriate and practical under relevant safety and operational
standards.
   (b)   Relocation or removal of facilities. Within 30 days, or such longer
time as reasonably determined by the City Manager, following written notice
from the city, a service provider shall, at its expense, temporarily or
permanently remove, relocate, change or alter the position of any facilities in
the public right-of-way whenever the city determines that such removal,
relocation, change or alteration is reasonably necessary for:
      (1)   The construction, reconstruction, maintenance or installation of
any city or other public improvement in or upon the public right-of-way.
      (2)   The operations of the city or other governmental entity in or upon
the public right-of-way, including replacement of city-owned poles.
Notwithstanding the above, no service provider shall be required to bear the
expense of removal, relocation, change or alteration of position of any
facilities if such requirement would be prohibited by law.
   (c)   Removal of unauthorized facilities. Within 30 days following written
notice from the city, any service provider or other person that owns, controls
or maintains any unauthorized system, facility or related appurtenances in the
city's public right-of-way shall, at its own expense, remove those facilities
or appurtenances from the public right-of-way or, at the city's option, shall
arrange to sell the system, facilities or appurtenances to the city. After the
30 days have expired, the city may remove the facilities or appurtenances from
the public right-of-way at the other party's expense. A system or facility is
unauthorized and subject to removal in the following circumstances:
      (1)   Upon revocation of the service provider's consent to occupy or use
the public right-of-way;
      (2)   If the system or facility was constructed, reconstructed, operated
or maintained without the consent to do so, except as otherwise provided by
this chapter;
      (3)   Upon abandonment of a facility in the public right-of-way of the
city, with the exception of underground facilities abandoned in a manner
authorized and approved by the City Manager;
      (4)   If the system or facility was constructed or reconstructed, or any
excavation of a public right-of-way was performed, without prior issuance of a
required construction permit, except as otherwise provided by this chapter;
      (5)   If the system or facility was constructed, reconstructed, operated
or maintained, or any excavation of a public right-of-way was performed, at a
location not permitted pursuant to the city's consent for the provider to
occupy or use the public right-of-way or construction permit; or
      (6)   If the service provider fails to comply with, or cure a violation
of, a material requirement of this chapter. Notwithstanding the above, no
service provider shall be required to remove unauthorized facilities or
appurtenances from the public rights-of-way if such requirement would be
prohibited by law.
   (d)   Emergency removal or relocation of facilities. Subject to applicable
state and federal law, the city retains the right and privilege to cut or move
any facilities, or stop work on any construction, reconstruction, or
excavation, located in the public right-of-way, as the City Manager may
determine to be necessary, appropriate or useful in response to any need to
protect the public health, safety or welfare.
(Ord. 08-O-2455, passed 3-18-2008)
§ 1050.07  NOTICE OF WORK, ROUTINE MAINTENANCE AND EMERGENCY WORK.
   (a)   Notice of work required. A service provider shall provide the city
with notice of work in the public right-of-way, including routine maintenance,
new service orders and emergency work, under the following circumstances.
Notice shall be given in the manner determined by the City Manager.
      (1)   Notice of excavation in the public right-of-way.
         A.   A service provider shall provide the City Manager with notice no
later than 48 hours after commencing any excavation (including installation of
a pole) in the public right-of-way.
         B.   A service provider shall notify the Ohio utility protection
service ("OUPS") in advance of any excavation of the public right-of-way in
accordance with Ohio law and OUPS regulations.
      (2)   Notice of lane obstruction or closing of a public street.
         A.   Lane obstruction. For routine maintenance and new service orders
that require the service provider to cause a lane obstruction such that two
vehicles may not pass in opposite directions at the site of the lane
obstruction the service provider shall provide the Police Department with three
hours advance notice prior to commencing such work, to the extent reasonably
practicable, and shall maintain traffic in compliance with the ODOT Manual of
Uniform Traffic Control Devices or other applicable ODOT regulations.
         B.   Closing of a public street. For routine maintenance and new
service orders that require the service provider to close any public street,
the service provider shall provide the City Manager and the Police Department
with 48 hours advance notice prior to commencing such work, and shall maintain
traffic in compliance with the ODOT Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices
or other applicable ODOT regulations.
      (3)   Notice of extension of overhead facilities. For the relocation or
replacement of more than 1000 lineal feet of a service provider's existing
overhead facilities in the public right-of-way, the service provider shall
provide the City Manager with twenty-four (24) hours advance notice.
      (4)   Emergency work. In the event of the need for any unexpected repair
or emergency work, a service provider may commence such emergency response work
as required under the circumstances, provided that for emergency work that
requires excavation of a public right-of-way or lane obstruction or closing of
a public street, the service provider shall notify the City Manager as promptly
as possible before commencing such emergency work, or as soon as possible
thereafter if advance notice is not practicable.
   (b)   No notice of work required: routine maintenance and new service
orders.
      (1)   A service provider need not provide the city with notice, or obtain
a construction permit, prior to or after commencing routine maintenance or new
service orders that do not include excavation of a public right-of-way, a lane
obstruction described in §
1050.07(a)(2)(a) above, the closing of a public street, or extension of
overhead facilities described in §
1050.07(a)(3).
      (2)   A service provider performing routine maintenance, new service
orders or emergency work shall otherwise comply with the requirements of this
chapter.
(Ord. 08-O-2455, passed 3-18-2008)
§ 1050.08  CONSTRUCTION PERMIT AND STANDARDS.
   (a)   Construction permit.
      (1)   A service provider shall obtain a construction permit from the City
Manager as provided in this section, prior to commencing or continuing any
construction or reconstruction of facilities in the right-of-way under the
following circumstances:
         A.   The construction of a new system or reconstruction of facilities
to provide a new service;
         B.   The extension of a service provider's system in the public right-
of-way in an area of the city not currently serviced by that service provider;
not including new service orders;
         C.   Any construction or reconstruction of above-ground facilities in
the right-of-way; or
         D.   Any capital improvement, construction, reconstruction or
replacement of facilities, routine maintenance or new service orders in the
public right-of-way requiring more than three working days to complete.
      (2)   No construction permit shall be issued for the construction or
reconstruction of facilities, or excavation, in the public right-of-way unless
the service provider has obtained consent from the city to use or occupy the
public right-of-way and whose registration is in good standing pursuant to §§
1050.02 and
1050.03 of this chapter.
      (3)   No construction permit required. Except as provided in divisions C.
and D. above, no construction permit is required for routine maintenance and
new service orders.
   (b)   Construction permit applications. Applications for construction
permits shall be submitted upon forms provided by the city and be accompanied
by relevant drawings, plans and specifications in sufficient detail and include
the following information:
      (1)   A preliminary construction schedule.
      (2)   Overhead facilities.   If the applicant is proposing to construct
or reconstruct overhead facilities:
         A.   Evidence that surplus space is available for locating its
facilities on existing utility poles along the proposed route;
         B.   The location and route of all facilities to be located or
installed on existing utility poles.
      (3)   Above-ground facilities. If the applicant is proposing to install
above-ground facilities, the location of all known existing underground
utilities, conduits ducts, pipes, mains and installations that are in the
public right-of-way in the proposed location of and/or along the route of the
proposed above-ground facilities.
      (4)   Underground facilities.
         A.   If the applicant is proposing new underground facilities in
existing ducts, pipes or conduits in the public right-of-way, information in
sufficient detail to identify:
            1.   The excess capacity currently available in such ducts or
conduits before the installation of the applicant's facilities.
            2.   The excess capacity, if any that will exist in such ducts or
conduits after installation of the applicant's facilities.
         B.   If the applicant is proposing new underground facilities in new
ducts or conduits to be constructed in the public right-of-way:
            1.   The location and depth proposed for the new ducts or conduits;
and
            2.   The excess capacity that will exist in such ducts or conduits
after installation of the applicant's facilities.
         C.   The location and route of all facilities to be located under the
surface of the ground, including the line and grade proposed for the burial at
all points along the route which are in the public right-of-way. Included with
the installation shall be magnetic and florescent tape placed at a minimum of
one foot to a maximum of two feet above the entire facility as installed for
the purpose of locating the facility during future construction activities, or
other such location device as approved by the City Manager. The tape shall be
marked with the type of facility installed.
         D.   The location of all known existing underground utilities,
conduits, ducts, pipes, mains and installations that are in the public right-
of-way along the underground route proposed by the applicant.
      (5)   The location(s), if any, for interconnection with the facilities of
other service providers.
      (6)   The construction methods to be employed to protect existing
structures, fixtures and facilities in or adjacent to the public right-of-way.
      (7)   The structures, improvements, facilities and obstructions, if any,
that the applicant proposes to temporarily or permanently remove or relocate,
and any necessary plans for their restoration.
      (8)   The impact of construction or reconstruction of facilities on trees
and landscaping in or adjacent to the public right-of-way along the route
proposed by the applicant, together with a landscape plan for protecting,
trimming, removing, replacing and restoring any trees, landscaping or areas
disturbed during construction.
      (9)   Information to establish that the applicant has obtained all other
governmental approvals and permits to construct and operate the facilities and
to offer or provide the services.
      (10)   An attestation that the facilities will be constructed or
reconstructed, or the public right-of-way excavated, in accordance with all
applicable codes, rules and regulations.
      (11)   Any other information the City Manager may reasonably request
related to the service provider's application for a construction permit.
   (c)   Issuance of permit. Within ten business days after submission of all
plans and documents required of the applicant, the City Manager, if satisfied
that the applications, plans and documents comply with all requirements of this
chapter, shall issue a construction permit authorizing the construction or
reconstruction of the facilities, or excavation in the public right-of-way,
subject to such further conditions, restrictions or regulations affecting the
time, place and manner of performing the work as the City Manager may deem
necessary or appropriate. The ten business day period shall begin after the
City Manager deems all submissions to be complete and in accordance with the
requirements of this chapter.
   (d)   Modification of construction schedule. The service provider may modify
the construction schedule at any time provided that 48 hours advance notice is
given to the City Manager. The service provider shall further notify the City
Manager and the Ohio Utility Protection Service (OUPS) not less than 48 hours
in advance of any excavation or work in the public right-of-way.
   (e)   Construction codes. Facilities shall be constructed, reconstructed,
operated, excavated and maintained in accordance with all applicable federal,
state and local codes, rules, regulations and technical codes including, but
not limited to, the National Electrical Safety Code.
   (f)   Maintenance of landscaping or other aesthetic requirements. A service
provider with a construction permit that includes a landscaping, screening and/
or other aesthetic requirement in connection with the placement of any
structure or item above the ground in the public right-of-way, shall maintain
the landscaping, screening and/or other aesthetic requirement, on a continuing
basis, in the manner specified in the construction permit or other manner as
approved by the City Manager.
   (g)   Least disruptive technology. To the extent reasonably possible, all
facilities shall be constructed or reconstructed in the manner resulting in the
least amount of damage and disruption of the public right-of-way. Unless
otherwise authorized by the City Manager for good cause, service providers
constructing or reconstructing underground facilities shall utilize trenchless
technology, including, but not limited to, horizontal drilling, directional
boring, and microtunneling, if technically and/or technologically feasible.
   (h)   Compliance with permit. All construction practices and activities
shall be in accordance with the construction permit and approved final plans
and specifications for the facilities. The City Manager shall have access to
the work and such further information as he or she may require to ensure
compliance with such requirements. Field changes may be approved by the City
Manager if such changes are determined to be necessary due to site conditions
or other changed circumstances.
   (i)   Display of permit. The service provider shall maintain a copy of the
construction permit and approved plans at the construction site, which shall be
displayed and made available for inspection by the City Manager whenever
construction work is occurring.
   (j)   Noncomplying work. Upon order of the City Manager, all work that does
not comply with the permit, the approved plans and specifications for the work,
or the requirements of this chapter, shall immediately cease and be immediately
removed and/or corrected by the service provider.
   (k)   Record drawings. Within 60 days after completion of construction, the
service provider shall provide the city with two complete sets of plans, drawn
to scale and certified to the city as accurately depicting the location of all
facilities constructed pursuant to the permit. If required by the city, the
service provider shall submit the record drawings in a digital format
compatible with the city's computer software.
   (l)   Restoration of improvements. Upon completion of any construction work,
the service provider shall promptly repair any and all public rights-of-way,
property improvements, fixtures, structures and facilities which were damaged
during the course of construction, and restore them as nearly as practicable to
their prior condition, in accordance with §
1050.05(f).
   (m)   Landscape restoration.
      (1)   All trees, landscaping and grounds removed, damaged or disturbed as
a result of the construction, reconstruction, installation, maintenance, repair
or replacement of facilities must be replaced or restored as nearly as may be
practicable, to the condition existing prior to performance of work, except to
the extent that tree trimming is necessary to prevent the interference of tree
branches with overhead facilities.
      (2)   All restoration work within the public right-of-way shall be done
in accordance with landscape plans approved by the City Manager.
   (n)   Construction and completion bond. If the City Manager reasonably
determines that extraordinary circumstances related to an application for a
construction permit or series of construction permits requires a bond, in
addition to the performance bond deposited with the city pursuant to §
1050.04(c) of this chapter, to adequately ensure the city's ability to manage
its public rights-of-way related to the service provider construction permit or
permits, the city may require the service provider to obtain and file a
construction bond with the city that ensures the service provider's full and
complete compliance with, and performance under the construction permit or
permits, this chapter and the city's codified ordinances, including any costs,
expenses, damages or loss the city pays or incurs due to any failure
attributable to the service provider to comply with the construction permit,
this chapter or the city's codified ordinances.
      (1)   The construction bond shall be written by a corporate surety
acceptable to the city and equal to at least 100% of the estimated cost of the
construction that is the subject of the construction permit or permits, or such
lesser amount as the City Manager may determine to adequately protect the
city's interest.
      (2)   The form of the construction bond shall be subject to the
reasonable approval of the Director of Law. A service provider required to
obtain a construction bond under this section may file an appeal pursuant to §
1050.09(b) of this chapter.
   (o)   Responsibility of owner. The owner of the facilities to be constructed
or reconstructed and, if different, the service provider, are responsible for
performance of and compliance with all provisions of this section.
(Ord. 08-O-2455, passed 3-18-2008)
§ 1050.09  MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS.
   (a)   Modification or waiver of requirements. It is within the City
Manager's reasonable discretion to modify or waive any portion of this chapter,
if in his or her judgment, such requirements are not necessary or appropriate
to protect the city's interests and the purposes and intent of this chapter.
   (b)   Appeal and variance process. Within 14 calendar days of a written
decision of the City Manager regarding any requirements of this chapter, a
service provider may appeal the decision to, or apply for a variance from, the
Planning Commission. The Planning Commission shall hold a hearing on the appeal
or requested variance no later than 30 days from receiving the service
provider's written appeal or request for the variance pursuant to the
procedures established by the Planning Commission. In determining the merits of
the appeal or variance application, the Planning Commission shall consider all
relevant factors including, but not limited to: the purpose of the City
Manager's decision or requirement from which a variance is requested; whether
the decision or requirement is necessary or appropriate to protect the
interests of the city; the health, safety and general welfare of the city's
residents, the general public, and properties in the city; the purposes and
intent of this chapter; and the extent of the hardship, economic or otherwise,
the service provider will bear if the appeal or variance is not granted. The
Planning Commission shall make findings of fact and issue a written decision
setting forth the reasons for granting or denying the appeal or variance. The
decision of the Planning Commission is the final decision of the city on the
appeal or variance request.
   (c)   Preemption by state and federal law. Except as may be preempted by
applicable state or federal laws, rates, regulations, and orders, this chapter
shall apply and be controlling over each service provider with facilities in
the public rights-of-way.
   (d)   Exemption for city-owned or operated facilities. Except as otherwise
required by law, nothing in this chapter shall be construed to apply the
provisions of this chapter to facilities owned or operated by the city or any
of its operations.
   (e)   Recovery of city costs. Any city costs related to a service provider's
use of the public right-of-way and recovered pursuant to this chapter from the
performance bond, letter of credit and/or construction bond, or in any other
manner, shall be considered public way fees as that term is defined in Ohio
R.C. Chapter 4939 and shall be assessed by the City Manager in accordance with
Chapter 4939 and any other applicable law.
   (f)   Private facilities. Persons using the city's public right-of-way for
facilities that provide service not available to the general public shall
obtain consent from the city pursuant to §
1050.02, register pursuant to §
1050.03, obtain a construction permit (if applicable) pursuant to §
1050.08 and comply with all provisions of this chapter.
   (g)   Application to existing code provisions. In the event of a direct
conflict between any provision of this chapter and any other section of the
city's codified ordinances, the provisions of this chapter shall apply.
   (h)   Severability. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or
other portion of this chapter, or its application to any person, is, for any
reason, declared invalid, in whole or in part by any court or agency of
competent jurisdiction, that decision shall not affect the validity of the
remaining portions hereof.
(Ord. 08-O-2455, passed 3-18-2008)
§ 1050.99  PENALTIES AND OTHER REMEDIES.
   (a)   Criminal penalties. Any person found guilty of violating, disobeying,
omitting, neglecting or refusing to comply with any of the provisions of this
chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. A separate and
distinct offense shall be deemed committed each day on which a violation occurs
or continues.
   (b)   Civil violations and forfeiture.
      (1)   In lieu of the criminal penalties set forth above, the City Manager
may make an initial finding of a civil violation by the service provider for
violating, disobeying, omitting, neglecting or refusing to comply with any of
the provisions of this chapter.
      (2)   The civil forfeiture shall be in an amount payable to the city of
not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than five hundred dollars
($500.00) for each offense. A separate and distinct offense shall be deemed
committed each day on which a violation occurs or continues.
      (3)   An action for civil forfeiture shall be commenced by providing the
service provider with written notice describing in reasonable detail the
service provider's alleged violation of one or more provisions of this chapter
and the amount of the penalty that will be assessed against it.
      (4)   The service provider shall have 15 days subsequent to receipt of
the notice of violation in which to correct the violation before the city may
assess penalties against the service provider. The time in which to cure the
violation may be extended by the city if additional time is required to correct
the violation; provided that the service provider commences corrective action
within seven days of the notice of violation and proceeds with reasonable
diligence.
      (5)   The service provider may dispute the alleged violation by providing
the city with written notice within five days of receipt of the notice of
violation, setting forth in reasonable detail the reasons for its dispute. The
city shall set a date for hearing of the alleged violation no sooner than 30
days and no later than 60 days from receipt of the notice of dispute.
      (6)   The city shall issue a written decision on the service provider's
alleged violation within 30 days of the hearing, which decision shall be final
and subject to the administrative appeal procedures under Ohio law. If the city
finds after hearing that the alleged violation(s) did occur, the penalty shall
be assessed starting 15 days from the notice of violation and shall continue
until the violation has been corrected.
   (c)   Other remedies. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as limiting
any judicial remedies that the city may have, at law or in equity, for
enforcement of this chapter.
(Ord. 08-O-2455, passed 3-18-2008)
CHAPTER 1052: IDENTITY THEFT PREVENTION PROGRAM
Section
1052.01   Program established; adopted by reference.
§ 1052.01  PROGRAM ESTABLISHED; ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   In order to comply with the Fair and Accurate Credit Transactions Act of
2003 (FACT) there is hereby adopted and made a part of this code by reference,
the Identity Theft Prevention Program policy, as set forth in Exhibit A
attached to Resolution 08-R-380.
(Res. 08-R-380, passed  - -2008)
TITLE SIX:  OTHER PUBLIC SERVICES
CHAPTER 1060:  GARBAGE AND RUBBISH COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL
Section
1060.01   Hours of collection.
1060.02   Joint Solid Waste Management District.
1060.03   Recycling site.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Collection and disposal of garbage - see Ohio R.C. 715.43, 717.01
   Employment of scavengers - see Ohio R.C. 3707.39
   Littering from motor vehicles - see TRAF.
432.42
   Vehicle loads dropping or leaking - see TRAF.
440.06
   Littering generally - see GEN. OFF.
660.03
   Filthy accumulations - see GEN. OFF.
660.04
   Discharges into sewers - see S.U. & P.S.
1044.13(m)
   Grinders - see S.U. & P.S.
1044.13(m)
   Storage and disposal - see B. & H.
1484.07,
1484.08
§ 1060.01  HOURS OF COLLECTION.
   No person, proprietorship, partnership, corporation or other such firm
engaged in the collection of garbage and trash in residential districts within
the municipality, excluding the following described locations, shall engage in
the collection of garbage or trash between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
of the following day, daily.
   (a)   Columbiana Manor Apartments.
   (b)   Camelot Apartments.
(Ord. 92-O-1311, passed 8-18-1992)
§ 1060.02  JOINT SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT DISTRICT.
   (a)   The Board of Directors (Board) of the Carroll-Columbiana-Harrison
Joint Solid Waste Management District (District) has established and convened a
solid waste management policy committee in accordance with Ohio R.C. 3734.54
(Policy Committee) to prepare a solid waste management plan  for the District
as required by Ohio R.C. 3734.54 (Plan).
   (b)   The Policy Committee completed a draft amended plan for the District
and submitted that plan to the Director of the Ohio Environmental Protection
agency for preliminary review and comment in accordance with Ohio R.C. 3734.54
and 3734.55.
   (c)   The Policy Committee received the Director’s written, non-binding
advisory opinion regarding the draft amended plan and established a public
comment period and held three public hearings concerning the draft amended
plan.
   (d)   The Policy Committee, after consideration of the comments and
recommendations received concerning the draft amended plan, has adopted and
submitted to this legislative authority a copy of the draft amended plan for
the District (the “Final Draft Amended Plan”).
   (e)   The final draft amended plan is hereby approved in the form submitted
to this legislative authority and presently on file with the Clerk of this
legislative authority.
   (f)   The Clerk of this legislative authority is hereby authorized and
directed to mail or otherwise deliver promptly a certified copy of this
resolution to the Policy Committee.
(Ord. 05-O-2182, passed 2-1-2005)
§ 1060.03  RECYCLING SITE.
   (a)   The City Manager is hereby authorized to execute an agreement with the
Carroll-Columbiana-Harrison Joint Solid Waste Management District, 618 B Canton
Road, Carrollton, Ohio 44615 for the purpose of permitting the use of a site
located at 31 West Park Avenue, Columbiana for a recycling site in accordance
with the contract, as the same being a part hereof as if rewritten herein.
   (b)   At all times hereafter, Carroll-Columbiana-Harrison Joint Solid Waste
Management District shall be deemed to be an independent contractor providing
services for the City of Columbiana, and the city shall therefore assume no
responsibility whatsoever for the payment of any unemployment compensation
premiums, workers compensation premiums or other benefits for its agents,
employees or officers; and the city shall require, that Carroll-Columbiana-
Harrison Joint Solid Waste Management District shall agree to indemnify and
save the city harmless from any and all injury to persons or property by reason
of any acts of negligence of Carroll-Columbiana-Harrison Joint Solid Waste
Management District or its agents, employees or officers.
(Ord. 04-O-2157, passed 11-2-2004)
CHAPTER 1062:  PARKS
Section
1062.01   Declaration of purpose; conditions of use.
1062.02   Restrictions on use of public ways.
1062.03   Parking restrictions.
1062.04   Hours.
1062.05   Prohibited practices.
1062.06   Restricted practices.
1062.07   Firestone Recreation Park.
1062.08   Swimming pool party rentals.
1062.09   Nonsmoking areas.
1062.99   Penalty.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Park, Recreation and Cemetery Board - see CHTR.
9.06,
9.07; ADM.
Ch. 286
   Land appropriation for parks - see Ohio R.C. 715.21, 719.01
   Parks and recreation - see Ohio R.C. Ch. 755
   Power to regulate vehicle speed in parks - see Ohio R.C. 4511.07
   Animals running at large - see GEN. OFF.
618.01
   Damaging public park - see GEN. OFF.
642.13
   Disorderly conduct - see GEN. OFF.
648.04
   Littering and garbage deposits - see GEN. OFF.
660.03
§ 1062.01  DECLARATION OF PURPOSE; CONDITIONS OF USE.
   Municipal recreational parks are hereby determined to be recreational
centers for the benefit and pleasure of the residents of the municipality and
the vicinity. Each person using the parks and recreational centers is subject
to the rules and regulations prescribed by Council or the Manager.
(Ord. 79-O-472, passed 12-18-1979)
§ 1062.02  RESTRICTIONS ON USE OF PUBLIC WAYS.
   Commercial vehicles are prohibited upon park roadways unless required to
make service repairs or improvements or at special park events. Park walks
shall be used exclusively by pedestrians, except that baby carriages and
children’s carts may be propelled thereon.
(Ord. 79-O-472, passed 12-18-1979)
§ 1062.03  PARKING RESTRICTIONS.
   (a)   No person who is the operator, driver or owner of a vehicle shall park
such vehicle or permit a vehicle operated, driven or owned by him or her to
remain on any drive or road in the municipal recreational parks at any time. A
vehicle may be parked only in the areas designated in such parks for parking.
   (b)   Nothing in this section shall be deemed to apply to vehicles belonging
to the Police and Fire Departments.
(Ord. 79-O-472, passed 12-18-1979)
§ 1062.04  HOURS.
   Municipal recreational parks shall be closed between 12:00 midnight and 5:00
a.m. and no person, except parties under permit at pavilions and employees of
the Park, Recreation and Cemetery Board on duty, shall be permitted to remain
in, or have access to, the parks during such time.
(Ord. 79-O-472, passed 12-18-1979)
§ 1062.05  PROHIBITED PRACTICES.
   No person shall commit any of the following acts within the boundaries of
the municipal recreational parks:
   (a)   Throw or drain offensive substances into any park waters;
   (b)   Bathe in lake waters;
   (c)   Have in his or her possession any alcoholic beverage;
   (d)   Wash any automobile;
   (e)   Pitch horseshoes;
   (f)   Fly motor-powered model airplanes; or
   (g)   No feeding of wildlife of any kind.
(Ord. 79-O-472, passed 12-18-1979; Ord. 14-O-2784, passed 11-4-2014)
§ 1062.06  RESTRICTED PRACTICES.
   No person shall do or permit any of the following acts without first
obtaining permission therefor from the Manager or the Superintendent of Parks
and Cemetery:
   (a)   Keep, ride or transport horses or ponies in or through a park at any
time;
   (b)   Keep or offer anything for sale;
   (c)   Obstruct in any way a roadway or path;
   (d)   Build a fire, except at places provided for that purpose;
   (e)   Enter any place upon which the words “no admittance” or “private” are
displayed;
   (f)   Play baseball at any place not designated for that purpose;
   (g)   Enter or leave a park with a motor vehicle, except at the established
ways of entrance and exit;
   (h)   Throw or cause to be thrown anything on the ice or skating pond within
a park;
   (i)   Discharge a firearm or fireworks, unless in connection with park
activities; or
   (j)   Use a metal locator.
(Ord. 79-O-472, passed 12-18-1979)
§ 1062.07  FIRESTONE RECREATION PARK.
   (a)   Use of park facilities.
      (1)   The Park, Recreation and Cemetery Board is hereby authorized to
establish a schedule for the use of the recreational facilities at Firestone
Park on an annual basis in cooperation with the Park Manager who shall assume
the responsibility for coordinating and overseeing such scheduled uses.
      (2)   Subject to the direction and control of the Service Director, the
Board shall coordinate the payment of maintenance and repair expenses by users
of such facilities.
   (b)   Pavilion, shelter and hillside rental.
      (1)   A.   Rates for pavilion, shelter and hillside rentals at Firestone
Recreation Park shall be as follows:
 
 One-half Day All Day
Half of Pavilion #1   $80.00  $115.00
All of Pavilion #1    $110.00 $165.00
Pavilions #2 and #3   $60.00  $95.00
Pavilion #4           $70.00  $100.00
Shelters # 1, 3 and 4 $20.00  $30.00
Shelter #2            $30.00  $40.00
Hillside event rental         $200.00
Event restrooms       $50.00  $100.00
 
         B.   Rentals for two hours or less of Pavilions #2 and #3 is twenty
dollars ($20.00) and at the discretion of the Park Superintendent.
      (2)   Off-season rates, from October 1 to May 1, shall be:
 
                    One-half Day All Day
Half of Pavilion #1 $110.00      $155.00
All of Pavilion #1  $150.00      $205.00
Pavilion #4         $90.00       $120.00
 
      (3)   Half days shall be from 10:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. or 5:00 p.m. to 11:
00 p.m. All day shall be from 10:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m.
      (4)   Such rates shall be due and payable, a one hundred dollar ($100.00)
cleaning fee may be invoiced if extra cleaning of the unit is necessary and
future reservations will be in jeopardy. In the event of a rental reservation
cancellation not less than 48 hours prior to the rental date, the rental charge
may be refunded or applied to an alternate rental date if such alternate rental
date is requested and available for reservation.
   (c)   Swimming pool rates.
      (1)   A.   Admission rates to the Firestone Park swimming pool for
residents within the city corporation limits shall be:
 
Family resident membership (four members or less)                $150.00
Each additional family member (over four members)                $20.00
Individual resident membership                                   $50.00
Adult daily rate - weekdays - Monday through Friday              $6.00
Children under eighteen years - weekdays - Monday through Friday $4.00
*Children three and under free
Seniors - weekdays - Monday through Friday                       $4.00
Adult daily rate - Saturday, Sunday and holidays                 $8.00
Children under eighteen years - Saturday, Sunday and holidays    $6.00
*Children three and under free
Seniors - Saturday, Sunday and holidays                          $6.00
 
         B.   It shall be mandatory that any person applying for a resident
pool pass shall show positive identification that they are city residents.
      (2)   Admission rates to the Firestone Park swimming pool for persons
living outside the city corporation limits shall be:
 
Family non-resident membership (four members or less)            $250.00
Each additional family member (over four members)               $20.00
Individual non-resident membership                               $100.00
Adult daily rate - weekdays - Monday through Friday              $6.00
Children under eighteen years - weekdays - Monday through Friday $4.00
*Children three and under free
Seniors - weekdays - Monday through Friday                       $4.00
Adult daily rate - Saturday, Sunday and holidays                 $8.00
Children under eighteen years - Saturday, Sunday and holidays   $6.00
*Children three and under free
Seniors - Saturday, Sunday and holidays                          $6.00
 
      (3)   Annual season passes shall entitle all members of the purchaser’s
immediate family residing in the same household as listed on the membership
application to unlimited admission to the pool for the season. Individual
season passes shall entitle the purchaser only to unlimited admission to the
pool for the season.
   (d)   Speed limit.
      (1)   The speed limit for motor vehicles traveling within the confines of
Firestone Park shall be 13 miles per hour.
      (2)   The Manager shall be and hereby is authorized to purchase and post
13 mile per hour speed limit signs in appropriate locations throughout
Firestone Park.
(Ord. 85-O-836, passed 7-16-1985; Ord. 95-O-1471, passed 3-7-1995; Ord. 97-O-
1635, passed 11-18-1997; Ord. 98-O-1706, passed 12-15-1998; Ord. 00-O-1843,
passed 11-21-2000; Ord. 01-O-1869, passed 2-20-2001; Ord. 04-O-2128, passed 4-
20-2004; Ord. 06-O-2289, passed 3-7-2006; Ord. 14-O-2761, passed 4-15-2014;
Ord. 14-O-2783, passed 11-4-2014; Ord. 17-O-2904, passed 4-4-2017; Ord. 19-O-
2992, passed 1-15-2019)
§ 1062.08  SWIMMING POOL PARTY RENTALS.
   (a)   The swimming pool rates for pool party rentals shall be:
 
One or more persons $ 50.00
 
   (b)   At least one lifeguard shall be required for each 25 persons in a
party (26 persons would require two lifeguards). The fee for each lifeguard
shall be fifteen dollars ($15.00) and shall be paid directly to the lifeguards
by the party renting the swimming pool. The lifeguard fee is in addition to the
swimming pool rental fee paid to the park.
   (c)   If the pool slide is to be used, an additional lifeguard will be
required. The fee shall be fifteen dollars ($15.00) for the lifeguard.
   (d)   Hours for swimming pool party rentals are from 9:00 p.m. until 11:00
p.m.
(Ord. 91-O-1229, passed 5-7-1991; Ord. 98-O-1672, passed 4-21-1998)
§ 1062.09  NONSMOKING AREAS.
   (b)   The Superintendent of the Columbiana Exempted Village School District
has made a request that the football field, the bleachers, the buildings and
the entire area adjacent thereto which is enclosed by a temporary fence during
football season be declared to be a nonsmoking place so long as the fence
remains in place each year during football season.
   (b)   As the owner of the Columbiana City Park in which the subject area and
facilities are located, the City of Columbiana, by the authority of its
Council, hereby resolves, pursuant to the provisions of Ohio R.C. 3794.05, that
the football field, the bleachers, the buildings and the entire area adjacent
thereto which is enclosed by a temporary fence installed by the Columbiana
Exempted Village School District, during football season each successive year,
commencing in 2007, shall be and hereby is declared to be an nonsmoking place
so long as such fence shall remain in place each year during football season.
   (c)   Appropriate signage shall be forthwith posted at the location, which
signage shall conform to the provisions of Ohio R.C. 3794.06.
(Res. 07-R-361, passed 9-4-2007)
§ 1062.99  PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor for a first offense and shall be fined not more than one hundred
fifty dollars ($150.00). For any subsequent offense, the offender is guilty of
a misdemeanor of the third degree and shall be fined not more than five hundred
dollars ($500.00) or imprisoned not more than 60 days, or both.  A separate
offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a violation
occurs or continues.
(Ord. 14-O-2784, passed 11-4-2014)
CHAPTER 1064:  COLUMBIANA CEMETERY
EDITOR’S NOTE: Rates for the services and facilities of the Columbiana Cemetery
are established from time to time by Council. Because of the frequency of
change, these rates are not codified. Copies of the latest relevant legislation
may be obtained, at cost, from the Manager.
Section
1064.01   Veteran’s Memorial Section.
1064.02   Burial vaults.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Park, Recreation and Cemetery Board - see CHTR.
9.06,
9.07; ADM.
Ch. 286
   Cemeteries and crematories - see Ohio R.C. 759.01
   Powers of legislative authorities as to cemeteries - see Ohio R.C. 759.03
   Power to sell portions of cemeteries - see Ohio R.C. 759.04
   Burials prohibited within municipal corporations - see Ohio R.C. 759.05
   Bond of officer to secure cemetery funds - see Ohio R.C. 759.06
   Desecration - see GEN. OFF.
642.05
§ 1064.01  VETERANS’ MEMORIAL SECTION.
   (a)   The Veterans’ Memorial Section of grave plots in the Columbiana
Cemetery is hereby established and designated for use by honorably discharged
veterans who served during a time of armed conflict as recognized by the
Congress of the United States. Such section, consisting of plots 1 through 35,
shall be occupied by such veterans and their spouses who shall purchase the
same in accordance with the rules and regulations of the Park, Recreation and
Cemetery Board.
   (b)   The Veterans’ Memorial Section, and the use thereof, shall be subject
to the following restrictions.
      (1)   All graves shall have bronze alloy markers that shall be mounted
flush with the ground.
      (2)   The sexton or the permanent Memorial Committee of the Veterans of
Foreign Wars and the American Legion shall verify, in writing, all honorable
discharges and DD 214's prior to the sale of any plot within such section.
      (3)   The plots within such section are not transferable to persons other
than those described in division (a) hereof.
      (4)   The cost of such plots within such section shall be established by
Council, and shall be paid in advance.
      (5)   The Veterans’ Memorial Section shall be maintained by the Park,
Recreation and Cemetery Board in a manner which is consistent with the
maintenance of the entire Columbiana Cemetery.
(Ord. 84-O-771, passed 10-16-1984)
§ 1064.02  BURIAL VAULTS.
   Outer burial containers (burial vaults) shall be used for burials in the
Columbiana Cemetery. Such containers shall be made from reinforced cement,
copper or steel, except that vaults for infants or children, not to exceed 36
inches in length, may be made of plastic or fiberglass.
(Ord. 84-O-733, passed 3-20-1984)
CHAPTER 1066:  PUBLIC SAFETY VEHICLE SERVICE
Section
1066.01   Establishment.
1066.02   Director of Public Safety and Chief of Public Safety Vehicle Service
as administrators of service; duties; compensation.
1066.03   Rules and regulations.
1066.04   Personnel.
1066.05   Service outside municipality.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Traffic direction in emergencies - see TRAF.
404.08
   Right-of-way of public safety vehicles - see TRAF.
416.08
   Emergency and public safety vehicles at stop signals or signs - see TRAF.
432.19
   Following and parking near emergency and public safety vehicles - see TRAF.
432.27
   Speed limit exceptions for emergency and public safety vehicles - see TRAF.
434.07
§ 1066.01  ESTABLISHMENT.
   Pursuant to § 8.08 of the Charter, there is hereby established a Public
Safety Vehicle Service to provide emergency ambulance service for the
municipality and the inhabitants thereof. Such service shall be under the
supervision of the Director of Public Safety.
(Ord. 78-O-395, passed 8-15-1978)
§ 1066.02  DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC SAFETY AND CHIEF OF PUBLIC SAFETY VEHICLE SERVICE
AS ADMINISTRATORS OF SERVICE; DUTIES; COMPENSATION.
   (a)   The Director of Public Safety and the Chief of the Public Safety
Vehicle Service, also known as the Columbiana Emergency Medical Service, who
shall be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the Director of Public
Safety with the approval of Council, shall be and hereby are charged with the
responsibility of providing administrative direction for the Service, the
Director being charged with the supervision and control of the Chief.
   (b)   The Chief of the Service shall have the duties and responsibilities as
set forth in Exhibit A, attached to original Ordinance 91-O-1220, passed
February 19, 1991.  The Chief shall be compensated as determined from time to
time by Council.
(Ord. 91-O-1220, passed 2-19-1991)
§ 1066.03  RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The Director of Public Safety shall prescribe rules and regulations for the
operation of the Public Safety Vehicle Service.
(Ord. 78-O-395, passed 8-15-1978)
§ 1066.04  PERSONNEL.
   The personnel to be involved in the operation of the Public Safety Vehicle
Service shall be duly appointed members of the Auxiliary Police Unit of the
Police Department. Such personnel shall be otherwise qualified to participate
in such service in accordance with the laws of the state and the rules and
regulations of its departments and agencies.
(Ord. 78-O-395, passed 8-15-1978)
§ 1066.05  SERVICE OUTSIDE MUNICIPALITY.
   Personnel of the Public Safety Vehicle Service are hereby authorized to go
outside the corporate limits of the municipality for the purpose of rendering
aid in cases of accidents, illnesses or other emergencies or situations
requiring emergency vehicle service. However, such personnel shall not render
such services outside the corporate limits without an order from the
Coordinator or the Assistant Coordinator of the Service or a person authorized
by such Coordinator or Assistant Coordinator to give such an order.
(Ord. 78-O-395, passed 8-15-1978)
PART TWELVE:  PLANNING AND ZONING
      TITLE TWO - Planning
         Chap.
1220.   Planning Commission.
         Chap.
1222.   Land Use and Thoroughfare Plan Map.
      TITLE FOUR - Subdivision Regulations - Summary of Procedures
         Chap.
1240.   General Provisions and Definitions.
         Chap.
1242.   Administration, Enforcement and Penalty.
         Chap.
1244.   Procedure for Minor Subdivision Approval (Lot Split).
         Chap.
1246.   Procedure for Major Subdivision Approval.
         Chap.
1248.   Design Standards.
         Chap.
1250.   Construction of Improvements.
            
Figure 1.   Generalized Jurisdictional Area.
            
Figure 2.   Types of Lots.
            
Figure 3.   Lot Terms.
            
Figure 4.   Example of a Subdivision.
            
Figure 5.     Typical Classification of the Thoroughfare System.
            
Figure 6.     Example of Minor Subdivision Sketch Plan.
            
Figure 7.   Sample Application for Minor Subdivision Approval.
            
Figure 8.   Typical Preapplication Sketch.
            
Figure 9.   Application for Tentative Approval of Preliminary Plat.
            
Figure 10.   Typical Preliminary Subdivision Plat.
            
Figure 11.   Preliminary Plat Checklist.
            
Figure 12.   Application for Final Plat Approval.
            
Figure 13.   Performance Bond.
            
Figure 14.   Typical Final Subdivision Plat.
            
Figure 15.   Final Plat Checklist.
            
Figure 16.   Forms for Final Plat Certifications.
            
Figure 17.   Technical Design and Improvement Checklist.
            
Figure 18.   Street Design Standards.
            
Figure 19.   Intersection Design Standards.
            
Figure 20.   Suggested Minimum Paving Standards.
            
Figure 21.   Preferred Trees for Tree Lawn Planting.
            
Figure 22.   Application for Subdivision Variance.
      TITLE SIX - Zoning
         Chap.
1260.   General Provisions and Definitions.
         Chap.
1262.   Administration, Enforcement and Penalty.
         Chap.
1264.   Board of Zoning Appeals.
         Chap.
1266.   Conditional Zoning Certificates.
         Chap.
1268.   A-O-C Agricultural-Open Space-Conservation Districts.
         Chap.
1270.   R-1 Low Density Residential Districts.
         Chap.
1272.   R-2 Medium Density Residential Districts.
         Chap.
1274.   R-3 High Density Residential Districts.
         Chap.
1276.   C-1 Local Commercial Districts.
         Chap.
1278.   C-2 Office and Limited Business Districts.
         Chap.
1280.   C-3 Central Business Districts.
         Chap.
1282.   C-4 Intensive and Automobile-Oriented Commercial Districts.
         Chap.
1284.   C-5 Highway Commercial Districts.
         Chap.
1286.   I-1 Industrial Research and Office Districts.
         Chap.
1288.   I-2 Light Industrial Districts.
         Chap.
1290.   I-3 Manufacturing, Storage and Disposal Districts.
         Chap.
1292.   Off-Street Parking and Loading.
         Chap.
1294.   Signs.
         Chap.
1296.   Nonconforming Uses.
         Chap.
1298.   Wireless Communication Antennas and Towers.
            
Appendix A.   Zoning Districts Map.
            
Table 1.   Summary of District Regulations.
TITLE TWO:  PLANNING
CHAPTER 1220:  PLANNING COMMISSION
EDITOR’S NOTE: There are no sections in
Chapter 1220. This chapter has been established to provide a place for cross
references and any future legislation.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Referral of zoning ordinances to Planning Commission - see CHTR.
6.12; P. & Z.
1262.14
   Membership- see CHTR.
9.01
   Powers and duties - see CHTR.
9.02
   Organization - see CHTR.
9.09
   Vacancy - see CHTR.
9.10
   Removal of members - see CHTR.
9.11
CHAPTER 1222:  LAND USE AND THOROUGHFARE MAP
Section
1222.01   Adoption.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Planning Commission - see Ohio R. C. 713.01 et seq.; P. & Z.
Ch. 1220
   Street obstructions and special uses - see TRAF.
Ch. 412
   Major Thoroughfare Plan defined - see P. & Z.
1240.12(b)(22)
   Zoning Districts Map - see P. & Z.
1260.03
   Land Use and Thoroughfare Plan defined - see P. & Z.
1260.35(b)
§ 1222.01  ADOPTION.
   The Land Use and Thoroughfare Plan Map, as amended and as presented to
Council and dated May 7, 1974, is hereby approved and adopted as the official
Land Use and Thoroughfare Plan Map of the municipality. Such Map shall be a
part of the comprehensive planning program for the municipality.
(Ord. 74-O-95, passed 5-21-1974)
TITLE FOUR:  SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
   SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES
   (a)   These Subdivision regulations were prepared by the Planning Commission
and recommended to Council. After a public hearing was held, they were adopted.
   (b)   After the adoption of these subdivision regulations (Ordinance 74-O-
129, passed September 17, 1974), subdivisions shall be reviewed and approved by
the Planning Commission in accordance with such regulations and any amendments
thereto.
   (c)   The developer, before subdividing, shall obtain information on, or a
copy of, these subdivision regulations and other applicable codes in effect.
   (d)   For a minor subdivision, the developer shall prepare a sketch plan and
submit it to the Commission. After review, the Commission may give final
approval and the subdivision may be recorded and the lots created may be sold.
   (e)   For a major subdivision, the developer shall prepare a preliminary
plan in accordance with Chapter 1248, submit it to the Commission and apply for
approval thereof. After review, the Commission may approve, conditionally
approve or disapprove the preliminary plan.
   (f)   The developer, having received approval of a preliminary plan of a
major subdivision, shall prepare drawings and specifications for improvements
in accordance with
Chapter 1250. The developer may then:
      (1)   Apply for approval of the drawings and specifications for
improvements and, after such approval, construct the improvements and then
apply for approval of the final plat for recording; or
      (2)   Apply for approval of the plans and specifications for improvements
and of the final plat concurrently and furnish performance guarantees for the
subsequent construction of the improvements.
   The Commission may approve the drawings and specifications for improvements.
However, the Commission may approve the final plat only after the improvements
are installed or performance guarantees are furnished.
   (g)   After approval, the final plat of the subdivision may be recorded by
the developer and he or she may sell the lots.
   (h)   The developer shall offer for dedication the streets or other public
areas and Council may accept the same.
(Ord. 74-O-129, passed 10-17-1974)
CHAPTER 1240:  GENERAL PROVISIONS AND DEFINITIONS
Section
1240.01   Short title.
1240.02   Purpose.
1240.03   Objectives.
1240.04   Authority.
1240.05   Interpretation.
1240.06   Jurisdiction.
1240.07   Conflicts of laws.
1240.08   Planned unit developments.
1240.09   Separability.
1240.10   Amendments.
1240.11   Effective date.
1240.12   Definitions.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Plat and subdivision defined - see Ohio R.C. 711.001
   Fee for designated public land to vest when plat recorded - see Ohio R.C.
711.01, 711.07
   Cornerstones and permanent markers - see Ohio R.C. 711.03, 711.11
   Plat acknowledgement and recording - see Ohio R.C. 711.06
   Administration, enforcement and penalty - see P. & Z.
Ch. 1242
   Design standards - see P. & Z.
Ch. 1248
   Construction of improvements - see P. & Z.
Ch. 1250
   Zoning Districts Map - see P. & Z.
1260.03
§ 1240.01  SHORT TITLE.
   These subdivision regulations shall be known and may be cited and referred
to as the “Subdivision Regulations of the City of Columbiana, Ohio,” or just
the “subdivision regulations.” Hereinafter, they shall be referred to as “these
subdivision regulations” or “these regulations.”
(Ord. 74-O-129, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1240.02  PURPOSE.
   The general purpose of these subdivision regulations is to guide and
regulate the planning, subdividing and development of land in order to promote
and protect the public health, safety, convenience, comfort and prosperity and
the general welfare of the municipality.
(Ord. 74-O-129, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1240.03  OBJECTIVES.
   These subdivision regulations shall be administered to achieve the following
objectives:
   (a)   The orderly development of land to create harmonious and stable
neighborhoods;
   (b)   Safe and convenient vehicular and pedestrian traffic circulation;
   (c)   Adequate and economical provisions for utilities and public services
in order to conserve the public funds;
   (d)   Ample public open spaces for schools and recreational and other public
purposes;
   (e)   The accurate surveying of land and preparing and recording of plats;
   (f)   Discouraging of premature, uneconomical or scattered subdivisions; and
   (g)   Coordination of land development in accordance with the Zoning Code,
the Major Thoroughfare Plan, the Comprehensive Development Plan and other plans
of the municipality.
(Ord. 74-O-129, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1240.04  AUTHORITY.
   The authority for the preparation, adoption and implementation of these
subdivision regulations is derived from Ohio R.C. Chapter 711 which permits the
adoption of uniform rules and regulations governing the subdivision of land.
(Ord. 74-O-129, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1240.05  INTERPRETATION.
   These subdivision regulations shall be construed to be minimum requirements.
(Ord. 74-O-129, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1240.06  JURISDICTION.
   These subdivision regulations shall be applicable to all subdivisions of
land within the municipality and the territory within one and one-half miles of
the corporate limits thereof. (See
Figure 1 immediately following these subdivision regulations.)
(Ord. 74-O-129, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1240.07  CONFLICTS OF LAWS.
   These subdivision regulations shall supplement any law of the state or
ordinance of the municipality, or any rule or regulation promulgated by
authority of such a law or ordinance relating to the purpose and scope of these
subdivision regulations. Whenever a requirement of these subdivision
regulations is at variance with a requirement of any other lawfully adopted
rule, regulation, ordinance or resolution, the most restrictive or that
imposing the higher standard shall govern, except as provided in §
1240.08. 
(Ord. 74-O-129, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1240.08  PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS.
   The planned unit development approach to development is greatly encouraged.
These subdivision regulations may be modified by the degree necessary to
accomplish the objectives and standards required for the planned unit
development of residential, commercial or industrial subdivisions, or a mixture
thereof, in accordance with the Zoning Code. Nothing in this section, however,
shall exempt the developer from the requirements of subdivision plat approval
as specified in
Chapter 1246.
(Ord. 74-O-129, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1240.09  SEPARABILITY.
   If, for any reason, any clause, sentence, paragraph, section or other part
of these subdivision regulations is decided by a court of competent
jurisdiction to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect the validity of
these subdivision regulations as a whole, or any part thereof, other than the
part so held to be invalid.
(Ord. 74-O-129, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1240.10  AMENDMENTS.
   These subdivision regulations may be amended after a public hearing is held
and other requirements are met, as specified in the appropriate sections of the
Ohio Revised Code.
(Ord. 74-O-129, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1240.11  EFFECTIVE DATE.
   These subdivision regulations shall become effective from and after the date
of their approval and adoption by the Planning Commission and Council, after
public hearing and certification to the County Recorder. Thenceforth, any other
regulations previously adopted by Council or the Planning Commission shall be
deemed to be repealed. These subdivision regulations shall in no way affect any
subdivision having received preliminary approval prior to the effective date of
these subdivision regulations (Ordinance 74-O-129, passed October 17, 1974),
provided, however, that no changes to the preliminary plat, as approved, are
introduced by the subdivider.
(Ord. 74-O-129, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1240.12  DEFINITIONS.
   (a)   General terms.  As used in these subdivision regulations, words in the
present tense include the future tense, the singular number includes the plural
and the plural number includes the singular. In addition:
      (1)   “Commission” means the Municipal Planning Commission.
      (2)   “Council” means the legislative body of the municipality.
      (3)   “Lot” includes the words “plot” and “parcel.”
      (4)   “Manager” means the Municipal Manager.
      (5)   “Person” means an individual, firm, association, organization,
partnership, trust, company or corporation.
      (6)   “Secretary” means the Secretary of the Planning Commission.
      (7)   “Shall” is a mandatory requirement, “may” is a permissive
requirement and “should” is a preferred requirement.
      (8)   “Used” and “occupied” include “intended, designed or arranged to be
used or occupied.”
   (b)   Specific terms.  As used in these subdivision regulations:
      (1)   “Alley.”  See under Thoroughfare, street and road.
      (2)   “Building line.”  See Setback line.
      (3)   “Comprehensive Development Plan” means the Plan, or any portion
hereof, adopted by the Planning Commission and/or Council, showing the general
location and extent of present and proposed physical facilities, including
housing, industrial and commercial uses, major streets, parks, schools and
other community facilities. Such Plan establishes the goals, objectives and
policies of the community.
      (4)   “Corner lot.”  See under Lot types.
      (5)   “Covenant” means a written promise or pledge.
      (6)   “Cul-de-sac.”  See under Thoroughfare, street and road.
      (7)   “Culvert” means a transverse drain that channels under a bridge,
street or driveway.
      (8)   “Dead-end street.”  See under Thoroughfare, street and road.
      (9)   “Developer” means an individual, subdivider, firm, association,
syndicate, partnership, corporation, trust or any other legal entity commencing
proceedings under these subdivision regulations to effect a subdivision of land
under these subdivision regulations for himself or herself or for another
person.
      (10)   “Dwelling unit” means space, within a building, comprising a
living, dining and sleeping room or rooms and storage closets, as well as space
and equipment for cooking, bathing and toilet facilities, all used by only one
family and its household employees.
      (11)   “Easement” means the authorization by a property owner for the use
by another, and for a specified purpose, of any designated part of his or her
property.
      (12)   “Engineer” means any person registered to practice professional
engineering by the State Board of Registration for Professional Engineers and
Surveyors, as specified in Ohio R.C. 4733.14.
      (13)   “Highway Director” or “Transportation Director” means the Director
of the State Department of Transportation.
      (14)   “Improvements” means street pavement or resurfacing and curbs,
gutters, sidewalks, water lines, sewer lines, storm drains, street lights,
flood control and drainage facilities, utility lines, landscaping and other
related matters normally associated with the development of raw land into
building sites.
      (15)   “Location map.”  See Vicinity map.
      (16)   “Lot” means a parcel of land of sufficient size to meet the
minimum zoning requirements for use, coverage and area and to provide such
yards and other open spaces as are required under these subdivision
regulations. Such lot shall have frontage on an improved public street or on an
approved private street and may consist of:
         A.   A single lot of record;
         B.   A portion of a lot of record; or
         C.   A combination of complete lots of record, of complete lots of
record and portions of lots of record, or of portions of lots of record. (See
Figures
2 and
3 immediately following these subdivision regulations.)
      (17)   “Lot frontage” means that portion of a lot nearest the street. For
the purpose of determining yard requirements on corner lots and through lots,
all sides of a lot adjacent to a street shall be considered frontage. Yards
shall be provided as indicated under division (b)(49) hereof.
      (18)   “Lot measurements.”
         A.   “Lot depth” means the distance between the mid-points of straight
lines connecting the foremost points of the side lot lines in the front, and
the rearmost points of the side lot lines in the rear, of a lot.
         B.   “Lot width” means the distance between straight lines connecting
front and rear lot lines at each side of a lot, measured at the building
setback line, provided, however, that the width between side lot lines at their
foremost points (where they intersect with the street line) shall not be less
than 80% of the required lot width.
      (19)   “Lot, minimum area of.”  “Minimum area of lot” means the area of a
lot exclusive of any portion of the right-of-way of any public or private
street.
      (20)   “Lot of record” means a lot which is part of a subdivision
recorded in the office of the County Recorder, or a lot or parcel described by
metes and bounds, the description of which has been so recorded.
      (21)   “Lot types.”
         A.   “Corner lot” means a lot located at the intersection of two or
more streets. A lot abutting on a curved street or streets shall be considered
a corner lot if straight lines drawn from the foremost points of the side lot
lines to the foremost point on the lot meet at an interior angle of less than
135 degrees.
         B.   “Interior lot” means a lot, other than a corner lot, with
frontage on more than one street. Through lots abutting two streets may be
referred to as double frontage lots.
         C.   “Reversed frontage lot” means a lot whose frontage is at right
angles to the general pattern in the area. A reversed frontage lot may also be
a corner lot.
      (22)   “Major Thoroughfare Plan” means the comprehensive plan adopted by
Council indicating the general location recommended for arterial, collector and
local thoroughfares within the corporate limits of the municipality and
unincorporated areas surrounding the municipality.
      (23)   “Minor subdivision” means a division of a parcel of land that does
not require a plat to be approved by a planning authority, in accordance with
Ohio R.C. 711.131, and is also known as a lot split.
      (24)   “Monument” means a permanent concrete or iron marker used to
establish definitely all lines of the plat of a subdivision, including all lot
corners, boundary lines, corners and points of change in street alignment.
      (25)   “Open space” means an area open to the sky which may be on the
same lot with a building. Such area may include, along with natural
environmental features, a swimming pool, tennis court or any other recreational
facility that the Planning Commission deems permissive. Streets, structures for
habitation and the like shall not be included.
      (26)   “Outlot” means the property shown on a subdivision plat outside of
the boundaries of the land which is to be developed, which property is to be
excluded from the development of the subdivision.
      (27)   “Parking space, off-street.”  “Off-street parking space” means an
area adequate for parking an automobile, with room for opening doors on both
sides, together with properly related access to a public street or alley and
maneuvering room, but located totally outside of any street or alley right-of-
way.
      (28)   “Performance bond” and “surety bond” mean an agreement by a
subdivider or developer with the municipality for the amount of the estimated
construction cost, guaranteeing the completion of physical improvements, in
accordance with plans and specifications, within the time prescribed by the
subdivider’s or developer’s agreement.
      (29)   “Planned unit development” means an area of land in which a
variety of housing types and/or related commercial and industrial facilities
are accommodated in a pre-planned environment under more flexible standards,
such as lot sizes and setbacks, than those restrictions that would normally
apply under these subdivision regulations. The procedure for approval of such
development contains requirements in addition to those of the standard
subdivision, such as building design principles and landscaping plans.
      (30)   “Plat” means the map, drawing or chart on which a developer’s plan
of subdivision (preliminary) is presented to the Planning Commission for
approval and, after such approval, to the County Recorder (final) for
recording.
      (31)   “Public way” means an alley, avenue, boulevard, bridge, channel,
ditch, easement, expressway, freeway, highway, land, parkway, right-of-way,
road, sidewalk, street, subway, tunnel, viaduct, walk or any other way in which
the general public or a public entity has a right, or which is dedicated,
whether improved or not.
      (32)   “Right-of-way” means a strip of land taken or dedicated for use as
a public way. In addition to a roadway, a right-of-way normally incorporates
curbs, lawn strips, sidewalks, lighting and drainage facilities, and may
include special features (required by topography or treatment), such as grade
separation, landscaped areas, viaducts or bridges.
      (33)   “Road.”  See Thoroughfare, street and road.
      (34)   “Setback line” means a line established by the Zoning Code,
generally parallel with, and measured from, the lot line, defining the limits
of a yard in which no building, other than an accessory building or structure,
may be located above ground, except as may be provided in such Code. (See
Yards.)
      (35)   “Sewer, central and group.”  “Central sewer” and “group sewer”
mean an approved sewage disposal system which provides a collection network and
disposal system and central sewage treatment facility for a single development,
community or region.
      (36)   “Sewer, on-site.”  “On-site sewer” means a septic tank or similar
installation on an individual lot which utilizes an aerobic bacteriological
process or equally satisfactory process for the elimination of sewage and
provides for the proper and safe disposal of the effluent, subject to the
approval of health and sanitation officials having jurisdiction.
      (37)   “Sidewalk” means that portion of the road right-of-way outside the
roadway, which is improved for the use of pedestrian traffic. (See Walkway.)
      (38)   “Street.”  See Thoroughfare, street and road.
      (39)   “Subdivider.”  See Developer.
      (40)   “Subdivision” means:
         A.   The division of any parcel of land shown as a unit or as
contiguous units on the last preceding tax roll, into two or more parcels,
sites or lots, any one of which is less than five acres, for the purpose,
whether immediate or future, of transfer of ownership (See
Figure 4 immediately following these subdivision regulations.), provided,
however, that the division or partition of land into parcels of more than five
acres not involving any new street or easement of access, and the sale or
exchange of parcels between adjoining lot owners, where such sale or exchange
does not create additional building sites, shall be exempted; or
         B.   The improvement of one or more parcels of land for residential,
commercial or industrial structures or groups of structures involving the
division or allocation of land for the opening, widening or extension of any
street except a private street serving industrial structures, or the division
or allocation of land as open spaces for common use by owners, occupants or
lease holders, or as easements for the extension and maintenance of a public
sewer, water, storm drainage or other public facility. (See Minor subdivision.)
      (41)   “Surveyor” means any person registered to practice surveying.
      (42)   “Thoroughfare,” “street” and “road” mean the full width between
property lines bounding every public way, with a part thereof to be used for
vehicular traffic and designated as follows: (See
Figure 5 immediately following these subdivision regulations.)
         A.   “Alley” means a minor street used primarily for vehicular service
access to the back or side of properties abutting on another street.
         B.   “Arterial street” means a highway used primarily for through
traffic, carrying heavy loads and large volumes of traffic, usually on a
continuous route.
         C.   “Boulevard” means a thoroughfare described as consisting of
parallel streets, the right-of-way for each of which streets shall be not less
than 35 feet wide, and such parallel streets shall be separated by a landscaped
or grass strip of land which shall not be less than 30 feet wide. A “boulevard”
of such length as shall be deemed reasonable by the Planning Commission to
satisfy public safety and convenience concerns may be used to provide the sole
means of ingress and egress for a residential, industrial, commercial or other
type of development where, owing to conditions peculiar to such a development,
multiple means of ingress and egress for such a development cannot be otherwise
established, or cannot be otherwise established without material financial or
other hardship, or a “boulevard” is, as determined by the Planning Commission,
best suited for such a development.
         D.   “Collector street” means a thoroughfare, whether within a
residential, industrial, commercial or other type of development, which
primarily carries traffic from local streets to arterial streets, including the
principal entrance and circulation routes within residential subdivisions.
         E.   “Cul-de-sac” means a local street of relatively short length with
one end open to traffic and the other end terminating in a vehicular turn-
around.
         F.   “Dead-end street” means a street temporarily having only one
outlet for vehicular traffic and intended to be extended or continued in the
future.
         G.   “Local street” means a street primarily for providing access to
residential, commercial or other abutting property.
         H.   “Loop street” means a type of local street, each end of which
terminates at an intersection with the same arterial or collector street and
whose principal radius points of the 180-degree system of turns are not more
than 1,000 feet from such arterial or collector street or normally more than
600 feet from each other.
         I.   “Marginal access street” and “frontage street” mean a local or
collector street, parallel and adjacent to an arterial or collector street,
providing access to abutting properties and protection from arterial or
collector streets.
      (43)   “Through lot.”  See under Lot types at Interior lot.
      (44)   “Tree lawn” and “devil strip” mean that portion of a street right-
of-way between the edge of a pavement or curb and the public sidewalk or
property line.
      (45)   “Variance” means a modification of the strict terms of the
relevant subdivision regulations, where such modification will not be contrary
to the public interest and where, owing to conditions peculiar to the property
in question and not the result of the action of the applicant for the variance,
a literal enforcement of such regulations would result in unnecessary and undue
hardship.
      (46)   “Vicinity map” means a drawing located on the plat which sets
forth the relationship of the proposed subdivision or use to other nearby
developments, landmarks and community facilities in order to better locate and
orient the area in question.
      (47)   “Walkway” means a dedicated public way, four feet or more in
width, for pedestrian use only, whether along the side of a road or not.
      (48)   “Watershed” means the drainage basin in which the subdivision 
drains or that land whose drainage is affected by the subdivision.
      (49)   “Yard” means a required open space, other than a court, which is
unoccupied and unobstructed by any structure or portion of a structure from
three feet above the general ground level of the graded lot upward, provided
that accessories, ornaments and furniture may be permitted in any yard, subject
to height limitations and requirements limiting obstruction of visibility. (See
Figure 3 immediately following these subdivision regulations.)
         A.   “Front yard” means a yard extending between side lot lines across
the front of a lot and from the front lot line to the front of the principal
building.
         B.   “Rear yard” means a yard extending between side lot lines across
the rear of a lot and from the rear lot line to the rear of the principal
building.
         C.   “Side yard” means a yard extending from the principal building to
the side lot line on both sides of the principal building between the lines
establishing the front and rear yards.
(Ord. 74-O-129, passed 10-17-1974; Ord. 98-O-1698, passed 10-6-1998)
CHAPTER 1242:  ADMINISTRATION, ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTY
Section
1242.01   Administration.
1242.02   Recording of plats before approval.
1242.03   Revision of plats after approval.
1242.04   Sale of land within subdivisions.
1242.05   Fees.
1242.06   Variances.
1242.07   Appeals.
1242.99   Penalty; equitable remedies.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Land outside a municipal corporation; approval - see Ohio R.C. 711.041
   Planning Commission or legislative approval of plat; petition for recording;
village subdivision regulations - see Ohio R.C. 711.09
   Planning Commission - see P. & Z.
Ch. 1220
   Definitions - see P. & Z.
1240.12
§ 1242.01  ADMINISTRATION.
   These subdivision regulations shall be administered by the Planning
Commission. The Commission shall have final approval on all plats except for
the provisions therefor in
Chapter 1250, which shall be approved by the Municipal or County Engineer or
the County Board of Health, whoever or whichever has jurisdiction.
(Ord. 74-O-129, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1242.02  RECORDING OF PLATS BEFORE APPROVAL.
   No plat of any subdivision shall be recorded by the County Recorder or have
any validity until such plat has received final approval in the manner
prescribed in these subdivision regulations.
(Ord. 74-O-129, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1242.03  REVISION OF PLATS AFTER APPROVAL.
   No change, erasure, modification or revision shall be made in any plat of a
subdivision after approval has been given by the Planning Commission and
endorsed in writing on the plat, unless the plat is first resubmitted to the
Commission.
(Ord. 74-O-129, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1242.04  SALE OF LAND WITHIN SUBDIVISIONS.
   No owner or agent of the owner of any lot or parcel located within a
subdivision shall transfer or sell any land by reference to, or exhibition or
use of, a plat of the subdivision, before such plat has been approved and
recorded in the manner prescribed in these subdivision regulations. The
description of such lot or parcel by metes and bounds in the instrument of
transfer or other document used in the process of selling or transferring shall
not exempt the seller from conforming with these subdivision regulations.
(Ord. 74-O-129, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1242.05  FEES.
   (a)   Minor subdivision (lot split).  For the review of minor subdivision
plans, there is a minimum fee of twenty dollars ($20.00) for each subdivision.
   (b)   Preliminary plan review.  For the review of preliminary plans of a
subdivision, there is a minimum fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) for each
subdivision, plus two dollars ($2.00) for each lot in excess of five lots.
   (c)   Final plat examination.  For the examination of final plats of a
subdivision, there is a minimum fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) for each plat,
plus two dollars ($2.00) for each lot in excess of five lots.
(Ord. 74-O-129, passed 10-17-1974; Ord. 02-O-1980, passed 12-17-2002)
§ 1242.06  VARIANCES.
   The following regulations shall govern the granting of variances.
   (a)   Where the Planning Commission finds that extraordinary and unnecessary
hardship may result from strict compliance with these subdivision regulations
due to exceptional topographic or other physical conditions, it may vary such
regulations so as to relieve such hardship, provided that such relief may be
granted without detriment to the public interest and without impairing the
intent and purpose of these subdivision regulations or the desirable
development of the neighborhood and community. Such variances shall not have
the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of these subdivision
regulations, the Comprehensive Plan or the Zoning Code.
   (b)   In granting variances or modifications, the Commission may require
such conditions as will, in its judgment, secure substantially the objective of
the standards or requirements so varied or modified. (See
Figure 22 immediately following these subdivision regulations.)
(Ord. 74-O-129, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1242.07  APPEALS.
   Any person who believes that he or she has been aggrieved by any of the
provisions of these subdivision regulations or an action of the Planning
Commission has all the rights of appeal as set forth in Ohio R. C. Chapter 711
or any other applicable section of the Ohio Revised Code.
(Ord. 74-O-129, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1242.99  PENALTY; EQUITABLE REMEDIES.
   The following penalties shall apply to violations of these subdivision
regulations.
   (a)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of these subdivision
regulations or any rule or regulation adopted by Council for the purposes of
setting standards and requiring and securing the construction of improvements
within a subdivision, or fails to comply with any order issued pursuant
thereto, is creating a public nuisance and the creation thereof may be enjoined
and the maintenance thereof may be abated by an action of suit by the
municipality or any resident thereof. Whoever violates any of the provisions of
these subdivision regulations shall forfeit and pay not less than one hundred
fifty dollars ($150.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). Such
sum may be recovered with costs in a civil action brought in the Court of
Common Pleas of the county.
   (b)   A County Recorder who records a plat contrary to any of the provisions
of these subdivision regulations shall forfeit and pay not less than one
hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) to
be recovered with costs in a civil action by the prosecuting attorney in the
name and for the use of the county.
   (c)   Whoever, being the owner or agent of the owner of any land within or
without a municipal corporation, transfers any lot, parcel or tract of such
land from or in accordance with a plat of a subdivision, before such plat has
been recorded in the office of the County Recorder, shall forfeit and pay not
less than one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) nor more than five hundred
dollars ($500.00) for each lot, parcel or tract of land so sold. The
description of such lot, parcel or tract by metes and bounds in the deed or
transfer shall not serve to exempt the seller from the forfeiture provided in
this division. If such land is within a municipal corporation, such sum may be
recovered in a civil action brought in the Court of Common Pleas of the county
by the legal representative of the municipality in the name of the
municipality.
   (d)   Any person who disposes of, offers for sale or leases, in excess of
five years, any lot or part thereof in a subdivision before these subdivision
regulations are complied with shall forfeit and pay not less than one hundred
fifty dollars ($150.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each
lot or part thereof so sold, offered for sale or leased, to be recovered with
costs in a civil action in the name of the Manager for the use of the
municipality.
   (e)   If a developer fails to complete the installation of all improvements
in accordance with the terms and conditions of the agreement therefor, the
municipality, upon proper notice, may complete the same and appropriate such
portion of monies or bonds posted for the faithful performance of such work.
(Ord. 74-O-129, passed 10-17-1974)
CHAPTER 1244:  PROCEDURE FOR MINOR SUBDIVISION APPROVAL (LOT SPLIT)
Section
1244.01   Purpose.
1244.02   Conditions for approval.
1244.03   Sketch plans.
1244.04   Maps and data.
1244.05   Applications for approval.
1244.06   Approval.
1244.07   Fee; filing of deed.
1244.08   Approval period.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Vacating of plats - see Ohio R.C. 711.17 et seq.
   Revision of plats - see Ohio R.C. 711.28 et seq.
   Recording and revision of plats - see P. & Z.
1242.02,
1242.03
   Sale of land within subdivisions - see P. & Z.
1242.04
   Fees - see P. & Z.
1242.05
§ 1244.01  PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to provide a simplified procedure for the
approval of subdivisions which meet the conditions described in §
1244.02.
(Ord. 74-O-129, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1244.02  CONDITIONS FOR APPROVAL.
   Approval without a plat of a minor subdivision may be granted by the
Planning Commission if the proposed division of a parcel of land meets all of
the following conditions.
   (a)   The proposed subdivision is located along an existing public road and
involves no opening, widening or extension of any street or road.
   (b)   Not more than five lots are involved after the original parcel has
been completely subdivided.
   (c)   The proposed subdivision is not contrary to applicable subdivision or
zoning regulations.
   (d)   The property has been surveyed and a sketch plan and legal description
of the property is submitted with the application.
(Ord. 74-O-129, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1244.03  SKETCH PLANS.
   (a)   A sketch plan shall contain a layout of the proposed division of land
and provide sufficient information for the study and determination of proper
integration of the development with the neighborhood and compliance with
municipal codes. (See
Figure 6 immediately following these subdivision regulations.)
   (b)   The sketch plan shall be clearly drawn on eight and one-half inch by
14 inch (or multiple thereof) transparent paper, mylar or cloth at a scale of
not less than 100 feet to the inch and shall show the proposed layout and
dimension of each lot to be recorded.
(Ord. 74-O-129, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1244.04  MAPS AND DATA.
   A developer of a minor subdivision shall submit to the Planning Commission
the following:
   (a)   A vicinity map showing the relationship of the proposed subdivision to
other nearby developments and landmarks;
   (b)   A property map showing by scale and dimension the parcel that is to be
subdivided and all contiguous land of the same ownership, including locations
of structures within 50 feet of the boundaries;
   (c)   Topographic data showing topographic lines and drainage of the
proposed subdivision and of the area within 50 feet thereof, which data may be
shown on the property map or a separate drawing (U.S.G.S. is sufficient);
   (d)   Utility data showing the availability of required utilities, which may
be noted on the property map; and
   (e)   The names of the owner of the parcel and all adjoining property
owners, which may be shown on the property map.
(Ord. 74-O-129, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1244.05  APPLICATIONS FOR APPROVAL.
   An application for approval of a minor subdivision shall be submitted on
forms provided by the Planning Commission, together with three copies of the
maps and data specified in §§
1244.03 and
1244.04, to the Secretary of the Commission. (See
Figure 7 immediately following these subdivision regulations.)
(Ord. 74-O-129, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1244.06  APPROVAL.
   (a)   The Engineer or the authorized representative of the Planning
Commission shall review minor subdivisions and determine whether the
subdivision shall be approved, approved with modifications or disapproved. If
the proposed subdivision is disapproved, the reasons for such disapproval shall
be stated in writing. The Engineer or the authorized representative of the
Commission shall take action within seven working days after the receipt of an
application, or within a mutually agreed upon extension, and he or she shall
report his or her action thereon at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the
Commission.
   (b)   If approval is given, the Engineer or the authorized representative of
the Commission, upon presentation of a deed for the parcel in question, shall
stamp “Approved by the Municipality of Columbiana Planning Commission; no plat
required” and the Engineer or the authorized representative of the Commission
shall sign the deed.
   (c)   If the sketch plan is not approved, the Commission shall state the
condition that shall be complied with before approval may be given or it may
prepare an approved sketch.
(Ord. 74-O-129, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1244.07  FEE; FILING OF DEED.
   When a minor subdivision is approved by the Planning Commission, the
developer shall be charged the fee indicated in §
1242.05, and shall file the deed therefor with the County Recorder.
(Ord. 74-O-129, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1244.08  APPROVAL PERIOD.
   An approval of a minor subdivision shall expire within 120 days unless the
deed therefor has been filed and recorded in the office of the County Recorder.
(Ord. 74-O-129, passed 10-17-1974)
CHAPTER 1246:  PROCEDURE FOR MAJOR SUBDIVISION APPROVAL
Section
1246.01   Purpose.
1246.02   Pre-application meeting.
1246.03   Pre-application sketch contents.
1246.04   Preparation of preliminary plats.
1246.05   Applications for tentative approval of preliminary plat.
1246.06   Preliminary plat form.
1246.07   Preliminary plat contents.
1246.08   Supplementary information to be submitted with preliminary plat.
1246.09   Review of preliminary plat by other public officials and agencies.
1246.10   Filing of preliminary plat; fee.
1246.11   Public hearings.
1246.12   Approval of preliminary plats.
1246.13   Approval period.
1246.14   Preparation of final plats.
1246.15   Applications for approval of final plats.
1246.16   Approval of improvements.
1246.17   Final plat form.
1246.18   Final plat contents.
1246.19   Supplementary information.
1246.20   Filing of final plats.
1246.21   Approval of final plats; refusal of plats.
1246.22   Transmittal of copies.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Vacating of plats - see Ohio R.C. 711.17 et seq.
   Revision of plats - see Ohio R.C. 711.28 et seq.
   Recording and revision of plats - see P. & Z.
1242.02,
1242.03
   Sale of land within subdivisions - see P. & Z.
1242.04
   Fees - see P. & Z.
1242.05
§ 1246.01  PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to specify the procedures that shall be
followed to subdivide land which does not meet all the conditions described in
§
1244.02.
(Ord. 74-O-129, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1246.02  PRE-APPLICATION MEETING.
   The subdivider shall meet with the Planning Commission or its designated
representative prior to submitting the preliminary plat for a major
subdivision. The purpose of this meeting is to discuss early and informally the
purpose and effect of these subdivision regulations and the criteria and
standards contained in the same and to familiarize the developer with the
Comprehensive Development Plan, the Major Thoroughfare Plan, the Parks and
Public Open Space Plan, the Zoning Code and the drainage, sewerage and water
systems for the municipality.
(Ord. 74-O-129, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1246.03  PRE-APPLICATION SKETCH CONTENTS.
   The subdivider shall submit to the Planning Commission a sketch plan,
legibly drawn at a suitable scale and containing the following information (See
Figure 8 immediately following these subdivision regulations):
   (a)   The proposed subdivision in relation to existing community facilities,
thoroughfares and other transportation modes, shopping centers, major
manufacturing establishments and residential developments, which may be
identified on a U.S.G.S. map of the area;
   (b)   The layout of streets, lots and nonresidential sites, such as
commercial, manufacturing, school or recreational uses, within the proposed
subdivision;
   (c)   A notation of the utilities available for extension to the proposed
subdivision, which may be noted on the sketch;
   (d)   The scale and title of the subdivision, the north point and the date;
and
   (e)   The names, addresses and telephone numbers of the owners and
developers.
(Ord. 74-O-129, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1246.04  PREPARATION OF PRELIMINARY PLATS.
   After a tentative agreement has been reached at the pre-application stage,
the subdivider shall prepare and submit a preliminary plat of the proposed
subdivision, which plat shall conform with the requirements set forth in §§
1246.05 through
1246.09. The preliminary plat shall be prepared by a qualified registered
engineer or surveyor.
(Ord. 74-O-129, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1246.05  APPLICATIONS FOR TENTATIVE APPROVAL OF PRELIMINARY PLAT.
   An application for the tentative approval of a preliminary plat shall be
submitted on forms provided by the Planning Commission, together with eight
copies of the preliminary plat and the supplementary information specified in
§§
1246.06 to
1246.09, inclusive, to the Commission. (See
Figure 9 immediately following these subdivision regulations.)
(Ord. 74-O-129, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1246.06  PRELIMINARY PLAT FORM.
   The preliminary plat shall be drawn at a scale of not less than 100 feet to
the inch and shall be on one or more sheets 30 inches by 42 inches in size.
(Ord. 74-O-129, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1246.07  PRELIMINARY PLAT CONTENTS.
   The preliminary plat shall contain the following information (See
Figure 10 immediately following these subdivision regulations):
   (a)   The proposed name of the subdivision, which shall not duplicate or
closely approximate the name of any other subdivision in the municipality or
county;
   (b)   The names of the engineer and/or registered surveyor who prepared the
plat and their appropriate registration numbers and seals;
   (c)   The date of the survey;
   (d)   The scale of the plat and the north point;
   (e)   The boundaries of the subdivision and its acreage;
   (f)   The names of adjacent subdivisions and owners of adjoining parcels of
unsubdivided land and the location of the boundary lines of such subdivisions
and parcels;
   (g)   The locations, widths and names of existing streets, railroad rights-
of-way, easements, parks, permanent buildings and corporation and township
lines and the location of wooded areas and other significant topographic and
natural features within and adjacent to the plat, for a minimum distance of 100
feet;
   (h)   The zoning classification of the tract and adjoining properties and a
description of proposed zoning changes, if any;
   (i)   Existing contours at an interval of not greater than two feet, if the
slope of the ground is 15% or less, and not greater than five feet, if the
slope is more than 15%;
   (j)   A notation of existing sewers, water lines, culverts and other
underground structures and power transmission poles and lines, within and
adjacent to the tract;
   (k)   The locations, names and widths of proposed streets and easements;
   (l)   Building setback lines with dimensions;
   (m)   The layout, numbers and approximate dimensions of each lot and, when a
lot is located on a curved street or when side lot lines are not at 90 degree
angles, the width at the property line;
   (n)   Parcels of land in acres to be reserved for public use or to be
reserved by covenant for residents of the subdivision; and
   (o)   A vicinity map, at a scale of not less than 2,000 feet to the inch,
shall be shown on, or accompany, the preliminary plat. Such map shall show all
existing subdivisions, roads and tract lines and the nearest existing
thoroughfares and shall also show the most advantageous connections between the
roads in the proposed subdivision and those of the neighboring areas.
(Ord. 74-O-129, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1246.08  SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION TO BE SUBMITTED WITH PRELIMINARY PLAT.
   The following information shall be supplied to the Planning Commission in
addition to the requirements enumerated in §
1246.07:
   (a)   A statement of the proposed use of lots, giving the type and number of
dwelling units and the type of business or industry;
   (b)   The location and approximate dimensions of all existing buildings;
   (c)   For commercial and industrial development, the location and size of
proposed parking and loading areas, alleys, pedestrian walks, streets and the
points of vehicular ingress to and egress from the development; and
   (d)   A description of proposed covenants and restrictions.
(Ord. 74-O-129, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1246.09  REVIEW OF PRELIMINARY PLAT BY OTHER PUBLIC OFFICIALS AND AGENCIES.
   (a)   If the proposed subdivision is located in an area not served by a
public water or sanitary sewerage system, the Planning Commission shall
transmit one copy of the maps and data accompanying the application to the
County Board of Health, for a determination of whether or not proposed methods
for the disposal of sewage are adequate and whether or not they will create a
nuisance or pollute the water supply.
   (b)   If the proposed subdivision is located in an unincorporated area
within the one and one-half mile jurisdiction of review by the municipality,
the application for preliminary plat approval shall be submitted to the
Planning Commission and a copy of the maps and data accompanying the
application shall be transmitted to the County Planning Commission, the County
Board of Health, the Sanitary Engineer, the County Engineer and the Board of
Zoning Appeals.
   (c)   If the proposed subdivision is located within 300 feet of the
centerline of a proposed new highway or a highway for which changes are
proposed, as described in the certification to local officials by the Director
of the State Department of Transportation of any land within a radius of 500
feet from the point of intersection of such centerline with any public road or
highway, the Commission shall give notice, by registered or certified mail, to
the Director. The Commission shall not approve the plat for 120 days from the
date the notice is received by the Director. If the Director notifies the
Commission that he or she shall proceed to acquire the land needed, then the
Commission shall refuse to approve the plat. If the Director notifies the
Commission that acquisition at this time is not in the public interest, or upon
the expiration of the 120-day period or any extension thereof agreed upon by
the Director and the property owner, the Commission shall, if the plat is in
conformity with these subdivision regulations, approve the plat.
(Ord. 74-O-129, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1246.10  FILING OF PRELIMINARY PLAT; FEE.
   The preliminary plat shall be considered officially filed on the day it is
received by the Planning Commission and shall be so dated. A filing fee shall
be charged, as indicated in §
1242.05. (See
Figure 11 immediately following these subdivision regulations.)
(Ord. 74-O-129, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1246.11  PUBLIC HEARINGS.
   The Planning Commission, on its own initiative or upon petition by a
resident or neighboring property owner, may, prior to acting on a preliminary
plat of a subdivision, hold a public hearing thereon at such time and upon such
notice as the Commission may designate.
(Ord. 74-O-129, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1246.12  APPROVAL OF PRELIMINARY PLATS.
   The Planning Commission shall forward copies of the preliminary plat to such
officials and agencies as may be necessary for the purposes of study and
recommendation. Such officials and agencies shall include at least the
Municipal or County Engineer and the County Board of Health. After receipt of
reports from the officials and agencies described in §
1246.09, the Commission shall determine if the preliminary plat shall be
approved, approved with modifications or disapproved. (See
Figure 10 immediately following these subdivision regulations.) If a plat is
disapproved, the reasons for such disapproval shall be stated in writing. The
Commission shall act on the preliminary plat within 30 days after filing unless
such time is extended by an agreement with the subdivider. When a preliminary
plat has been approved by the Commission, the Chairperson shall sign all copies
and return one to the subdivider for compliance with final approval
requirements. Approval of the preliminary plat shall be conditioned upon
compliance with all other applicable statutes and ordinances of the
municipality, county or township, whichever has jurisdiction.
(Ord. 74-O-129, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1246.13  APPROVAL PERIOD.
   The approval of the preliminary plat shall be effective for a maximum period
of 12 months and shall guarantee that the terms under which the approval was
granted shall not be affected by changes to these subdivision regulations.
(Ord. 74-O-129, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1246.14  PREPARATION OF FINAL PLATS.
   The subdivider, having received approval of the preliminary plat of the
proposed subdivision, shall submit a final plat of the subdivision and drawings
and specifications of the improvements required therein. The final plat shall
incorporate all changes in the preliminary plat required by the Planning
Commission. Otherwise, the final plat shall conform to the preliminary plat and
may constitute only that portion of the approved preliminary plat which the
subdivider proposes to record and develop at the time. The final plat and
supplementary information shall be prepared by a qualified registered engineer
or surveyor.
(Ord. 74-O-129, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1246.15  APPLICATIONS FOR APPROVAL OF FINAL PLATS.
   An application for approval of a final plat shall be submitted on forms
provided by the Planning Commission, together with five copies of the plat and
the supplementary information specified, to the Commission. (See
Figure 12 immediately following these subdivision regulations.)
(Ord. 74-O-129, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1246.16  APPROVAL OF IMPROVEMENTS.
   Final plat drawings and specifications of improvements shall be a set of
construction and utility plans prepared by a registered professional engineer.
The plans shall include typical sections, plans and profile views, construction
details and estimates of quantities. All typical sections and major engineering
details to be used on a particular street shall be approved in advance by the
Engineer before completion of the plans. Prior to the granting of approval of
the final plat, the subdivider shall install the minimum required improvements
or furnish a surety or certified check for the amount of the estimated
construction cost of the ultimate installation and the initial maintenance of
the improvements. Before the surety is accepted, it shall be approved by the
proper administrative officials. The term of the surety shall extend 12 months
beyond the completion date of the project. (See
Figure 13 immediately following these subdivision regulations.)
(Ord. 74-O-129, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1246.17  FINAL PLAT FORM.
   The final plat shall be legibly drawn in waterproof ink on tracing cloth or
other material of equal permanence. It shall be drawn at a scale of not less
than 100 feet to the inch and shall be on one or more sheets 30 inches by 42
inches in size. If more than one sheet is needed, each sheet shall be numbered
and the relation of one sheet to another clearly shown.
(Ord. 74-O-129, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1246.18  FINAL PLAT CONTENTS.
   The final plat shall contain the following information (See
Figure 14 immediately following these subdivision regulations):
   (a)   The name of the subdivision and its location by section, range and
township or by another number, and the date, north point, scale and acreage;
   (b)   The names and addresses of the subdividers and the professional
engineer and/or registered surveyor who prepared the plat and their appropriate
registration numbers and seals;
   (c)   The plat boundaries, based on accurate traverse, with angular and
linear dimensions; all dimensions, both linear and angular, shall be determined
by an accurate control survey in the field, which must balance and close within
the limit of one in 10,000;
   (d)   The bearings and distances to nearest established street lines or
other recognized permanent monuments;
   (e)   The exact locations, rights-of-way and names of all streets, within
and adjoining the plat, and building setback lines;
   (f)   The radii, internal angles, points of curvature, tangent bearings,
lengths of arcs and lengths of bearings of chords of all applicable streets
within the plat area;
   (g)   All easements and rights-of-way provided for public services or
utilities;
   (h)   All lot numbers and lines with accurate dimensions in feet and
hundredths when lots are located on a curve, the lot width at the building
setback line;
   (i)   The accurate outlines of areas to be dedicated or reserved for public
use or any area to be reserved for the common use of all property owners and
the use and accurate boundary locations for each parcel of land to be
dedicated;
   (j)   A copy of any restrictions and covenants the subdivider intends to
include in the deeds to the lots in the subdivision;
   (k)   A certification by a registered surveyor to the effect that the plat
represents a survey made by him or her and that the monuments shown thereon
exist as located and that all dimensional details are correct;
   (l)   A notarized certification, by the owners, of the adoption of the plat
and the dedication of streets and other public areas;
   (m)   Typical sections and complete profiles of streets and other related
improvements to be constructed in the proposed subdivision; and
   (n)   The location and a description of all monuments and corner pins as
specified in §
1250.04.
(Ord. 74-O-129, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1246.19  SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION.
   The following information shall be supplied in addition to the requirements
in §
1246.18:
   (a)   If a zoning change is involved, certification from the Zoning
Inspector shall be required indicating that the change has been approved and is
in effect.
   (b)   Certification shall be required showing that all required improvements
have been either installed and approved by the proper officials or agencies or
that a bond or other surety has been furnished ensuring the installation and
initial maintenance of the required improvements. (See
Figure 15 immediately following these subdivision regulations.)
(Ord. 74-O-129, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1246.20  FILING OF FINAL PLATS.
   A final plat shall be filed with the Planning Commission not later than 12
months after the date of approval of the preliminary plat. Otherwise, the final
plat shall be considered void unless an extension is requested by the developer
and granted in writing by the Commission.
(Ord. 74-O-129, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1246.21  APPROVAL OF FINAL PLATS; REFUSAL OF PLATS.
   The Planning Commission shall approve or disapprove a final plat within 30
days after it has been filed. Failure of the Commission to act upon the final
plat within such time shall be deemed an approval of the plat. If the final
plat is disapproved, the grounds for disapproval shall be stated in the record
of the Commission and a copy of such record shall be forwarded to the
subdivider. The Commission shall not disapprove the final plat if the developer
has done everything that he or she was required to do and has proceeded in
accordance with the conditions and standards specified in the approved
preliminary plat. If the final plat is disapproved, the subdivider shall make
the necessary corrections and resubmit the final plat within 30 days to the
Commission for its final approval. If a final plat is refused by the
Commission, the person submitting the plat which the Commission refused to
approve may file a petition within ten days after such refusal in the Court of
Common Pleas of the county.
(Ord. 74-O-129, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1246.22  TRANSMITTAL OF COPIES.
   When the final plat has been approved by the Planning Commission, the
original tracing shall be returned to the subdivider for filing with the County
Recorder after all necessary certifications are received. (See
Figure 16 immediately following these subdivision regulations.)
(Ord. 74-O-129, passed 10-17-1974)
CHAPTER 1248:  DESIGN STANDARDS
Section
1248.01   Purpose; responsibility of Planning Commission.
1248.02   Conformity with development plans and Zoning Code required.
1248.03   Suitability of land for development.
1248.04   Street design standards.
1248.05   Special street types and reserve strips.
1248.06   Streets for multi-family developments.
1248.07   Streets for business developments and accessory parking areas.
1248.08   Streets for industrial developments.
1248.09   Horizontal alignment of streets.
1248.10   Vertical alignment of streets.
1248.11   Intersection design and improvement standards.
1248.12   Sidewalks.
1248.13   Blocks.
1248.14   Design and layout of lots.
1248.15   Payment of costs for public sites; preservation of natural features.
1248.16   Easements.
1248.17   Flood areas and storm drainage ditches.
1248.18   Public sites, open spaces and natural features.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Design and construction standards - see P. & Z.
1250.03
   Grading and improvement of streets - see P. & Z.
1250.05 et seq.
   Construction of sidewalks - see P. & Z.
1250.13
   Driveways - see P. & Z.
1250.14
   Usable open space - see P. & Z.
1260.29
§ 1248.01  PURPOSE; RESPONSIBILITY OF PLANNING COMMISSION.
   (a)   The purpose of this chapter is to specify design standards that shall
be followed in the development of subdivisions. The provisions of §§
1248.02 through
1248.17 shall control the manner in which streets, lots and other elements of a
subdivision are arranged on the land. These design controls shall help ensure
convenient and safe streets, the creation of usable lots, the provision of
space for public utilities and the reservation of land for recreational uses.
The planning of attractive and functional neighborhoods shall be promoted,
which minimizes the undesirable features of unplanned, haphazard growth.
   (b)   The Planning Commission has the responsibility for reviewing the
design of each future subdivision early in its design development. The
Commission shall ensure that all of the requirements of §§
1248.02 through
1248.17 are met. (See
Figure 17 immediately following these subdivision regulations.)
(Ord. 74-O-129, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1248.02  CONFORMITY WITH DEVELOPMENT PLANS AND ZONING CODE REQUIRED.
   The arrangement, character, width and location of all arterial and collector
thoroughfares or extensions thereof shall conform to the Major Thoroughfare
Plan. Thoroughfares not contained in such Plan shall conform to the
recommendation of the Planning Commission based upon the design standards set
forth in §§
1248.05 through
1248.10. In addition, no final plat of land within the area in which the Zoning
Code is in effect shall be approved unless it conforms to such Code.
(Ord. 74-O-129, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1248.03  SUITABILITY OF LAND FOR DEVELOPMENT.
   If the Planning Commission finds that the land proposed to be subdivided is
unsuitable for subdivision development due to flooding, bad drainage,
topography, inadequate water supply, schools, transportation facilities and
other such conditions which may endanger health, life or property, and if, from
investigations conducted by the public agencies concerned, it is determined
that, in the best interest of the public, the land should not be developed for
the purpose proposed, the Commission shall not approve the land for
subdivision, unless adequate methods are advanced by the subdivider for solving
the problems that will be created by such development.
(Ord. 74-O-129, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1248.04  STREET DESIGN STANDARDS.
   (a)   In general.  The arrangement, character and location of all streets
shall conform to the Major Thoroughfare Plan, as amended, and be considered in
relation to existing and planned streets, topographical conditions and public
convenience and safety, as well as in their appropriate relation to the
proposed uses of the land to be served by such streets. The street pattern
shall discourage through traffic in the interior of a subdivision. The
subdivider shall provide, within the boundaries of the subdivision plat, the
necessary rights-of-way for the widening, continuance or alignment of such
streets, in conformity with such Plan.
   (b)   Local streets.  All local streets shall be designed and constructed in
accordance with the standards specified in
Figure 18 immediately following these subdivision regulations.
   (c)   Collector streets.  All collector streets shall be designed and
constructed in accordance with the standards specified in
Figure 18 immediately following these subdivision regulations.
   (d)   Arterial streets.  All arterial streets shall be designed and
constructed in accordance with the standards specified in
Figure 18 immediately following these subdivision regulations. No local street
or driveway shall intersect an arterial street. Marginal access roads shall be
provided, when necessary, in accordance with §
1248.05(c). Only collector streets shall intersect arterial streets and the
minimum spacing between such streets shall be not less than 1,320 feet.
(Ord. 74-O-129, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1248.05  SPECIAL STREET TYPES AND RESERVE STRIPS.
   The following requirements shall apply to special street types and reserve
strips:
   (a)   Dead-end streets.  Permanent dead-end streets are not permitted.
Temporary dead-end streets shall be permitted only as a part of a continuing
street plan and only if a temporary turn-around, satisfactory to the Planning
Commission in design, is provided and provisions for maintenance and removal
are advanced. Temporary dead-end streets longer than 200 feet are not
permitted.
   (b)   Half streets.  Dedication of new half streets is not permitted. Where
a dedicated or platted half street exists adjacent to the tract being
subdivided, the other half shall be platted.
   (c)   Marginal access streets.  Where a subdivision adjoins an arterial
street, a marginal access street shall be designed, if the subdivision design
is such that residential lots would require direct vehicular access onto the
arterial street. Points of access to the arterial street shall be spaced at a
minimum of 1,320 feet. A planting strip having a minimum width of 20 feet shall
be provided between the pavement of the arterial street and the pavement of the
marginal access street. The minimum width of the marginal access right-of-way
shall be 50 feet.
   (d)   Alleys.  Alleys shall not be approved in residential subdivisions,
except where justified by extreme conditions. Alleys may be required in
commercial and industrial districts if other provisions cannot be made for
adequate service access. The minimum widths for alleys shall be 20 feet for the
right- of-way and 18 feet for the pavement width.
   (e)   Reserve strips.  Reserve strips adjoining streets, or other provisions
to control access or extensions of pavement and/or utilities to another
property, are not permitted, except where provisions for the control and
disposal of land comprising such strips have been assigned to the municipality
under conditions approved by the Commission.
(Ord. 74-O-129, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1248.06  STREETS FOR MULTI-FAMILY DEVELOPMENTS.
   Streets serving multi-family developments shall be planned to connect with
major or secondary streets and so as not to generate large volumes of traffic
on local residential streets. Vehicular and pedestrian access shall be adequate
and convenient to each dwelling unit and planned so that a street, service
drive, parking area or delivery area shall be located not more than 100 feet
from every main or service entrance of a building.
(Ord. 74-O-129, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1248.07  STREETS FOR BUSINESS DEVELOPMENTS AND ACCESSORY PARKING AREAS.
   Streets serving business developments and accessory parking areas shall be
planned to connect with arterial streets so as not to generate traffic on local
streets. The intersections of driveways, from parking areas, with arterial or
collector streets shall be located not less than 100 feet from the intersection
of an arterial or collector street with any other street so as to cause the
least possible interference with traffic movement on the streets and shall be
spaced not less than 200 feet from each other. The Planning Commission may
require marginal access streets to provide maximum safety and convenience.
Parking areas serving adjoining business establishments shall be interconnected
by drives and designed to provide maximum safety and convenience to
pedestrians.
(Ord. 74-O-129, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1248.08  STREETS FOR INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENTS.
   Collector streets for industrial developments shall be planned to serve
industrial areas exclusively and shall connect with arterial streets so that no
industrial traffic will be directed into any residential street. The
intersections of service streets, from parking areas, with arterial or
collector streets shall be not less than 100 feet from the intersection of the
arterial or collector street with any other street. Streets shall be planned to
be extended to the boundaries of any adjoining land planned for industry,
except under severe physical conditions or if the Planning Commission finds
that such extension is not in accordance with the approved plan of the area.
(Ord. 74-O-129, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1248.09  HORIZONTAL ALIGNMENT OF STREETS.
   Where there is an angle of deflection of more than ten degrees between two
centerline tangent sections of a street, a curve of adequate radius shall
connect them. Between reverse curves, a minimum tangent of 100 feet shall be
introduced.
(Ord. 74-O-129, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1248.10  VERTICAL ALIGNMENT OF STREETS.
   (a)   All changes of grade shall be connected by vertical curves of a
minimum length in feet equal to 20 times the algebraic difference in the rate
of grade for arterial and industrial streets and, for collector and local
streets, 15 times the algebraic difference in the rate of grade.
   (b)   The minimum vertical visibility of streets shall conform to the
regulations of the State Department of Transportation in effect on the date of
the approval of the preliminary plat.
   (c)   No street grade shall be less than 0.6% and in no case shall a street
grade be more than 3% within 100 feet of an intersection.
(Ord. 74-O-129, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1248.11  INTERSECTION DESIGN AND IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS.
   (a)   The design and improvement standards for intersections are suggested
minimums for all street intersections in subdivisions. All such intersections
shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the standards specified in
Figure 19 immediately following these subdivision regulations.
   (b)   Multiple intersections involving junctions of more than two streets
shall be avoided.
   (c)   Four-way intersections of local streets should be avoided and three-
way or “T” intersections should be encouraged wherever possible.
(Ord. 74-O-129, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1248.12  SIDEWALKS.
   (a)   Sidewalks shall be required on both sides of the street in all
residential subdivisions where the predominant lot width is less than 100 feet
and on one side where the predominant lot width is greater than 100 feet but
less than 150 feet. No sidewalk shall normally be required where the
predominant lot width is greater than 150 feet.
   (b)   Public sidewalks shall be required for all commercial lots, subject to
the approval of the Planning Commission.
   (c)   Public sidewalks may be required for industrial lots, subject to the
approval of the Planning Commission.
(Ord. 74-O-129, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1248.13  BLOCKS.
   The following regulations shall govern the design and layout of blocks:
   (a)   The arrangement of blocks shall be such as to conform to the street
planning criteria set forth in §§
1248.04 through
1248.11 and shall be arranged to accommodate lots and building sites of the
size and character required for the district in which they are located, as set
forth in these subdivision regulations or in the Zoning Code, and to provide
for the required community facilities.
   (b)   Irregularly shaped blocks, those intended for cul-de-sacs or loop
streets, and those containing interior parks or playgrounds, may be approved by
the Planning Commission if the same are properly designed and located and if
the maintenance of interior public spaces is covered by agreements.
   (c)   No block shall be longer than 1,500 feet. The block width shall
accommodate two tiers of lots, except where unusual topography or other
exceptional physical circumstances exist.
   (d)   Where blocks are over 900 feet in length, a crosswalk easement not
less than ten feet in width, at or near the halfway point, may be required, if
necessary, to provide proper access to schools, recreational areas, shopping
centers and other facilities.
(Ord. 74-O-129, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1248.14  DESIGN AND LAYOUT OF LOTS.
   The following regulations shall govern the design and layout of lots:
   (a)   Lot arrangement and design shall be such that all lots shall provide
satisfactory building sites, properly related to topography and the character
of the surrounding development.
   (b)   All lots shall conform to or exceed the requirements of these
subdivision regulations and the zoning district requirements for the district
in which they are located and the use for which they are intended.
   (c)   Each lot shall front on a public thoroughfare. Minimum lot sizes,
widths and setbacks shall be as specified in the Zoning Code.
   (d)   All side lot lines shall be at right angles to street lines and radial
to curved street lines, except where the Planning Commission determines that a
variation to this rule would provide a better layout.
   (e)   Lots with double frontage shall be avoided, except where the
Commission determines that it is essential to provide a separation of a
residential development from arterial streets.
   (f)   No corner lot shall have a width at the building line of less than 75
feet.
   (g)   No lot shall have an average depth which is more than two and one-half
times its average width, nor shall it have a depth of less than 120 feet,
except that whenever a lot fronts upon an exterior curved portion of a street,
the centerline radius of which is 100 feet or less than the required minimum
lot depth, such lot depth may be reduced to not less than 110 feet.
(Ord. 74-O-129, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1248.15  PAYMENT OF COSTS FOR PUBLIC SITES; PRESERVATION OF NATURAL FEATURES.
   The subdivider shall pay for only that portion of the cost of the public
site that benefits his or her subdivision, as determined by the Planning
Commission. Every subdivider of land for subdivisions not containing public
sites shall be requested to provide land or payment in lieu thereof for that
portion of benefits from public sites accruing to his or her land, as
determined by the Commission. The Commission shall, whenever possible,
establish the preservation of all natural features which add value to
residential developments and to the community, such as large wooded areas,
watercourses, beaches, areas of historical significance and similar
irreplaceable assets.
(Ord. 74-O-129, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1248.16  EASEMENTS.
   Easements at least 20 feet in width centered along rear or side lot lines
shall be provided where necessary for sanitary sewers, gas mains, water lines
and electric lines. Easements shall also be provided along every watercourse,
storm sewer, drainage channel or stream within a subdivision, as provided for
in §
1248.17.
(Ord. 74-O-129, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1248.17  FLOOD AREAS AND STORM DRAINAGE DITCHES.
   (a)   In order to protect the health, safety and general welfare of the
people, the Planning Commission shall reject any proposed subdivision located
in an area subject to periodic flooding. If the subdivision is located in an
area having poor drainage or other adverse physical characteristics, the
Commission may approve the subdivision, provided that the subdivider agrees to
perform such improvements as will render the area safe for the intended use. In
lieu of improvements, the subdivider shall furnish a surety or certified check
covering the cost of the required improvements.
   (b)   Flood control or storm drainage facilities shall be provided as
follows:
      (1)   Access to flood control or storm drainage ditches and channels
shall be by means of easements. Such easements shall be not less than 30 feet
in width, exclusive of the width of the ditch or channel. An easement of this
type shall be provided on one side of a flood control or storm drainage ditch,
channel or similar type of facility.
      (2)   Flood control or storm drainage easements containing underground
facilities shall have a minimum width of ten feet.
      (3)   Whenever a flood control or storm drainage ditch or channel has a
depth of five feet or more, or a bank slope of two feet horizontal to one foot
vertical or steeper, a five-feet high masonry wall or a five-feet high chain
link fence may be required by the Planning Commission.
(Ord. 74-O-129, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1248.18  PUBLIC SITES, OPEN SPACES AND NATURAL FEATURES.
   Where a park, playground, or school or public access to a water frontage
which is shown in the Comprehensive Development Plan is located in whole or in
part in a proposed subdivision, the Planning Commission shall request the
dedication of such area within the subdivision.
(Ord. 74-O-129, passed 10-17-1974)
CHAPTER 1250:  CONSTRUCTION OF IMPROVEMENTS
Section
1250.01   Purpose; responsibility of Engineer.
1250.02   Construction or guarantee for installation of improvements required.
1250.03   Design and construction standards; inspection costs.
1250.04   Monuments, markers and pins.
1250.05   Grading and improvement of streets.
1250.06   Street width.
1250.07   Street subgrades.
1250.08   Street base courses.
1250.09   Street surface courses.
1250.10   Portland cement concrete pavements.
1250.11   Full-depth asphalt pavements.
1250.12   Curbs and gutters.
1250.13   Sidewalks.
1250.14   Driveways.
1250.15   Street name signs; naming of streets.
1250.16   Street and walkway lighting.
1250.17   Street trees.
1250.18   Water supply.
1250.19   Fire hydrants; water lines.
1250.20   Sanitary sewers.
1250.21   Drainage.
1250.22   Storm sewers and storm water drainage.
1250.23   Culverts and bridges.
1250.24   Electric, gas and telephone improvements.
1250.25   Oversize and off-site improvements.
1250.26   Cost of oversize improvements.
1250.27   Extensions to boundaries.
1250.28   Off-site extensions.
1250.29   Final inspections.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Inspection of construction; acceptance by municipality - see Ohio R.C.
711.091
   Street design standards - see P. & Z.
1248.04 et seq.
   Design standards for sidewalks - see P. & Z.
1248.12
   Design and layout of blocks and lots - see P. & Z.
1248.13,
1248.14
§ 1250.01  PURPOSE; RESPONSIBILITY OF ENGINEER.
   The purpose of this chapter is to provide standards for the construction of
improvements within subdivisions. The Municipal or County Engineer, whoever or
whichever has jurisdiction, shall ensure that all requirements of §§
1250.02 through
1250.28 are complied with. (See
Figure 17 immediately following these subdivision regulations.)
(Ord. 74-O-129, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1250.02  CONSTRUCTION OR GUARANTEE FOR INSTALLATION OF IMPROVEMENTS REQUIRED.
   All improvements required under this chapter shall be constructed prior to
the granting of the final plat approval by the Planning Commission, or the
subdivider shall furnish the Commission with a surety or certified check for
the amount of the estimated construction cost for the ultimate installation and
initial maintenance of the improvements.
(Ord. 74-O-129, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1250.03  DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS; INSPECTION COSTS.
   A subdivider shall design and construct improvements according to standards
not less than those outlined in these subdivision regulations. The work shall
be done under municipal supervision and inspection and shall be completed
within the time fixed or agreed upon by the Municipal Engineer. The minimum
requirements for materials shall be in accordance with the standards of the
current edition of Construction and Material Specifications of the State of
Ohio Department of Transportation and the requirements of the State Department
of Health. All inspection costs shall be paid by the subdivider.
(Ord. 74-O-129, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1250.04  MONUMENTS, MARKERS AND PINS.
   Permanent concrete monuments shall be accurately set and established at the
intersections of all outside boundary lines of the subdivision, at the
intersections of such boundary lines with all street lines, at the beginning
and end of all curves, at points on curves where the radius or direction
changes, and at such other points as are necessary to establish definitely all
lines of the plat, including all lot corners. Stone or concrete monuments shall
be at least 36 inches long and at least six inches in diameter and shall be
provided with an appropriate center point. Solid iron pins or iron pipe
monuments at least one inch in diameter and at least 30 inches long may be used
at all other points.
(Ord. 74-O-129, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1250.05  GRADING AND IMPROVEMENT OF STREETS.
   All streets shall be graded to their full width, including side slopes, and
improved in conformity with the standards given or referred to in these
subdivision regulations.
(Ord. 74-O-129, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1250.06  STREET WIDTH.
   Minimum street pavement widths shall conform to the standards given in
Figure 18 immediately following these subdivision regulations. Where pavement
widths greater than those specified in
Figure 18 are deemed necessary by the Municipal Engineer and approved by
Council, the municipality shall bear the extra cost of providing greater than
the minimum pavement width required by these subdivision regulations.
(Ord. 74-O-129, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1250.07  STREET SUBGRADES.
   Street subgrades shall be free of sod, vegetative or organic matter, soft
clay and other objectional materials for a depth of at least two feet below the
finished surface. Such subgrades shall be properly rolled, shaped and compacted
and shall be subject to the approval of the Municipal Engineer.
(Ord. 74-O-129, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1250.08  STREET BASE COURSES.
   A developer has the option of using any of the following base courses, based
upon recommendations of the Municipal Engineer as to soil and traffic
conditions: aggregate, bituminous aggregate, asphaltic concrete, water-bound
macadam, portland cement concrete or another equally suitable base course.
Thickness shall be determined by the Municipal Engineer, based upon the
physical properties of the base course used and the physical properties of the
roadbed. Normally, the standards specified in
Figure 20 immediately following these subdivision regulations shall be
considered minimum.
(Ord. 74-O-129, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1250.09  STREET SURFACE COURSES.
   Upon the expiration of the established maintenance period for a street base
course, a surface course shall be constructed using either asphaltic concrete,
bituminous mix or portland cement concrete. Specific material and thickness
recommendations shall be determined by the Municipal Engineer, based upon
traffic conditions.
(Ord. 74-O-129, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1250.10  PORTLAND CEMENT CONCRETE PAVEMENTS.
   If a subdivider elects to construct streets totally of portland cement
concrete or if such a pavement is required by the Municipal Engineer, a
thickness of six inches for local and collector streets and seven inches for
arterial, commercial and industrial streets is required. The Planning
Commission may require pavement of greater thickness, upon the recommendation
of the Municipal Engineer, based upon his or her evaluation of the subgrade,
traffic and wheel load conditions.
(Ord. 74-O-129, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1250.11  FULL-DEPTH ASPHALT PAVEMENTS.
   If streets are to be constructed out of full-depth asphalt, an asphalt
pavement in which asphalt-aggregate mixtures are used for all courses above the
subgrade, a careful inspection of the subgrade may be necessary to determine
pavement thicknesses. For local streets, pavements may vary from four to six
inches depending upon subgrade conditions. For collector streets, pavements may
vary from five to nine inches, and for arterial and industrial streets, from
six to 11 inches.
(Ord. 74-O-129, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1250.12  CURBS AND GUTTERS.
   The requirements for curbs and gutters shall vary according to the character
of the area and the density of development. In areas of notable flash flooding
or heavy rain run-off, curbs shall be required to channel the flow of water.
Curbs shall be required on all streets designed for areas where the existing or
anticipated residential density of the area surrounding the proposed
subdivision equals or exceeds three dwelling units per acre. In commercial
developments, or where other similar intensive urban uses exist or are
anticipated, curbs shall be required. Where curbs exist on abutting properties,
their extension shall be required throughout the proposed subdivision. Curbs,
combined curbs and gutters shall be constructed in conformity with the current
edition of Construction and Material Specifications of the State of Ohio
Department of Transportation.
(Ord. 74-O-129, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1250.13  SIDEWALKS.
   All sidewalks shall be constructed of portland cement concrete or other
acceptable material to the minimum width specified in
Figure 18 immediately following these subdivision regulations and a minimum
depth of four inches.
(Ord. 74-O-129, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1250.14  DRIVEWAYS.
   Driveways shall have a maximum grade of 10%. Driveways and curb cuts shall
be located not less than three feet from a side lot line. Curb cuts for
straight curbs and the flair for rolled curbs shall be three feet wider than
the driveway paving on each side. All driveways constructed after June 15,
1993, in conjunction with new home construction shall be constructed of
blacktop, concrete, brick or other similar material over a properly constructed
driveway base, which shall be approved as to composition and thickness by the
Municipal Engineer.
(Ord. 93-O-1370, passed 7-6-1993)
§ 1250.15  STREET NAME SIGNS; NAMING OF STREETS.
   (a)   Street name signs, of a type in use throughout the municipality, shall
be erected by the subdivider at all intersections.
   (b)   For purposes of street naming, the following system shall be used:
 
General Direction Long Continuous Short Disconnected
North-south       Streets         Courts
East-west         Avenues         Places
Diagonal          Roads           Ways
Curving           Drives          Lanes or Circles
 
   (c)   Whenever a new street is constructed along the approximate alignment
or extension of an existing street, its name shall be the same as that of the
existing one.
   (d)   Whenever a street alignment changes direction more than 75 degrees
without a return to the original alignment within a distance of 500 feet, the
name of the street shall be changed at the point of curvature.
   (e)   Whenever a cul-de-sac street serves not more than three lots, the name
of the intersecting street shall apply to the cul-de-sac.
   (f)   To avoid duplication and confusion, the proposed names of all streets
shall be approved by the municipality or County Engineer, whoever or whichever
has jurisdiction, prior to such names being assigned or used. Street names
shall not duplicate or be confused with names of existing streets in northern
Columbiana or southern Mahoning Counties.
(Ord. 74-O-129, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1250.16  STREET AND WALKWAY LIGHTING.
   (a)   A subdivider shall install street and walkway lights in accordance
with standards and specifications of the Municipal Engineer in each residential
subdivision which contains a majority of lots with an individual lot width of
100 feet or less at the front property line. Such lights shall be located at
each street and walkway entrance to the subdivision and in each street
intersection within the subdivision. In addition, wherever the distance between
two adjacent street or walkway lights would exceed 300 feet, then additional
street lights shall be installed in such a manner that proper light intensity
shall be provided and maintained.
   (b)   New subdivision street and walkway lighting shall be installed with
all associated wiring underground.
(Ord. 74-O-129, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1250.17  STREET TREES.
   Trees should be provided by the subdivider in all subdivisions where curbs,
gutters and sidewalks are required, in accordance with the following standards.
   (a)   No tree shall be planted or replaced in tree lawns or curb strips less
than three feet wide, and only those trees named in the list approved by the
Planning Commission may be planted in the tree lawn. (See
Figure 21 immediately following these subdivision regulations.)
   (b)   Trees appearing on the approved list, but requiring a wider tree lawn
than three feet, may be planted only in tree lawns having a sufficient width to
meet the minimum width specified for any certain species.
   (c)   No tree shall be planted closer than 30 feet apart within the tree
lawn. Those varieties indicated in the approved list as having a wider spread
than 30 feet shall be planted at least as far apart as the distance of spread.
   (d)   No tree shall be planted nearer than ten feet from any utility pole,
fire hydrant or driveway.
   (e)   No tree shall be planted nearer than 20 feet from the intersection of
two streets.
   (f)   Existing trees should be retained in new subdivisions whenever
possible.
(Ord. 74-O-129, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1250.18  WATER SUPPLY.
   Water shall be supplied for each lot as required for the district, as
follows:
   (a)   When a subdivision is located in a district requiring a public water
supply and a public main is reasonably accessible, a water system shall be
provided for domestic use and fire protection and a connection for each lot
shall be made upon application for a building permit.
   (b)   When a subdivision is located in a district requiring a public water
supply and a public main is not available, the Planning Commission may permit
the installation of a community water supply, complying with municipality or
county standards, for domestic use and fire protection and a connection for
each lot shall be made upon application for a building permit.
   (c)   When a subdivision is located in a district permitting private wells,
such facilities shall be provided for each lot.
   (d)   A public water system shall be designed and constructed in accordance
with the standards of the municipality or county. A community water system or
private wells shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the
standards of the County Board of Health.
(Ord. 74-O-129, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1250.19  FIRE HYDRANTS; WATER LINES.
   (a)   Fire hydrants with two and one-half inch outlets and one large pumping
connection shall be provided by the subdivider in all subdivisions with public
water supplies. The hydrants should be located between property lines and curbs
with all outlets facing or parallel to the street. Hydrants shall be placed at
the corners of all blocks and at mid-block for blocks exceeding 800 feet in
length. Hydrants shall also be required at the entrance and end of all cul-de-
sacs exceeding 400 feet in length.
   (b)   The type of hydrant and control valves and the location of the hydrant
shall be approved by the Fire Chief. The minimum size of any water line serving
a hydrant shall be six inches in diameter and it should be a circulating water
line. The size and location of water lines should be approved by the Municipal
Engineer, the Fire Chief and the Ohio Inspection Bureau for commercial and
industrial subdivisions.
(Ord. 74-O-129, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1250.20  SANITARY SEWERS.
   The following requirements shall govern sanitary sewer improvements:
   (a)   When an adequate public sanitary sewerage system is reasonably
accessible, in the determination of the Planning Commission, public sanitary
sewers shall be installed to adequately serve all lots, including lateral
connections to the public system. Public sewerage system extensions shall meet
the requirements of the State Department of Health and municipality or county
standards. Combinations of sanitary sewers and storm sewers are prohibited.
   (b)   When a public sanitary sewerage system is not reasonably accessible,
the subdivider may provide:
      (1)   A central treatment plant for the group, provided that such central
treatment plant is installed in accordance with State Department of Health and
County Board of Health requirements, and provided, further, that such a system
is designed and the plant located so that it can be integrated into a master
sewer plan when trunk lines are installed; or
      (2)   Lots which may be served by individual disposal systems if approved
by the County Board of Health or Sanitary Engineer.
   (c)   (1)   When the installation of individual disposal systems is
considered, the suitability of the soil for individual systems, the absorptive
ability of the soil, surface drainage, ground water level and topography shall
be the criteria for determining whether or not the installation of individual
systems is permissible. Criteria shall be in accordance with the requirements
of the County Board of Health and the State Department of Health. However, in
no instance shall the outlet open into a storm sewerage system.
      (2)   Each lot so served shall be of a size and shape to accommodate the
necessary length of tile field at a safe distance from, and at a lower
elevation than, a proposed building. Such lot size and shape shall conform to
the requirements of the zoning district in which such lot is located.
      (3)    At least one percolation test may be required for each lot area
being platted. Each test shall be located in close proximity to the proposed
individual sewage disposal unit, numbered and its location shown on the
preliminary plat. All percolation tests shall be performed in accordance with
the requirements of the County Board of Health.
      (4)    When the installation of individual disposal units is considered
and the average natural ground slope exceeds 10%, the installation of a step-up
disposal system may be required, subject to the specifications of the County
Board of Health.
(Ord. 74-O-129, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1250.21  DRAINAGE.
   A subdivider shall construct all necessary facilities, including underground
pipes, inlets, catch basins or open drainage ditches, as determined by the
Municipal Engineer, to provide for the adequate disposal of subsurface and
surface water and the maintenance of natural drainage courses. The velocity of
flow in an open ditch shall not exceed four feet per second in soil ditches or
six feet per second in turf gutters. Paved gutters shall be required if
velocities of flow are greater than those specified or if it is otherwise
likely that destructive erosion will result. Drainage ditches shall not be
permitted to discharge into any sanitary sewer facility. The grading of streets
shall extend the full width of the right-of-way. Tree lawns shall be graded at
a gradient of not less than 2% nor more than 5% upward from the curb to the
sidewalk. Where necessary, grading shall be extended into adjoining lots to
eliminate abrupt grade changes.
(Ord. 74-O-129, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1250.22  STORM SEWERS AND STORM WATER DRAINAGE.
   When an adequate public storm sewer is available at a plat boundary, the
subdivider shall construct a storm sewerage system and connect such system with
the line of such public storm sewer. If such a public storm sewer is not
accessible, natural drainage channels with easements of adequate width shall be
provided, as determined by the Municipal Engineer and approved by the Planning
Commission. Paved gutters or storm sewers shall be required if velocities of
flow are greater than specified in §
1250.21 or cause destructive erosion. Storm drainage, including drain tile
around basements, shall not be permitted to discharge into any sanitary sewer
facility, but shall connect to an adequate drainage outlet.
(Ord. 74-O-129, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1250.23  CULVERTS AND BRIDGES.
   Where natural drainage channels intersect a street right-of-way, the
subdivider shall have satisfactory bridges and/or culverts constructed. Where
culverts are required, the following minimum requirements shall be observed.
   (a)   All culverts shall extend across the entire right-of-way width of the
proposed street. The cover over the culvert and its capacity shall be
determined by the Municipal Engineer. The minimum diameter of a culvert pipe
shall be 18 inches. Depending on existing drainage conditions, head walls may
be required.
   (b)   Driveway culverts shall have a minimum length of 20 feet and a minimum
diameter of 12 inches. Driveway culverts shall be laid so as to maintain the
flow lines of the ditch or gutter. Head walls may be required.
(Ord. 74-O-129, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1250.24  ELECTRIC, GAS AND TELEPHONE IMPROVEMENTS.
   (a)   Electric service and telephone service shall be provided within each
subdivision. Gas service may be required where reasonably accessible and
available. Whenever such facilities are reasonably accessible and available,
they may be required to be installed within the area prior to the approval of
the final plat. Telephone, electric and street lighting wires, conduits and
cables shall be constructed underground, except in cases where the Municipal
Engineer determines that topographic, bedrock or underground water conditions
would result in excessive costs to the subdivider.
   (b)   Overhead utility lines, where permitted, shall be located at the rear
of all lots. The width of the easement per lot shall be not less than five feet
and the total easement width shall be not less than ten feet.
   (c)   Whenever a sanitary sewer line and an electric and/or telephone line
are each placed underground in the same utility easement, the following
provisions are applicable:
      (1)   The total easement width shall be not less than 20 feet.
      (2)   The sanitary sewer line shall be installed within three feet of one
side of the easement and the electric and/or telephone lines shall be installed
within three feet of the opposite side of the easement.
(Ord. 74-O-129, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1250.25  OVERSIZE AND OFF-SITE IMPROVEMENTS.
   The utilities, pavements and other land improvements required for a proposed
subdivision shall be designed of oversize and/or with extensions provided to
serve nearby land which is an integral part of the neighborhood service or
drainage area, as determined by the municipality or County Engineer, whoever or
whichever has jurisdiction.
(Ord. 74-O-129, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1250.26  COST OF OVERSIZE IMPROVEMENTS.
   A subdivider shall be required to pay for only that part of the construction
costs for the arterial streets, trunk sewers or water lines which are serving
the proposed subdivision, as determined by the municipality or County Engineer.
The municipality or county shall pay the difference between the cost of the
required improvements for the proposed subdivision and the improvements
required to service the surrounding areas specified in §
1250.24.
(Ord. 74-O-129, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1250.27  EXTENSIONS TO BOUNDARIES.
   A subdivider may be required to extend the necessary improvements to the
boundary of the proposed subdivision, to serve adjoining unsubdivided land, as
determined by the Planning Commission.
(Ord. 74-O-129, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1250.28  OFF-SITE EXTENSIONS.
   If streets or utilities are not available at the boundary of a proposed
subdivision, and if the Planning Commission finds that the extension across
undeveloped areas would not be warranted as a special assessment to intervening
properties or as a municipal expense until some future time, the subdivider may
be required, prior to approval of the final plat, to obtain necessary easements
or rights-of-way and construct and pay for such extensions. Such improvements
shall be available for connections by subdividers of adjoining lands.
(Ord. 74-O-129, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1250.29  FINAL INSPECTIONS.
   Upon completion of all improvements, a subdivider shall request, in writing,
a final inspection by the Municipal or County Engineer, whoever or whichever
has jurisdiction, as required by Ohio R.C. 711.091.
(Ord. 74-O-129, passed 10-17-1974)
FIGURE 1
GENERALIZED JURISDICTIONAL AREA
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/0e290f4930aa9d300d35a8df8a0eb049dd62f83c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3376.jpg]
 
Click_here_to_view_Figure_1_in_a_PDF_document.
FIGURE 2
TYPES OF LOTS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/0e290f4930aa9d300d35a8df8a0eb049dd62f83c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3379.jpg]
 
Click_here_to_view_Figure_2_in_a_PDF_document.
FIGURE 3
LOT TERMS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/0e290f4930aa9d300d35a8df8a0eb049dd62f83c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3382.jpg]
 
Click_here_to_view_Figure_3_in_a_PDF_document.
FIGURE 4
EXAMPLE OF SUBDIVISION
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/0e290f4930aa9d300d35a8df8a0eb049dd62f83c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3385.jpg]
 
1.   15 foot easement for planting screen to provide protection from non-
residential use.
2.   10 foot walk easement gives access to school.
3.   Cul-de-sac utilizes odd parcel of lend to advantage.
4.   Turn-around right-of-way 100 feet in diameter.
5.   Street trees planted approximately 50 feet apart where no trees exist.
6.   Additional building setback improves subdivision entrance.
7.   Street intersections of right angles reduce hazards.
8.   Lot aide line centered on street end to avoid car lights shining into
residence.
9.   Residences opposite street end set back farther to reduce glare from car
lights.
10.   Three-way intersections reduce hazards.
11.   Property lines on 30 feet radii at corners.
12.   Lot side lines perpendicular to street right-of-way lines.
13.   Secondary roadway eliminates hazard of entering major thoroughfare from
individual driveways.
14.   Neighborhood park located near center of tract. Adjacent lots wider to
allow for 15 foot protective side line setback.
15.   Pavement shifted within right-of-way to preserve existing trees.
16.   10 foot walk easement provides access to park. Adjacent lots wider to
allow for 15 foot protective side line setback.
17.   Variation of building line along straight street creates interest.
18.   Screen planting gives protection from noise and lights on thoroughfare.
19.   Lots backing to uncontrolled land given greater depth for additional
protection.
20.   Low planting at street intersections permits clear vision.
21.   Wider corner lot permits equal building setback on each street.
22.   Platting of block end to avoid siding properties to residences across
street.
Click_here_to_view_Figure_4_in_a_PDF_document.
FIGURE 5
TYPICAL CLASSIFICATION OF THE THOROUGHFARE SYSTEM
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/0e290f4930aa9d300d35a8df8a0eb049dd62f83c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3388.jpg]
 
Click_here_to_view_Figure_5_in_a_PDF_document.
FIGURE 6
EXAMPLE OF MINOR SUBDIVISION SKETCH PLAN
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/0e290f4930aa9d300d35a8df8a0eb049dd62f83c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3391.jpg]
 
Click_here_to_view_Figure_6_in_a_PDF_document.
FIGURE 7
SAMPLE APPLICATION FOR MINOR SUBDIVISION APPROVAL
   COLUMBIANA, OHIO
Date___________________________   Application No.______________________________
The undersigned applies for minor subdivision approval under Ohio R.C. 711.131,
and certifies that all material submitted with this application is true and
correct. Action must be taken within seven working days.
Signature___________________________________________________________________________
Address____________________________________________________________________________
Phone______________________________________________________________________________
Minor subdivision approval may be granted only under the following conditions:
   1.   The proposed subdivision is along an existing public road and involves
no opening, widening or extension of any street.
   2.   No more than five lots are involved after the original parcel has been
completely subdivided.
   3.   The subdivision is not contrary to applicable platting, subdividing, or
zoning regulations. Variance can only be requested before the entire
Commission.
   4.   The property has been surveyed and a sketch and a legal description are
submitted.
   5.   Approval is granted, where applicable, by the agencies listed below.
   For Official Use
   APPROVAL FOR BUILDING SITE
   BUILDING INSPECTOR (OR COUNTY BOARD OF HEALTH IF OUTSIDE
   THE MUNICIPALITY BUT WITHIN 1-1/2 MILE LIMIT OF JURISDICTION)
Date
Received_________________________________________________________________________________________
Action________________________________________________________________________________________________
Comments_____________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
   Signature__________________________________________
   MUNICIPAL ENGINEER (OR COUNTY ENGINEER IF OUTSIDE MUNICIPALITY
   BUT WITHIN 1-1/2 MILE LIMIT OF JURISDICTION)
Date
Received_________________________________________________________________________________________
Action________________________________________________________________________________________________
Comments_____________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
   Signature_________________________________________
   COUNTY SANITARY ENGINEER IF OUTSIDE MUNICIPALITY BUT
   WITHIN 1-1/2 MILE LIMIT OF JURISDICTION
Date
Received_________________________________________________________________________________________
Action________________________________________________________________________________________________
Comments____________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
   Signature_______________________________________
   TOWNSHIP ZONING COMMISSION IF OUTSIDE MUNICIPALITY
   BUT WITHIN 1-1/2 MILE LIMIT OF JURISDICTION
Date
Received_________________________________________________________________________________________
Action________________________________________________________________________________________________
Comments_____________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
   Signature_______________________________________
   MUNICIPAL PLANNING COMMISSION
Date
Received_________________________________________________________________________________________
Action________________________________________________________________________________________________
Fee Paid
$____________________________________________________________________________________________
Comments____________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
   Signature_______________________________________
Note: This form must be submitted to the County Auditor for transfer and the
County Recorder for recording.
Click_here_to_view_Figure_7_in_a_PDF_document.
FIGURE 8
TYPICAL PREAPPLICATION SKETCH
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/0e290f4930aa9d300d35a8df8a0eb049dd62f83c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3394.jpg]
 
Click_here_to_view_Figure_8_in_a_PDF_document.
FIGURE 9
APPLICATION FOR TENTATIVE APPROVAL OF PRELIMINARY PLAT
   COLUMBIANA, OHIO
Date___________________________________   Application______________________________
   1.   Name of Applicant:
____________________________________________________________
Address:____________________________________________________________________
Phone:______________________________________________________________________
   2.   Name of Surveyor or Engineer:
___________________________________________________
Address:____________________________________________________________________
Phone:______________________________________________________________________
   3.   Name of Subdivision:
__________________________________________________________
   4.   Locational Description:
   Section___________________Township_____________________
                  Range_________
Other:_______________________________________________________________________
(in addition, please attach copy of legal description)
   5.   Proposed Use:
________________________________________________________________
   6.   Present Zoning District:
________________________________________________________
   7.   Proposed Zoning Changes:
______________________________________________________
   8.   Number of Lots:
______________________________________________________________
   9.   Do you propose deed
restrictions?   Yes___________________No______________________
(If yes, please attach a copy)
   10.   What type of sewage disposal do you propose?
_____________________________________
If an “on lot” type of sewage disposal is proposed, include a letter from the
County Board of Health approving a specific type of sewage disposal.
   11.   List all proposed improvements and utilities and state your intention
to install or post a guarantee prior to actual installation.
 
Improvement              Installation              Guarantee
a. _____________________ _________________________ _____________________
b. _____________________ _________________________ _____________________
c. _____________________ _________________________ _____________________
d. _____________________ _________________________ _____________________
e. _____________________ _________________________ _____________________
f. _____________________ _________________________ _____________________
 
   12.   List other materials submitted with this application.
 
Item                                      No.
a. ______________________________________ ______________________________
b. ______________________________________ ______________________________
c. ______________________________________ ______________________________
d. ______________________________________ ______________________________
e. ______________________________________ ______________________________
f. ______________________________________ ______________________________
 
___________________________________      __________________________________________
Applicant                  Surveyor or Engineer
   For Official Use
Date
Received_______________________________________________________________________________________
Date of Meeting of Planning
Commission___________________________________________________________________
Action by Planning
Commission__________________________________________________________________________
If plat rejected, reason(s) for
rejection______________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________________________
Date_____________________________________________   _____________________________________________
                           Chairperson
Click_here_to_view_Figure_9_in_a_PDF_document.
FIGURE 10
TYPICAL PRELIMINARY SUBDIVISION PLAT
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/0e290f4930aa9d300d35a8df8a0eb049dd62f83c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3397.jpg]
 
Click_here_to_view_Figure_10_in_a_PDF_document.
FIGURE 11
PRELIMINARY PLAT CHECKLIST
 
Date                        Application Number_________________________
__________________________
Subdivision
________________________________________________________________________________________________________________
The following item(s) (does, does not) conform with the requirements of the municipal subdivision
regulations. Those items not conforming are explained on the final page:
Does         Does Not       Item
1.           _____________  Name of Subdivision (no duplication permitted)
____________
2.           _____________  Locational description
____________
3.           _____________  Name and address of owner, subdivider, surveyor and engineer
____________
4.           _____________  Sheet size not larger than 24" x 36" (index sheet, if more than one sheet)
____________
5.           _____________  Proper scale
____________
6.           _____________  Date and north point
____________
7.           _____________  Vicinity map
____________
8.           _____________  Names of adjacent subdivisions and owners
____________
9.           ______________ Zoning classification of all major parcels and proposed changes.
____________
10.          ______________ Topography at two-foot intervals (five-foot intervals in Hillside Development)
___________
11.          ______________ Location, width, and names of existing streets, rights-of way and easements
___________
12.          ______________ Location and dimensions of existing buildings and parks
___________
13.          ______________ Corporation, township, range, and section lines
___________
14.          ______________ Location of existing utilities, including sewers, water lines, and communication
___________                 lines or poles
15.          ______________ Layout, names and widths of proposed streets or easements and proper dedications
___________
16.          ______________ Layout and approximate dimensions of all lots
___________
17.          ______________ Building setback lines
___________
18.          ______________ Survey monuments of adjacent properties
___________
19.          ______________ Parks and open spaces and proper dedications
___________
20.          ______________ Proposed use of lots
___________
21.          ______________ Copy of proposed deed restrictions, if any
___________
22.          ______________ Sewage treatment and percolation test results
___________
23.          ______________ Adequate preliminary improvement plans
___________
24.          ______________ Construction estimates
___________
25.          ______________ Required certifications
___________
Date                        __________________________________________________________Title of Position
__________________________
____________________________________________________
Signature
 
Click_here_to_view_Figure_11_in_a_PDF_document.
FIGURE 12
APPLICATION FOR FINAL PLAT APPROVAL
   COLUMBIANA, OHIO
Date__________________________________   Application
No.___________________________
   1.   Name of
Applicant____________________________________________________________
Address_____________________________________________________________________
Phone_______________________________________________________________________
   2.   Name of Surveyor or
Engineer___________________________________________________
Address_____________________________________________________________________
Phone_______________________________________________________________________
   3.   Name of
Subdivision___________________________________________________________
   4.   Date Preliminary Plat
Approved_________________________________________________
   5.   Was a zoning change requested?   ___________Yes    _____________No
   6.   If yes, the plat may not be approved until it conforms with the local
zoning. Include a certification of zoning compliance if a change was requested.
   7.   Have all required improvements been
installed?   _____________Yes   ____________No
If no, include detailed estimate of cost and a statement relative to the method
of improvement guarantee. All estimates must be approved by the responsible
(municipal, county) official.
   8.   Do you propose deed
restrictions?   _________________Yes   ______________No
(If yes, please attach a final copy.)
   9.   List other materials submitted with this application.
 
Item                                    No.
a. ____________________________________ __________________________________
b. ____________________________________ __________________________________
c. ____________________________________ __________________________________
d. ____________________________________ __________________________________
e. ____________________________________ _________________________________
f. ____________________________________ __________________________________
g. ___________________________________  __________________________________
 
   For Official Use
Date
Received______________________________________________________________________
Date of Meeting of Planning
Commission________________________________________________
Plat Fee $____________________________      Inspection Fee
$_________________________
Action by Planning
Commission_______________________________________________________
If plat rejected, reason(s) for
rejection__________________________________________________
Date__________________________________   ______________________________________
                     Chairperson
Click_here_to_view_Figure_12_in_a_PDF_document.
FIGURE 13
COLUMBIANA, OHIO
   PERFORMANCE BOND
KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS:
WHEREAS,_______________________________Principal herein, is the owner and
developer of the
_____________________Subdivision located in_____________________________County,
Ohio, and
WHEREAS, the plans and specifications of said subdivision showing the location,
construction and installation of street pavement, curbs, sidewalks, sewers,
water mains and other improvements therein have been filed with the Municipal
Planning Commission for final approval, and which are hereby referred to and
made a part of this instrument, as if fully copied and set forth herein, and
WHEREAS, the Principal herein does hereby obligate itself and does agree to
complete the construction and installation of all street pavement, curbs,
sidewalks, sewers, water mains and all other improvements in the said
subdivision in accordance with said plans and specifications now on file,
pending final approval by said Commission.
NOW, THEREFORE, THE_______________________________________________as Principal
and
___________________________________________________________________________________
as Surety, do hereby firmly bind ourselves, our heirs, executors,
administrators, and successors unto the Municipal Planning Commission of
Columbiana, Ohio, in the sum of $_________________________
conditioned upon the performance by the Principal of its undertaking herein,
and its completion of said
______________________ subdivision in the construction of all the street
pavement, curbs, sidewalks, sewers, water mains and all other improvements
therein called for by the plans thereof, the same to be completed on or before
the __________day of____________, 20______, and upon the completion thereof
this obligation to be null and void, otherwise to remain in full force and
effect.
If the Principal fails to complete the construction, and the improvements of
said Subdivision as shown and provided for by said plans and specifications
herein referred to within the time herein specified, the Commission may in its
discretion extend the time for the completion of said work by order duly made
and entered by said Commission for a period of from 30 days to 90 days.
WITNESS our hands this the___________day of_________,20________
WITNESS:                  ________________________________
                     PRINCIPAL
___________________________________
                     ________________________________
___________________________________      SURETY
Click_here_to_view_Figure_13_in_a_PDF_document.
FIGURE 14
TYPICAL FINAL SUBDIVISION PLAT
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/0e290f4930aa9d300d35a8df8a0eb049dd62f83c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3400.jpg]
 
Click_here_to_view_Figure_14_in_a_PDF_document.
FIGURE 15
FINAL PLAT CHECKLIST
 
Date________________________ Application No. _________________________________________
Subdivision
________________________________________________________________________________________
The following item(s) (does, does not) conform with the requirements of the (county,
city, municipal) subdivision regulations. Those items not conforming are explained on
the final page.
Does        Does Not         Item
1.          ____________     Submitted within twelve months of preliminary approval
__________
2.          ____________     Conforms to preliminary plat and incorporates suggested
__________                   changes
3.          ____________     Name of Subdivision
__________
4.          ____________     Proper scale
__________
5.          ____________     Date and north point
__________
6.          ____________     Locational description
__________
7.          ____________     Sheet size not larger than 30" x 42" (index sheet if more
__________                   than one sheet)
8.          ____________     Name and address of owner, surveyor and engineer
___________
                             Accurate survey data - seconds; linear dimensions to
9.          ____________     hundredths of feet; radii; internal angles; points of
___________                  curvature; tangent bearing; lengths of arcs; lengths of
                             cords
10.         ____________     Closure
__________
11.         ____________     Bearings and distances to permanent monuments
__________
12.         ____________     Name, location, width and centerline of streets
__________
13.         ____________     Lot numbers and dimensions
__________
14.         ____________     Location and description of monuments
__________
15.         ____________     Building setback lines
__________
16.         ____________     Parks and open spaces and proper dedications
__________
17.         ____________     Final deed restriction
__________
18.         ____________     Final improvement plans
__________
19.         ____________     Installation or guarantee of installation of improvements
__________
20.         ____________     Required final certifications
__________
Date _______________________ ______________________________Title or Position
___________________________________________
Signature
 
Click_here_to_view_Figure_15_in_a_PDF_document.
FIGURE 16
FORMS FOR FINAL PLAT CERTIFICATIONS
Form 1  TITLE
      _______________________________________________________________   Subdivision
      (name of)
      Part of original tract
__________________________________________________________
                         (Municipality or Township)             
Form 2  CERTIFICATE OF OWNERSHIP AND DEDICATION
I (we) the undersigned (name lettered) owner(s) of the property shown and
described hereon as the subdivision do hereby accept this plat and do hereby
dedicate to public use the street(s) (easements) (parks or other areas)
designated on this plat.
                                         (Witness)                 
      (owner) (signature)   
            (lettered)
                                 (_______________________)
                                 (_______________________)
      (owner) (signature)   
            (lettered)                  (_______________________)
Form 3  CERTIFICATE OF NOTARY (directly below the above certificate)
      State of Ohio________________)
      County of___________________)
Before me, a Notary Public in and for said County and State, personally
appeared the above owner(s), (officers of company)_______________________who
acknowledged the making and signing of the foregoing instrument to be their
free act and deed.
In WITNESS whereof I have hereunto set my hand and official seal at
__________________
                              (City)
      _____________________this___________Day of (month), (year).
         (State)
                                 _________________________
                                 Notary Public
My Commission expires_______________________________________________________
Form 4  CERTIFICATE OF SURVEYOR
I hereby certify this survey and plat to be correct.
      __________________, 20______               ____________________________
         date                        Registered Surveyor-Ohio Serial No.
Form 5  CERTIFICATE OF THE APPROVAL OF REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS
I hereby certify: (1) that pavements, utilities and other required improvements
have been installed in an acceptable manner and according to Municipality of
Columbiana specifications in the subdivision described hereon; (alternate) (2)
that performance guarantees in the amount of $_______have been posted with
the________________to assure completion of all required improvements in case of
default.
      ________________, 20______
                                 _____________________________
                                 Municipal Engineer
Form 6  APPROVAL BY PLANNING COMMISSION
This PLAT OF SUBDIVISION has been approved by the Planning Commission of the
Municipality of Columbiana, Ohio.
      _______________, 20_______               _____________________________
         date                        Chairperson
                                 _____________________________
                                 Secretary
Form 7  ACCEPTANCE OF PUBLIC LANDS BY COUNCIL
The public streets (easements) (parks and other areas) dedicated to public use
as noted hereon have been accepted by the Council of the Municipality of
Columbiana, Ohio, by Ordinance No.
      ______________, 20_______                  _____________________________
         date                        President
                                 _____________________________
                                 Clerk
Form 8  COUNTY RECORDS
Transferred this_____________________day of_____________, 20_________
                                 ________________________________
                                 County Auditor
Recorded in Plat Book____________,Page No.______________
this   day of_________________, 20________
                                 ________________________________
                                 County Recorder
Click_here_to_view_Figure_16_in_a_PDF_document.
FIGURE 17
TECHNICAL DESIGN AND IMPROVEMENT CHECKLIST
The following item(s) (does, does not) conform with or does not apply (NA) to
the requirements of Chapters
1248 and
1250 of the municipal subdivision regulations. Those items not conforming are
explained on the final page.
 
Does Does Not NA Item
                                 General
1.        ___________ __________ Conformance with major street plan
_________
2.        ___________ __________ Conformance with zoning regulations, or if no zoning, §
_________                        1248.14(c)
3.        ___________ __________ No flood hazards
_________
4.        ___________ __________ Acceptable natural drainage and erosion control
_________
5.        ___________ __________ Steep slopes not limiting factor
_________
6.        ___________ __________ Large trees and other significant natural features
_________
                                 Streets
7.        ___________ __________ Areas of historical or cultural significance
_________
8.        ___________ __________ Right-of-way widths
_________
9.        ___________ __________ Pavement widths
_________
10.       ___________ __________ Radius of curvature
________
11.       ___________ __________ Horizontal visibility
________
12.       ___________ __________ Vertical alignment and visibility
________
13.       ___________ __________ Grades
________
14.       ___________ __________ Cul-de-sacs
________
15.       ___________ __________ Turn around radius - ROW - and pavement
________
16.       ___________ __________ Dead-end streets
________
17.       ___________ __________ Dedication and addition of half streets
________
18.       ___________ __________ Marginal access streets, points of access and planting
________                         strips
19.       ___________ __________ Alleys
________
20.       ___________ __________ Alignment of intersections
________
21.       ___________ __________ Spacing of intersection relative to different road
________                         classifications
22.       ___________ __________ Avoidance of multiple intersections
________
23.       ___________ __________ Avoidance of 4-way intersections
________
24.       ___________ __________ Pavement and ROW of intersections
________
 
 
Does Does Not NA Item
25. _______  ___________ __________ Streets for commercial subdivisions (§
                                    1248.07)
26. _______  ___________ __________ Repair of pavement
27. _______  ___________ __________ Streets for industrial subdivisions (§
                                    1248.08)
28. _______  ___________ __________ Length of blocks
29. _______  ___________ __________ Crosswalks
30. _______  ___________ __________ Street monuments
31. _______  ___________ __________ Subgrade
32. _______  ___________ __________ Base course
33. ________ ___________ __________ Surface course
34. ________ ___________ __________ Curbs and gutters
35. ________ ___________ __________ Bridges
36. ________ ___________ __________ Sidewalks
37. ________ ___________ __________ Street names and numbers, signs
                                    Lots
38. ________ ___________ __________ Size
39. ________ ___________ __________ Setback lines
40. ________ ___________ __________ Corner lot size
41. ________ ___________ __________ Avoidance of double frontage lots
42. ________ ___________ __________ Driveway culverts and grade
43. ________ ___________ __________ Monuments
44. ________ ___________ __________ Grading Plan
45. ________ ___________ __________ Parks and open spaces
46. ________ ___________ __________ Type of water supply
47. ________ ___________ __________ Test wells
48. ________ ___________ __________ Type of sewage treatment
49. ________ ___________ __________ Percolation test results
50. ________ ___________ __________ Storm drainage system .type
51. ________ ___________ __________ Manholes
52. ________ ___________ __________ Catch basins
53. ________ ___________ __________ Headwalls
 
 
Does         Does Not    NA             Item
54. ________ ___________ __________     Sufficient easements for utilities or
                                        open drainage
55. ________ ___________ __________     Other utilities
56. ________ ___________ __________     Underground utilities
Date___________________________________ ______________________________Title
__________________________Signature
 
Click_here_to_view_Figure_17_in_a_PDF_document.
FIGURE 18
STREET DESIGN STANDARDS
 
Street Type Local Collector Arterial
Zoning     Single Multi-          Service    Single Multi-          Service    Single Multi-          Service
District   Family Family Business and        Family Family Business and        Family Family Business and
                                  Industrial                        Industrial                        Industrial
Right-of-  50a    50a    60b      60b        60a    60a    80       80         80c    80-    100-     100- 120c
Way (ft)                                                                              100c   120c
Pavement   25     30     32       32         28     32     36       36         36     40     48       48
Width (ft)
Sidewalk   4      4      6        d          5      5      8        d          5      5      10       d
Width (ft)
Maximum    10     8      5        5          6      5      4        4          4      4      4        4
Grade (%)
Min.
Center
Line       150    200    200      200        300    300    300      300        500    500    500      500
Radius
(ft)
Max. Cul-
de-sac     750    500    500      500
Length
(ft)
Min. Cul-
de-sac     50     50     50       50
Radius
(row)
Min. Cul-
de-sac     40     40     40       50
Radius
(pavement)
a   A utility easement of ten feet may be required along each side of street.
b   Local business and industrial streets may not connect to local residential streets.
c   If the street is a continuation of an existing arterial street, it shall be the same width or wider than
existing street as determined by the City or County Engineer.
d   The necessity for walkways in industrial districts shall be determined by the Planning Commission.
 
Click_here_to_view_Figure_18_in_a_PDF_document.
FIGURE 19
INTERSECTION DESIGN STANDARDS
 
Maximum Approach Speed (mph)                25
Clear Sight Distance (ft)
(Length along each approach leg)            90
Vertical Alignment with Intersection        3%
Minimum Angle of Intersection Streets shall
remain in the angle of intersection for at  75 degrees (90 degrees preferred)
least 100 feet beyond the point of
intersection.
Minimum Curb Radius (ft)
(a) Local-local                             20 - all cases
(b) Local-collector                         25 - all cases
(c) Collector-collector                     30 - all cases
(d) Collector, marginal access-arterial     35 - all cases
Minimum Centerline, Offset of Adjacent
Intersections (ft)
(a) Local-local                             150 - all cases
(b) Local-collector                         200 - all cases
(c) Collector-collector                     300 - all cases
(d) Collector, marginal access-arterial     1320 - all cases
 
Click_here_to_view_Figure_19_in_a_PDF_document.
FIGURE 20
SUGGESTED MINIMUM PAVING STANDARDS
 
Street Type Use Pavement Width Base Asphalt Pavement Concrete Full Depth
                                                     Pavement Asphalt
Local     Single     28   10" Item  1½” Item 448 Asphalt Surface Course, Type 1   7      4 - 6
Street    Family     feet 304                                                        inches inches
                          Aggregate 2" Item 448 Asphalt Intermediate Course, Type 2
                          Base
          Multi-     30   10" Item  1½” Item 448 Asphalt Surface Course, Type 1   7      4 - 6
          Family     feet 304                                                        inches inches
                          Aggregate 2" Item 448 Asphalt Intermediate Course, Type 2
                          Base
          Business,
          Service    32   10" Item  1½” Item 448 Asphalt Surface Course, Type 1   9      6 - 9
          and        feet 304                                                        inches inches
          Industrial      Aggregate
                          Base      3" Item 448 Asphalt Intermediate Course, Type 2

Collector Single     28   10" Item  1½” Item 448 Asphalt Surface Course, Type 1   7      5 - 9
Street    Family     feet 304                                                        inches inches
                          Aggregate 2" Item 448 Asphalt Intermediate Course, Type 2
                          Base
          Multi-     32   10" Item  1½” Item 448 Asphalt Surface Course, Type 1   7      5 - 9
          Family     feet 304                                                        inches inches
                          Aggregate 2" Item 448 Asphalt Intermediate Course, Type 2
                          Base
          Business,  36   12" Item  1½” Item 448 Asphalt Surface Course, Type 1   9      8 - 11
          Service    feet 304                                                        inches inches
          and             Aggregate 3" Item 448 Asphalt Intermediate Course, Type 2
          Industrial      Base
          Single and 36   10" Item  1½” Item 448 Asphalt Surface Course, Type 1   7      6 - 11
Arterial  Multi-     feet 304                                                        inches inches
Street    Family          Aggregate 3" Item 448 Asphalt Intermediate Course, Type 2
                          Base
          Business,  48   12" Item  1½” Item 448 Asphalt Surface Course, Type 1   9      8 - 11
          Service    feet 304                                                        inches inches
          and             Aggregate 1½” Item 448 Asphalt Intermediate Course, Type 1
          Industrial      Base      2" Item 448 Asphalt Intermediate Course, Type 2
NOTES:
1.   All Item Numbers refer to the Ohio Department of Transportation (ODOT) Construction and
Materials Specifications (CMS) Latest Edition.
2.   Pavement designs shall be approved by the city, some projects may require additional pavement
thickness.
3.   All full depth asphalt designs must include a minimum of 4" ODOT Item 304 Aggregate Base.
4.   Pavement width shall be measured face to face of curbs.
5.   All concrete pavement shall be in accordance with ODOT CMS Item 451 Reinforced Concrete
Pavement.
6.   Base for concrete pavement surface may be reduced to 6" ODOT Item 304 Aggregate Base.
 
Click_here_to_view_Figure_20_in_a_PDF_document.
FIGURE 21
PREFERRED TREES FOR TREE LAWN PLANTING
JAPANESE FLOWERING CHERRY  (Prunus sps.)
The upright growing Amanagowa, or “Milky Way,” forms a slender tree to 25 feet
high. Kwanzan is an upsweeping broad-headed tree now being grafted on 6-foot
stems for use as a street tree for a 20 foot maximum height.
The flowering cherries are famed for their spectacular spring display. There
are several distinct forms available. Amanagowa has pinkish white flowers and
good fall color. Kwanzan has deep pink flowers. Also, there are light pink,
white, and yellowish flowered varieties.
KOBUS AND ANISE MAGNOLIAS (Magnolia Kobus and Magnolia Salicifolia)
As a street tree, Kobus will probably never grow taller than 20 or 25 feet.
Plant in tree lawn at least 6 feet wide. Has dark green foliage. Kobus is a
mass of small white flowers before foliage comes on. Is subject to scale and
may need spraying.
SALICIFOLIA
Is a myramidal form; plant in tree lawn at least 5 feet wide on streets of
shallow setback. Bears white, fragrant masses of flowers about 5 inches across.
Leaves, when crushed, give off an odor of anise.
IDAHO LOCUST (Robinia, pseudoacacia Idaho)
Grows to 25 feet. Has performed well on streets. Gives light, lacy shade. In
June, it is covered with panicles of rose-pink flowers. Susceptible to borers
which can be controlled with a dormant DDT spray. Has brittle branches.
WASHINGTON HAWTHORN (Crataegus phaenopyrum)
Grows to 20 feet high. Small trunk helps make it ideal for narrow tree lawns.
Has white flowers in spring, apricot tones in fall, brilliant red berries in
winter.
KOREAN EVODIA (Evodia hupenhensis)
Grows to 25 feet. Well-adapted to small streets and home grounds. Used quite
successfully on streets. White flowers appear in late August in flat corymbs
like the elderberry. Black, shining seeds are small and attractive. Shining,
leathery, compound leaves give it a clean appearance all summer. Grows well in
poor soil.
GOLDEN RAIN (Koelreuteria paniculata)
Grows to 25 feet. Round-headed tree. Bears yellow flowers in mid-July.
Withstands drought conditions. Tolerant of any but acid soil. One of the best
small trees for street or home use. May break in storm.
PAUL’S SCARLET HAWTHORN (Crataegus oxyacantha Pauli)
Grows to 25 feet high. Spectacular red flowers in early June. Must be sprayed
with nicotine or Malathion spray to control aphids, but its beauty and utility
outweigh its maintenance needs. Has been called a superlative ornamental tree
for home or street use.
LAVELLE HAWTHORN (Crataegus Laveallei)
Grows to 25 feet. White flowers in early June. Has coral berries. Deep green
foliage turns brilliant plum color in early autumn. Unexcelled for controlled
street planting under severe restrictions.
RUBY RED HORSE CHESTNUT (Aesculus carnea briotti)
Grows to 25 or 30 feet. Valuable for street planting in limited space
conditions. Firm pyramidal form. Red flowers in late May or early June. Flowers
contrast well with dark green foliage. Some nuts will fall. May blight if not
sprayed.
CHINESE CORK TREE (Phellodendron amurense)
Grows to 25 feet with 30-foot spread. Umbrella-topped. Heavy trunk development
as tree matures makes 5-foot tree lawns necessary. Should be planted 45 to 55
feet apart on streets with wide setbacks. Tree does well in heavy or light
soil, withstands drought and city air, and is pest-free. Turns lemon yellow in
fall. Small, black fruit persists through winter and attracts birds.
SASSAFRAS (Sassafras albidum)
Grows to 25 or 30 feet. Assumes interesting shapes at maturity. Foliage turns
to shades from salmon to bronze in fall. Difficult to transplant, but has been
successful in street use.
PAPERBARK OR CHERRYBARK MAPLE (Acer griseum)
Grows to 25 feet. Thrives in most soils. Rare trees. Pest-free. Foliage turns
bright red in fall. Bronzy, peeling bark interesting in winter.
SHINGLE OAK (Quercus imricaria)
Seldom grows to more than 30 feet under cultivation. Plant in 5-foot tree lawns
at 50-foot intervals. Laurel-shaped leaves turn to rust red in fall. In same
family as pin oak which should be planted in heavy soil. Plant shingle oak in
sandy soil.
SCANLON RED MAPLE (Acer rubrum pyramidal, var: Scanlon)
Grows to 35 feet with 15-foot spread. Use on narrow streets. Pyramidal form
with no heavy top exposed to wind damage. Red fall color. Low maintenance as
street tree.
UPRIGHT GOLDENRAIN (Koelreuteria paniculata fastigiata)
Grows to 20 feet with 8-foot spread. Narrow form makes it unexcelled for street
tree in extremely narrow conditions. Yellow-flowered.
UPRIGHT EUROPEAN BIRCH (Betula pendula fastifiata)
Grows to 30 feet with 8-foot spread. Variant of the white birch. Bark color
makes tree interesting through winter. Spray trunk in early June with DDT to
control bronze birch borer.
PYRAMIDAL EUROPEAN HORNBEAM (Carpinus betulus fastigiata)
Grows to 30 feet with 15-foot spread. Pyramidal form of European hornbeam.
Excellent for shallow setback and narrow tree lawn.
ALMIRA NORWAY MAPLES (Acer platanoides globosum, var: Almira)
Grows to 16 feet with 16-foot spread. Superior to common globe type in use for
years. Forms informal roundhead and is faster growing. Use in streets with low
wires and shallow setback. There are about 30 varieties of Norway Maple,
including Purple King, another recommended variety, which has red leaves all
summer and grows to 25 feet.
GLOBE HEAD ASH (Fraxium excelsior umbraculifera)
Grows in globe form to 30 feet. Plant 55 feet apart in 8-foot tree lawn and
deep setback, with no wires overhead. Globe form of European ash.
GLOBE LOCUST (Robinia pseudoacacia umbraculifera)
Good street tree under low overhead wires. There are two forms of this fast-
growing tree; one becoming a tight, dense globe, the other a looser globe
bearing large panicles of pink flowers. Susceptible to borers which can be
controlled with DDT dormant spray. Wood is brittle, may break in sleet storm.
MODESTO ASH (Fraxinus velutina glabra)
Grows to 20 or 25 feet. Use on 5-foot tree lawn under low wires. Grows fast but
never grows large. Has smooth, green trunk and bright, crisp green slighting
pendulous branches.
LITTLELEAF LINDEN (Tilia cordate)
Grows to 25 or 30 feet with small trunk. Has small, dark green foliage that is
quite dense with no serious disorders. Has fragrant, inconspicuous yellow
flowers in spring; small fruit is not troublesome. Good tree where there is
much smoke and traffic.
AMERICAN HOPHORNBEAM (Ostrya Virginiana)
Grows to 25 feet with pyramidal head and small trunk. Tolerant of most soil
conditions and withstands drought. Grows quite rapidly first ten or 15 years,
then slows down. Bark peels in thin strips for shaggy but attractive
appearance. Has elm-like leaves. Grows anywhere.
GLASTONBURY HAWTHORN (Crataegus monogyna oraecox)
Grows to 16 or 18 feet. Produces white flowers and red berries.
WINE LEAF SYCAMORE MAPLE (Acerpseudoplatanus Spaethi)
Grows to 30 feet with 25-foot spread. Leaves have bright green upper surface
and hue of burgundy wine for the undersurface, making a unique color pattern
when the leaves are ruffled by the wind. Well recommended in downtown area.
GOLDEN SYCAMORE MAPLE (Acer platonoides Worlei)
Grows to 20 feet with 20-foot spread. Use on 6-foot tree lawn; may be used with
shallow setback. Golden color of spring foliage continues for about two months
and then gives way to a rich green.
AMUR MACHIA
About 15 feet tall. Blossoms in August. Bears no fruit.
SKYLINE OR SUNBURST LOCUST
Use on wide streets at 50-foot intervals.
Click_here_to_view_Figure_21_in_a_PDF_document.
FIGURE 22
APPLICATION FOR SUBDIVISION VARIANCE
   MUNICIPAL PLANNING COMMISSION
   COLUMBIANA, OHIO
Date______________________________________  Application
No.____________________________
Name
______________________________________________________________________________
Address_____________________________________________________________________________
Phone______________________________________________________________________________
1.   Locational Description:
____________________________________________________________
   ________________________________________________________________________________
2.   Nature of Variance Requested: Describe generally the nature of the
variance.
   _______________________________________________________________________________
   _______________________________________________________________________________
3.   Justification of Variance: On a separate sheet, please attach a statement
relative to why the variance from requirements of the subdivision regulations
is requested. Include such items as:
   a.   Exceptional topographical or other conditions peculiar to this
particular parcel of land;
   b.   Why a literal interpretation of the regulations would deprive the
applicant of rights enjoyed by other property owners;
   c.   That the peculiar conditions do not result from previous actions of the
applicant;
   d.   That the requested variance is the minimum variance that will allow a
reasonable division of the land;
   e.   A sketch of the area showing the location and characteristics of the
requested variance.
I certify that all information contained in this application and its
supplements is true and correct.
   _____________________________
   Signature
   PLANNING COMMISSION
Date
Received_______________________________________________________________________
Action______________________________________________________________________________
Fee Paid
$__________________________________________________________________________
Comments__________________________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________________________________
   _____________________________
   Signature
Note: This form must be submitted to the County Auditor for transfer and the
County Recorder for recording.
Click_here_to_view_Figure_22_in_a_PDF_document.
TITLE SIX:  ZONING
CHAPTER 1260:  GENERAL PROVISIONS AND DEFINITIONS
Section
1260.01   Establishment of districts; uniformity of regulations.
1260.02   Districts.
1260.03   Zoning Districts Map.
1260.04   Interpretation of district boundaries.
1260.05   Permitted uses; certificates of occupancy required.
1260.06   Permitted height exceptions.
1260.07   Front yard variances in Residential Districts.
1260.08   Corner lots.
1260.09   Minimum living area per dwelling unit.
1260.10   Zoning certificates; sewage disposal facilities.
1260.11   Nonavailability of sewerage and water facilities; minimum lot size.
1260.12   Transition areas.
1260.13   Construction in progress.
1260.14   Number of dwellings per lot; frontage.
1260.15   Substandard lots.
1260.16   Yards and open spaces.
1260.17   Projections into yard areas.
1260.18   Visibility on corner lots.
1260.19   Accessory buildings.
1260.20   Temporary buildings.
1260.21   Conflicts of provisions of Zoning Code.
1260.22   Prohibited uses.
1260.23   Outdoor advertising signs.
1260.24   Compliance with building regulations required.
1260.25   Swimming and wading pools.
1260.26   Fences, walls and hedges.
1260.27   Businesses and merchandise displays.
1260.28   Zoning of annexed lands.
1260.29   Usable open space.
1260.30   General performance standards.
1260.31   Historic and architectural preservation.
1260.32   Site plan review; applications.
1260.33   Driveway construction.
1260.34   Garage sales.
1260.35   Definitions.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Municipal zoning - see Ohio R.C. 713.06 et seq.
   Administration, enforcement and penalty - see P. & Z.
Ch. 1262
   Board of Zoning Appeals - see P. & Z.
Ch. 1264
   Conditional zoning certificates - see P. & Z.
Ch. 1266
   Off-street parking and loading - see P. & Z.
Ch. 1292
   Signs - see P. & Z.
Ch. 1294
   Nonconforming uses - see P. & Z.
Ch. 1296
§ 1260.01  ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS; UNIFORMITY OF REGULATIONS.
   In order to promote public safety, health and general welfare, to regulate
residential, commercial, industrial and other land uses by location, to
establish minimum lot and yard requirements, to ensure adequate open space, and
to establish maximum building heights, the territory of the municipality is
hereby divided into zoning districts. All regulations in this Zoning Code are
uniform for each building, structure and/or use within each zoning district.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1260.02  DISTRICTS.
   The following zoning districts are hereby established:
 
A-O-C Agricultural-Open Space-Conservation District
R-1   Low Density Residential District
R-2   Medium Density Residential District
R-3   High Density Residential District
C-1   Local Commercial District
C-2   Office and Limited Business District
C-3   Central Business District
C-4   Intensive and Automobile-Oriented Commercial District
C-5   Highway Commercial District
I-1   Industrial Research and Office District
I-2   Light Industrial District
I-3   Manufacturing, Storage and Disposal District
 
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1260.03  ZONING DISTRICTS MAP.
   (a)   The districts and their boundary lines are indicated upon a map
entitled the “Zoning Districts Map of the Municipality of Columbiana, Ohio.”
(See
Appendix A immediately following this Zoning Code.) Such Map, together with all
notations, references and other matters shown thereon, is hereby declared to be
a part of this Zoning Code.
   (b)   The original or master of such Map shall be retained in the
municipality offices, maintained current with amendments and be available to
the public. All revisions or amendments shall be incorporated on the original
master Map within two weeks from the effective date of the enacting ordinance.
The boundary lines of each zoning change shall be described by the ordinance
number and date of the enacting ordinance and shown on the original master Map.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1260.04  INTERPRETATION OF DISTRICT BOUNDARIES.
   When any uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of any of the
districts listed in §
1260.02, as shown on the Zoning Districts Map, the following rules shall apply:
   (a)   Where a district boundary is indicated as approximately following the
centerline or right-of-way line of a street, the centerline or alley line of an
alley or the centerline or right-of-way line of a highway, such a line shall be
construed to be such district boundary.
   (b)   Where a district boundary is so indicated that it is approximately
parallel to the centerline or right-of-way line of a street, the centerline or
right-of-way line of an alley or the centerline or right-of-way line of a
highway, such district boundary shall be construed as being parallel thereto
and at such a distance therefrom as is indicated on the Zoning Districts Map.
If no distance is given, such dimensions shall be determined by the use of the
scale shown on such Map.
   (c)   Where a district boundary is indicated as approximately following a
lot line, such lot line shall be construed to be such boundary.
   (d)   (1)   Where a district boundary is so indicated that it does not
follow or parallel street, alley, highway or lot lines, but connects points
established by the intersection of such lines, such straight lines connecting
such points shall be construed to be such district boundaries.
      (2)   Where a district boundary is so indicated that it follows a
topographical feature, such line shall be construed as following the centerline
of such feature. The location of such topographical feature shall be determined
by the use of the scale shown on the Zoning Districts Map.
   (e)   Whenever any street, alley or public way is vacated in the manner
authorized by law, the zoning districts adjoining each side of the street,
alley or public way shall be automatically extended to the center of such
vacations, and all areas included in the vacation shall then and henceforth be
subject to all the regulations of the extended districts.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1260.05  PERMITTED USES; CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY REQUIRED.
   (a)   No building shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed or
structurally altered, nor shall any building or land be used, arranged to be
used or designed to be used, in a manner which does not comply with all of the
district provisions established by this Zoning Code for the district in which
the building or land is located. Uses which are omitted from this Zoning Code
which are not specifically permitted shall be considered prohibited until
deemed otherwise by the Planning Commission or until, by amendment, such uses
are written into this Zoning Code. A determination of whether or not a use is
specifically permitted, by virtue of being similar in character to a
specifically permitted use in the district, shall be made by the Commission,
based on the purpose of the district regulations and this Zoning Code. No land
shall be occupied or used and no building hereafter erected, altered or
extended shall be used or changed in use until a certificate of occupancy has
been issued by the Building Department stating that the building or proposed
use thereof complies with this Zoning Code.
   (b)   No liquid waste injection disposal wells and support structures are
permitted or conditionally permitted uses within the City.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974; Ord. 12-O-2704, passed 10-16-2012)
§ 1260.06  PERMITTED HEIGHT EXCEPTIONS.
   (a)   Except as specifically stated in other parts of this Zoning Code, no
building shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed or structurally
altered to exceed the height limit established for the district in which the
building is located, except that penthouse or roof structures for the housing
of elevators, stairways, tanks, ventilating fans or similar equipment required
to operate and maintain a building, and fire or parapet walls, skylights,
towers, steeples, stage lofts and screens, flagpoles, chimneys, smokestacks,
wireless masts, water tanks or similar structures may be erected above the
height limit. No such structure may be erected to exceed by more than 15 feet
the height limit of the district in which it is located, or have a total area
greater than 25% of the roof area of the building, or be used for any purpose
other than a use incidental to the main use of the building. Radio, television
and wireless aerials or masts may be erected to any height.
   (b)   Public or semipublic buildings, when permitted in a district, may be
erected to a height not to exceed 45 feet, except that churches and temples may
be erected to a height not to exceed 75 feet, if the building is set back from
each yard line at least one foot for each foot of additional building height
above the height limit otherwise provided in the district in which the building
is located.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1260.07  FRONT YARD VARIANCES IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.
   In any R District where the average depth of at least two existing front
yards on lots within 200 feet of the lot in question and within the same block
front is less than the least front yard depth prescribed elsewhere in this
Zoning Code, the required depth of the front yard on such lot may be modified.
In such cases, such depth shall not be less than the average depth of the
existing front yards on the two lots immediately adjoining or, in the case of a
corner lot, the depth of the front yard on the lot immediately adjoining,
provided, however, that the depth of the front yard on any lot shall not be
less than 20 feet.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1260.08  CORNER LOTS.
   Corner lots in all districts are required to have the minimum front yard
requirements, as indicated in the chapter pertaining to each district, facing
both streets.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1260.09  MINIMUM LIVING AREA PER DWELLING UNIT.
   No structure shall be erected, reconstructed or converted for use as a
dwelling unless the following minimum living floor area per dwelling unit is
provided:
   (a)   Single-family, single-family attached and two-family dwellings.
 
Dwelling Unit         With Basement (sq. ft.) Without Basement (sq. ft.)
One bedroom           600                     800
Two bedrooms          800                     1,000
Three bedrooms        1,000                   1,200
Four bedrooms         1,200                   1,400
Five or more bedrooms 1,400                   1,600
 
   (b)   Multi-family dwellings.
 
Efficiency apartment           250 sq. ft.
One-bedroom apartment          500 sq. ft.
Two-bedroom apartment          750 sq. ft.
Three-bedroom apartment        1,000 sq. ft.
Four or more bedroom apartment 1,250 sq. ft.
 
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1260.10  ZONING CERTIFICATES; SEWAGE DISPOSAL FACILITIES.
   No zoning certificate shall be issued without evidence that the responsible
health authority has approved the proposed sanitary sewage disposal facilities
for the use for which the zoning certificate has been requested.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1260.11  NONAVAILABILITY OF SEWERAGE AND WATER FACILITIES; MINIMUM LOT SIZE.
   Where central sanitary sewerage facilities and central water facilities are
not available, the minimum lot size shall be one acre for a single-family
dwelling in any R District and two acres for a two-family dwelling, where
permitted, unless a larger area is required by this Zoning Code and/or the
responsible health authority.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1260.12  TRANSITION AREAS.
   To secure the optimum effect of transition from a residential to a
nonresidential district, the Planning Commission shall have the power to
determine the need for, and the amount of, planting materials, walls, walks or
fences, or any combination of the same, on any property line of land under
consideration. The plans and specifications therefor, including density and
height figures for the overall site development, shall include the proposed
arrangement of such plantings and structures.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1260.13  CONSTRUCTION IN PROGRESS.
   Nothing contained in this Zoning Code shall hinder the construction of a
building or prohibit its use when construction has started before the effective
date of this Zoning Code (Ordinance 74-O-128, passed October 17, 1974),
provided that its foundations have been put in place before such date and
provided, further, that such building is completed within two years from such
date.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1260.14  NUMBER OF DWELLINGS PER LOT; FRONTAGE.
   Not more than one dwelling is permitted on any lot, unless otherwise
specifically stated in this Zoning Code. Every dwelling shall be located on a
lot having the required frontage on a public street.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1260.15  SUBSTANDARD LOTS.
   Any lot greater than 5,000 square feet in area, but not meeting minimum area
requirements, and being a lot of record or a lot for which a land contract has
been issued, or any lot within an unrecorded allotment, of which at least one-
half of such lots are of record and have been sold on land contract on the
effective date of this Zoning Code (Ordinance 74-O-128, passed October 17,
1974), may be used for a single-family dwelling, irrespective of the area,
depth or width of such lot, provided, however, that in no instance shall the
minimum dimensions of the side and rear yards be less than five feet and 20
feet, respectively.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1260.16  YARDS AND OPEN SPACES.
   No space which, for the purpose of a building, has been counted or
calculated as part of a side yard, rear yard, front yard or other open space
required by this Zoning Code, may, by reason of change in ownership or
otherwise, be counted to satisfy the yard or other open space requirement of,
or for, any other building.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1260.17  PROJECTIONS INTO YARD AREAS.
   Every part of a required yard shall be open to the sky unobstructed, except
for accessory buildings in a rear yard and except for the ordinary projections
of sills, belt courses, cornices and ornamental features projecting not more
than 12 inches. This requirement shall not prevent the construction of fences
not exceeding six feet in height, except on that portion of lots within 30 feet
of the intersection of two or more streets. Terraces, uncovered porches,
platforms and ornamental features which do not extend more than three feet
above the level of the ground (first) story may project into a required side
yard, provided that these projections are distanced at least two feet from the
adjacent lot line. The ordinary projections of chimneys or flues are permitted
into the required side, rear and front yards. No open, unenclosed porch or
paved terrace may project into the front yard more than ten feet.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1260.18  VISIBILITY ON CORNER LOTS.
   No obstruction to view in excess of two feet in height shall be placed on
any corner lot within a triangular area formed by the street right-of-way lines
and a line connecting such right-of-way lines at points 30 feet from the
intersection of the street lines, except that street trees are permitted which
are pruned at least eight feet above the established grade of the roadway so as
not to obstruct the clear view of motor vehicle drivers.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1260.19  ACCESSORY BUILDINGS.
   (a)   An accessory building attached to the principal building on a lot
shall be made structurally a part thereof and shall comply in all respects with
the requirements of this Zoning Code applicable to the principal building. No
accessory building which is not a part of the principal building shall be
located closer than 15 feet from the principal building. Accessory buildings
located in Residential Districts shall have side yard clearances in accordance
with the following.
 
District Minimum Clearance
R-1      Total 10 ft., minimum 3 ft. one side
R-2      Total 8 ft., minimum 3 ft. one side
R-3      Total 7 ft., minimum 3 ft. one side
 
   (b)   No accessory building shall be built within five feet of the rear lot
line.
   (c)   No accessory building shall exceed 832 square feet in floor space.
(Ord. 75-O-175, passed 5-14-1975; Ord. 87-O-954, passed 3-17-1987)
§ 1260.20  TEMPORARY BUILDINGS.
   (a)   Temporary buildings.  Temporary buildings for uses incidental to
construction work may be erected in any of the zoning districts established in
this Zoning Code. However, such temporary buildings shall be removed upon the
completion or abandonment of the construction work.
   (b)   Canvas type garages.
      (1)   A temporary canvas storage structure may be permitted in any zoning
district. A temporary and revocable permit, granted for a period not to exceed
365 days, shall be required for such structure, once per property owner. Permit
fee shall be twenty-five dollars ($25.00). The structure shall be required to
adhere to the same restrictions as permanent accessory buildings. The structure
may be used as a temporary garage for intact motorized vehicles and marine
equipment and it must be kept in good repair. The structure may not be used as
a dwelling, an animal shelter, or for junk storage and must be removed not
later than the 365th day after issuance of the permit.
      (2)   Existing similar structures shall not be replaced by another
temporary structure.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974; Ord. 03-O-2082, passed 12-16-2003)
§ 1260.21  CONFLICTS OF PROVISIONS OF ZONING CODE.
   If any of the requirements or regulatory provisions of this Zoning Code are
found to be inconsistent one with another, the more restrictive or greater
requirement shall be deemed, in each case, to be applicable.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1260.22  PROHIBITED USES.
   (a)   No use is permitted or authorized to be established which, when
conducted in compliance with this Zoning Code and any other condition or
requirement prescribed, is or may become hazardous, noxious or offensive due to
the emission of odor, dust, smoke, cinders, gas, fumes, noise, vibration,
electrical interference, refuse matter or water-carried wastes.
   (b)   No liquid waste injection disposal wells and support structures are
permitted or conditionally permitted uses within the City.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974; Ord. 12-O-2704, passed 10-16-2012)
§ 1260.23  OUTDOOR ADVERTISING SIGNS.
   An outdoor advertising sign is classified as a business use and is
specifically prohibited in all Residential Districts. Outdoor advertising signs
shall be erected subject to the provisions of
Chapter 1294.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1260.24  COMPLIANCE WITH BUILDING REGULATIONS REQUIRED.
   All structures shall comply with the standards and requirements of the
Building Code and all other building regulations adopted by Council.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1260.25  SWIMMING AND WADING POOLS.
   Public or private in-ground or above-ground swimming, wading or other pools
containing over one and one-half feet of water depth shall be considered as
structures for the purpose of permits, shall not be located in front or side
yards and shall conform to all required yard setback lines. The construction,
plumbing and electrical requirements, inspection and other safety facilities
shall be regulated by the applicable codes. Every pool defined as a structure
shall be completely surrounded by a fence or wall not less than four feet in
height. Such fence shall be constructed so as to have no opening, hole or gap
larger than three inches in any dimension, except for a door or gate which
shall be equipped with a suitable locking device to prevent unauthorized
intrusions. An accessory building may be used in, or as a part of, such
enclosure. Above-ground pools having vertical surfaces of at least four feet in
height shall be required to have fences and gates only where access may be had
to the pool.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1260.26  FENCES, WALLS AND HEDGES.
   Fences, walls and hedges may be permitted in any required yard, provided
that no fence, wall or hedge along the sides or front edge of any front yard
shall be over four feet in height. Fences, walls or hedges may be permitted
along the side or rear lot lines to a height of not more than six feet above
the grade, provided that any fence, wall or hedge shall be well maintained and
harmonious and appropriate in appearance with the existing character of the
immediate area in which it is to be located and will not be hazardous or
disturbing to existing or future neighboring uses. Informal plantings may be
higher than six feet. Solid walls and fences shall conform to all required
setback lines for yards. On corner lots, fences, walls, or hedges in the side
yard fronting on the side street shall not exceed four feet in height. The
Commission may vary the height restrictions for fences or walls in Commercial
or Industrial Districts for good cause and in accordance with an approved site
plan.
(Ord. 92-O-1317, passed 11-3-1992)
§ 1260.27  BUSINESSES AND MERCHANDISE DISPLAYS.
   In all Commercial Districts, all businesses and merchandise displays shall
be conducted within a completely enclosed building, except as otherwise
provided in this Zoning Code.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1260.28  ZONING OF ANNEXED LANDS.
   The zoning of all lands or property annexed by the municipality shall be
established at the time of annexation. No land or property shall be annexed
prior to the completion of a review and recommendation by the Planning
Commission.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1260.29  USABLE OPEN SPACE.
   Wherever required by this Zoning Code, usable open space shall be
unobstructed to the sky and shall not be devoted to service driveways or off-
street parking or loading spaces. However, balconies at least four feet, six
inches wide and roof areas which are improved for, and suitable as,
recreational areas may be counted as usable open space.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1260.30  GENERAL PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.
   All uses and activities established after the effective date of this Zoning
Code (Ordinance 74-O-128, passed October 17, 1974) shall comply with current
Environmental Protection Agency standards or the following standards, whichever
is greater.
   (a)   Noise.  The sound level of any operation, other than the operation of
motor vehicles or other transportation facilities, or operations involved in
the construction or demolition of structures, or emergency alarm signals or
time signals, or institutional or governmental or quasi-public activities,
shall not exceed the decibel levels in the designated octave bands as stated
below. The sound pressure level shall be measured with a sound level meter and
an octave bank analyzer that conform to specifications published by the
American Standards Association. Sound pressure levels shall be measured at the
lot line of the property from which the emission occurs. The maximum
permissible sound pressure levels for smooth and continuous noise are as
follows: (All of the decibel levels stated below shall apply in each case.)
 
Octave Band Center Frequency (Hertz) Maximum Permitted Sound Pressure Level
                                     (decibels re 0.0002 microbar)
31.5  83
63    78
125   72
250   64
500   57
1,000 51
2,000 46
4,000 41
8,000 38
 
   (b)   Vibrations.  No use shall cause earth vibrations or concussions
detectable without the aid of instruments beyond the lot lines of the use
creating the vibrations or concussions, except vibrations or concussions
produced as a result of construction or demolition operations.
   (c)   Dust, fumes, vapors and gases.
      (1)   The emission of dust, dirt, fly ash, fumes, vapors or gases which
can cause any damage to human health, animals, vegetation or property, or which
can cause any soiling or staining of persons or property at any point beyond
the lot line of the use creating the emission, is prohibited.
      (2)   No smoke shall be emitted from any chimney or other source which is
of a visible gray opacity greater than No. 1 on the Ringelmann Smoke Chart, as
published by the U.S. Bureau of Mines, except that smoke of a shade not darker
than No. 2 on the Ringelmann Chart may be emitted for not more than six minutes
in any 30-minute period.
      (3)   No emission of liquid or solid particles from any chimney or other
source shall exceed 0.5 grains per cubic foot of the covering gas at any point
beyond the lot line of the use creating the emission. At the source, allowable
particulate matter in combustion gases shall not exceed one pound per million
BTU input.
   (d)   Odors.  No use shall emit odorous gases or other odorous matter in
such quantities as to be offensive at any point on or beyond the lot lines of
such use. Any process which may involve the creation or emission of any odor
shall be provided with a secondary safeguard system, so that control will be
maintained if the primary safeguard system fails.
   (e)   Heat.  No use shall produce heat detectable without the aid of
instruments beyond the lot lines of such use.
   (f)   Glare.  No use shall produce a strong, dazzling light or a reflection
thereof beyond the lot lines of such use.
   (g)   Storage and waste disposal.
      (1)   No highly flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas shall be
stored in bulk above ground, except in tanks or drums of fuel directly
connected with energy devices or heating appliances located and operated on the
same lot as the tanks or drums of fuel.
      (2)   All outdoor storage facilities for fuel, raw materials and
products, and all fuel, raw materials and products stored outdoors, shall be
enclosed by an approved safety fence.
      (3)   No materials or wastes shall be deposited upon a lot in such a form
or manner that they may be transported off the lot by natural causes or forces,
nor shall any substance which can contaminate a stream or watercourse or
otherwise render such stream or watercourse undesirable as a source of water
supply or recreation, or which will destroy aquatic life, be allowed to enter
any stream or watercourse.
      (4)   All materials or wastes which might cause fumes or dust, which
constitute a fire hazard or which may be edible or otherwise attractive to
rodents or insects, shall be stored outdoors only if the same are enclosed in
containers which are adequate to eliminate such hazards and shall be hidden
from view from any street or adjacent property.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1260.31  HISTORIC AND ARCHITECTURAL PRESERVATION.
   (a)   No building or use which, because of its historical significance or
architectural character, has been identified on the Columbiana Preservation Map
as being significant to the heritage of the municipality, may be altered,
converted, enlarged, reconstructed, structurally altered or demolished without
the consent of the Planning Commission.
   (b)   A local civic organization will identify those buildings and uses
which will be shown on such Map and obtain the permission of the owner of such
buildings or uses before such a designation is made.
   (c)   All plans for revisions of such buildings and uses shall be presented
to the Commission for review and approval. The Commission may seek expert
advice or cause special studies to be made. The cost of securing such advice
shall be borne by the applicant therefor, but in no event shall such cost
exceed two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00), which sum shall be deposited with
the municipality upon request of the Commission.
   (d)   The Commission shall consider the following in making its
recommendations:
      (1)   The proposed use shall not adversely affect the character of the
structure or its surroundings.
      (2)   The proposed remodeling, rehabilitation and/or re-use shall be
consistent with the existing character of the structure. There shall be
coherence in the repetition and similarity of forms, mass, openings, surface
(materials) detailing, construction technique, structure and site planning.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1260.32  SITE PLAN REVIEW; APPLICATIONS.
   (a)   Review of site plans.
      (1)   No multi-family, commercial or industrial use specified under
Chapters
1274 through
1290 shall be permitted until the site plans therefor are reviewed and approved
by the Planning Commission, with a finding by the Commission that the plan is
consistent with the purposes and general requirements of this Zoning Code and
that the specific standards set forth in Chapters
1274 through
1290 and the following general requirements will be complied with. The
Commission may seek expert advice or cause special studies to be made. The cost
of securing such advice or studies shall be borne by the applicant and
forthwith deposited with the municipality in advance upon request of the
Commission.
      (2)   In order to promote the orderly development of the site plan to the
required specifications, the Commission and the Zoning Inspector shall
encourage informal discussions by and with the applicant prior to formal
application for a zoning certificate or conditional zoning certificate. The
formal application shall include the following:
         A.   The site plan shall be drawn to a legible scale, show
topographical features of the lot, building placement and activity areas and
include a circulation and parking plan, planting and landscaping plan and
architectural plans with engineering and constructional information. A
description of the proposed development or operation shall be provided in
sufficient detail to indicate possible emission of energy or matter beyond the
lot lines, with engineering plans for the handling of any excesses thereof.
         B.   The site plan shall show that a proper relationship will exist
between thoroughfares, service roads, driveways and parking areas to encourage
pedestrian and vehicular traffic safety on both public and private lands.
         C.   All development features, including principal buildings, open
spaces, service roads, driveways and parking areas, shall be so located and
related as to minimize the possibility of adverse effects upon adjacent
development.
         D.   The architectural design of buildings shall be developed with
consideration given to the relationship of adjacent development in terms of
building height, mass, texture, material, line, pattern and character.
         E.   Building location and placement shall be developed with
consideration given to minimizing the removal of trees and changes of
topography.
         F.   Maximum possible visual and auditory privacy for surrounding
properties and occupants shall be provided through good design and the use of
proper building materials and landscaping.
         G.   In large parking areas, visual relief shall be provided through
the use of tree-planted and landscaped dividers, islands and walkways.
         H.   Screening of parking areas and service areas from surrounding
properties shall be provided through landscaping and/or ornamental walls or
fences, where necessary, to promote harmony with adjacent developments.
         I.   On-site traffic circulation shall be designed to make possible
adequate fire and police protection.
         J.   In the case of an industrial use, adequate provisions shall be
made for the disposal of industrial wastes. Wastes containing poisonous,
corrosive, flammable or explosive solids, liquids or gases, or oils or greases,
shall not be discharged into the sanitary sewer.
         K.   Parking and loading provisions shall meet the requirements of
Chapter 1292.
         L.   All buildings and occupancies shall be in conformity with all
applicable codes.
         M.   Prior to approval by the Commission, grading and surface drainage
provisions shall be reviewed and approved by the Municipal Engineer.
         N.   Prior to approval by the Commission, the design and construction
standards of all private streets, driveways and parking areas shall be reviewed
and approved by the Municipal Engineer.
         O.   Prior to approval by the Commission, adequacy of fire protection
shall be established by review and approval of the Fire Chief.
      (3)   The site plan shall be fully implemented within one year from the
date of approval by the Planning Commission unless an extension of said time
period, which shall not exceed six months, is requested by the applicant and
granted by the Planning Commission within the said one year time period.  And
in the event that the site plan is not fully implemented within said time
period, which shall not exceed 18 months, the approval thereof, by the Planning
Commission shall be null and void and no certificate of occupancy shall be
issued to the site plan applicant.
   (b)   Conformity with site plans.
      (1)   The use, placement and dimensions of all buildings, driveways,
sidewalks, parking areas, truck loading and unloading areas, curb cuts, traffic
control devices and activity areas, and the installation of landscaping, fences
and walls, shall conform to the approved site plan. No injurious or offensive
effects shall result from the development or operation, and the control of
effects such as noise, smoke, dust, fumes, odors, electrical interferences and
the storage and disposal of wastes shall be in conformity with accepted current
standards.
      (2)   A performance bond or other financial guarantee shall be placed on
deposit with the municipality to ensure that the landscaping, hard surfacing of
private drives and parking areas and surface water drainage shall be installed
in conformity with approved plans. Such bond or guarantee shall be in an amount
equal to the cost of the construction of the improvements, based on an estimate
approved by the Municipal Engineer, shall be for a period not to exceed three
years and shall provide for the complete construction of the improvements
within that period.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974; Ord 05-O-2185, passed 2-15-2005; Ord. 13-O-
2734, passed 7-16-2013)
§ 1260.33  DRIVEWAY CONSTRUCTION.
   All driveways constructed after June 15, 1993, in conjunction with new
residential construction, shall be constructed of blacktop, concrete, brick or
other similar material over a properly constructed driveway base, which shall
be approved as to composition and thickness by the Municipal Engineer.
(Ord. 93-O-1370, passed 7-6-1993)
§ 1260.34  GARAGE SALES.
   In A-O-C Districts and all Residential Districts the sale of personal
property by way of a garage, yard, porch, street or other such sale shall not
be conducted more than four times within any 12 month period upon any
individual lot or upon acreage or multiple lots titled in the same name or
names; each such sale shall be limited to 72 consecutive hours in duration; the
personal property offered for sale shall not include consignment goods; and
advertising signs for such sales shall not exceed three square feet in size,
shall be placed on private property only with the permission of the private
property owner, shall be erected in free standing form and displayed only
during the hours of the sale, and shall be removed from view immediately
following the sale.
(Ord. 96-O-1571, passed 10-15-1996)
§ 1260.35  DEFINITIONS.
   (a)   General terms.  As used in this Zoning Code, words in the present
tense include the future tense, the singular number includes the plural and the
plural number includes the singular. In addition:
      “Lot” includes “plot” and “parcel.”
      “Person” means an individual, firm, association, organization,
partnership, trust, company or corporation.
      “Shall” is a mandatory requirement, “may” is a permissive requirement and
“should” is a preferred requirement.
      “Used” and “occupied” include “intended, designed or arranged to be used
or occupied.”
   (b)   Specific terms.  As used in this Zoning Code:
      “Accessory use” and “accessory structure” mean a use or structure on the
same lot with, and of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the
principal use or structure.
      “Agriculture” means the use of land for farming, dairying, pasturage,
apiculture, horticulture, floriculture, viticulture and animal and poultry
husbandry and the necessary accessory uses for packing, treating or storing the
produce, provided, however, that:
         A.   The operation of any such accessory use shall be secondary to
that of normal agricultural activities.
         B.   The above uses shall not include the feeding or sheltering of
animals or poultry in penned enclosures within 100 feet of any residential
zoning district. Agriculture does not include the feeding of garbage to animals
or the operation or maintenance of a commercial stockyard or feedyard.
      “Airport” means any runway, land area or other facility designed or used,
either publicly or privately, by a person for the landing and taking off of
aircraft, including all necessary taxiways, aircraft storage and tie-down
areas, hangars and other necessary buildings and open spaces.
      “Alteration, structural.”  “Structural alteration” means any change in
the supporting members of a building, such as a bearing wall, column, beam or
girder.
      “Automotive repair” means the repair, rebuilding or reconditioning of
motor vehicles or parts thereof, including collision service, painting and
steam cleaning of vehicles.
      “Automotive, travel trailer and farm implement sales” means the sale or
rental of new and used motor vehicles, travel trailers or farm implements, but
not including repair work, except the incidental warranty repair of the same,
to be displayed and sold on the premises.
      “Automotive wrecking” means the dismantling or wrecking of used motor
vehicles, mobile homes or trailers, or the storage, sale or dumping of
dismantled, partially dismantled, obsolete or wrecked vehicles or their parts.
      “Basement” means a story all or partly underground, but having at least
one-half of its height below the average level of the adjoining ground.
      “Bed and breakfast” means a dwelling unit in which there are one or more
rooms in which transient paying guests may live, sleep and/or eat over a period
of one or more days, as distinguished from a boarding house, a lodging house, a
hotel, a motel or a tourist home. Bed and breakfast dwelling units may also be
used for family dwelling use purposes.
      “Building” means any structure designed or intended for the support,
enclosure, shelter or protection of persons, animals, chattels or property.
      “Building, accessory.”  “Accessory building” means a subordinate building
detached from, but located on the same lot as, the principal building, the use
of which is incidental and accessory to that of the main building or use.
      “Building, height of.”  “Height of building” means the vertical distance
from the finished grade to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof, or
to the deck line of a mansard roof, or the mean height level between eaves and
the ridge of a gable, hip or gambrel roof.
      “Building line” means the line defining the minimum front, side and rear
yard requirements outside of which no building or structure may be located,
except as otherwise provided in this Zoning Code.
      “Building, principal.”  “Principal building” means the building on a lot
used to accommodate the primary use to which the premises is devoted.
      “Building sign” means a sign which identifies the business or profession
conducted or the principal products sold upon the premises.
      “Canopy” means any structure, other than an awning, made of cloth or
metal, with frames attached to a building, projecting over a sidewalk.
      “Carport” means a covered automobile parking space not completely
enclosed by walls or doors. A carport shall be subject to all the provisions
prescribed in this Zoning Code for private garages.
      “Cemetery” means land used or intended to be used for the burial of the
human or animal dead and dedicated for cemetery purposes, including
crematories, mausoleums and mortuaries if operated in connection with and
within the boundaries of such cemetery.
      “Centralized sewerage system” means a system where individual lots are
connected to a common sewerage system, whether publicly or privately owned and
operated.
      “Centralized water system” means a system where individual lots are
connected to a common water distribution system, whether publicly or privately
owned and operated.
      “Clinic” means any building or other structure devoted to the diagnosis,
treatment and care of human outpatients.
      “Commission” means the Municipal Planning Commission.
      “Comprehensive Development Plan” means the Plan, or any portion thereof,
adopted by the Planning Commission and Council, showing the general location
and extent of present and proposed physical facilities, including housing,
industrial and commercial uses, major thoroughfares, parks, schools and other
community facilities. Such Plan establishes the goals, objectives and policies
of the community.
      “Condominium” means and includes the land, together with all buildings,
improvements and structures thereon, all easements, rights and appurtenances
belonging thereto and all articles of personal property which have been
submitted to the provisions of Ohio R.C. Chapter 5311.
      “Convalescent home” means a rest home or boarding home for the aged or
mentally or physically infirm, conducted within any abode, building,
institutional residence or a home used for the reception and care, for a
consideration, of three or more persons who, by reason of age or mental or
physical infirmities, are not capable of properly caring for themselves or who
are 65 years of age or older, and for which a license has been issued by the
State Department of Public Welfare.
      “Council” means the Municipal Council.
      “Court” means an open, unoccupied and unobstructed space, other than a
yard, on the same lot with a building or group of buildings.
      “Density” means the number of families residing on, or dwelling units
developed on, a gross acre of land.
      “Discarded motor vehicle” means an inoperable motor-propelled vehicle or
an accessory to the same, which is in the process of being wrecked, dismantled
or stored and which does not have a license thereon which is valid or was valid
not more than six months prior to such wrecking, dismantling or storage.
      “District” means a section of the incorporated territory of the
municipality for which the regulations governing the use of buildings and
premises or the height and area of buildings are uniform.
      “Duplex.”  See Dwelling, two-family.
      “Dwelling” means any building, or portion thereof, which is designed or
used primarily for residential purposes, including one-family, two-family and
multi-family dwellings, but not including hotels, motels, boarding houses,
lodging houses and tourist dwellings. An attached garage, for purposes of
determining the front, side and rear yards, shall be considered a part of the
dwelling.
      “Dwelling, group.”  “Group dwelling” means a group of single-family, two-
family or multi- family dwellings or a combination thereof located on one lot
and around a common court or courts.
      “Dwelling, multi-family.”  “Multi-family dwelling” means a dwelling
designed for or occupied by three or more families living independently of each
other.
      “Dwelling, single-family, attached.”  “Attached single-family dwelling”
means and includes single-family dwelling units, not more than three in any one
building, which are physically attached, one to another, by a combination of
common or adjoining vertical walls or floors which have individual heating and
plumbing systems.
      “Dwelling, two-family.”  “Two-family dwelling” means a building designed
and used exclusively by two families living independently of each other.
      “Dwelling unit” means one or more rooms providing complete living
facilities for one family, including equipment for cooking or provisions for
the same, and including a room or rooms for living, sleeping and eating.
      “Easement” means authorization by a property owner for the use by
another, and for a specified purpose, of any designated part of his or her
property.
      “Essential services” means the erection, construction, alteration or
maintenance by public utilities or municipal departments or commissions, of
underground or overhead gas, electrical, steam or water transmission or
distribution systems or collection, communication, supply or disposal systems,
including poles, wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, fire
alarm boxes, police call boxes, traffic signals, hydrants and other similar
equipment and accessories in connection therewith, but not including buildings
reasonably necessary for the furnishing of adequate service by such public
utilities or municipal departments or commissions or for the public health,
safety or general welfare.
      “Family” means one or more persons occupying a dwelling unit and living
as a single housekeeping unit, whether or not related to each other by birth or
marriage, as distinguished from a group occupying a boarding house, lodging
house, hotel, tourist dwelling or sorority or fraternity house. A family may
also include domestic servants.
      “Fence” means a barrier constructed so as to contain or enclose an area
as a protective measure or to separate or divide areas.
      “Floor area” means the sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several
floors of a building, measured from the exterior faces of exterior walls or
from the centerline of common walls separating two buildings. Floor area, for
the purposes of this Zoning Code, does not include basements, garages, elevator
and stair bulkheads, attic spaces, terraces, breezeways, open porches or
uncovered steps.
      “Floor area ratio” means a mathematical expression determined by dividing
the total floor area of a building by the area of the lot on which it is
located.
      “Frontage” means all the property on one side of a street adjacent to,
and contiguous with, the line of the street.
      “Garage, auto service shop.”  “Auto service shop garage” means a building
or portion of a building in which repairs are made to motor vehicles and in
which there is no painting of cars or body and fender work done.
      “Garage, private.”  “Private garage” means an accessory building or an
accessory portion of a main building, enclosed on all sides, designed or used
for the shelter or storage of passenger vehicles and located on the same lot as
the dwelling to which it is accessory.
      “Garage, public.” “Public garage” means a building or portion of a
building in which more than four motor vehicles are, or are intended to be,
housed under arrangements made with patrons for renting or leasing such space
and accommodation and in which no repair work is carried on.
      “Garden apartment” means a group of buildings not more than two and one-
half stories in height, each building containing not more than eight dwelling
units.
      “Gasoline service station” means a place where gasoline, kerosene or any
other motor fuel or lubricating oil or grease for operating motor vehicles is
offered for sale to the public and deliveries are made directly into motor
vehicles, and where minor repairs are performed.
      “Grade, finished.” “Finished grade” means, for buildings abutting one
street only, the elevation of the sidewalk at the center of the wall facing the
street or the elevation of the centerline of the street where no sidewalk
exists; for buildings having walls facing more than one street, the average
elevation of the sidewalk at the centers of all walls facing the streets; and
for buildings having no walls facing the street, the average level of the
finished surface of the ground adjacent to the exterior walls of the buildings.
Any wall approximately parallel to a street line shall be considered as facing
the street.
      “Grade, natural.” “Natural grade” means the elevation of the undisturbed
natural surface of the ground prior to any excavation or fill.
      “Gross acre” means land area, measured on the horizontal plane, and
includes land occupied by all natural and manmade features of the landscape.
      “Guest house” and “accessory living quarters” means living quarters
located on the second floor of a private garage for the use of persons employed
on the premises or for the temporary use by guests of the occupants of the
premises. Such quarters shall have no kitchen facilities and shall not be
rented or otherwise used as a separate dwelling.
      “Home occupation” means any use or profession customarily conducted
entirely within a dwelling and carried on only by the inhabitants thereof,
which use is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for
dwelling purposes and does not change the character thereof.
      “Hospital” means any building or other structure containing beds for at
least four patients and devoted to the medical diagnosis, treatment or other
care of human ailments.
      “Hotel” means a building in which lodging is provided and offered to the
public for compensation and which is open to transient guests, as distinguished
from a boarding house or a lodging house.
      “Institution” means a building occupied by a nonprofit corporation or a
nonprofit establishment for public use.
      “Junk” means any worn out or cast off litter, debris, discarded article
or material which is ready for destruction or has been collected or stored for
salvage or conversion to some use.
      “Junk yard” means the use of more than 25 square feet of the area of any
lot, whether inside or outside a building, or the use of any portion of that
half of any lot that joins any street, for the storage, keeping or abandonment
of junk.
      “Kennel” means any lot or premises on which four or more domesticated
animals more than four months of age are housed, groomed, bred, boarded,
trained or sold or which offers provisions for minor medical treatment.
      “Land Use and Thoroughfare Plan” means the long range plan for the
development of the municipality and its environs, as officially adopted and
amended by the Planning Commission.
      “Loading space” means an off-street space or berth on the same lot with a
building or contiguous to a group of buildings, for the temporary parking of a
commercial vehicle while loading or unloading merchandise or materials, and
which abuts upon a street, alley or other appropriate means of access.
      “Lodging house” means a building where lodging only is provided by the
week or the month, for compensation, for three or more, but not more than 20,
persons.
      “Lot” means a piece, parcel or plat of land occupied or intended to be
occupied by a principal building or a group of such buildings and accessory
buildings, or utilized for a principal use and uses accessory thereto, together
with such open spaces and access to or frontage on a public street as are
required by this Zoning Code.
      “Lot area” means the computed area contained within lot lines. Where the
lot has been conveyed to the center of the street, the area of the lot lying
within the established street right-of-way shall not be included as part of the
lot area for the purposes of this Zoning Code.
      “Lot, corner.”  “Corner lot” means a lot at the junction of, and abutting
upon, two intersecting streets.
      “Lot coverage” means the portion of the lot area that is covered by any
building.
      “Lot depth” means the mean horizontal distance between the right-of-way
line of the street and the rear lot line.
      “Lot, double frontage.”  “Double frontage lot” means a lot having a
frontage on two nonintersecting streets, as distinguished from a corner lot.
      “Lot, interior.”  “Interior lot” means a lot other than a corner lot.
      “Lot line” means the property line defining the limits of a lot.
      “Lot line, front.” “Front lot line” means the line separating a lot from
the street on which the lot fronts.
      “Lot line, rear.”  “Rear lot line” means the lot line opposite and most
distant from the front lot line.
      “Lot line, side.”  “Side lot line” means any lot line other than a front
or rear lot line. A side lot line separating a lot from a street is called a
side street lot line. A side lot line separating a lot from another lot is
called an interior side lot line.
      “Lot of record” means a lot which is a part of a subdivision, the map of
which has been recorded in the office of the County Recorder, or a parcel of
land, the deed to which was of record on or prior to the effective date of this
Zoning Code (Ordinance 74-O-128, passed October 17, 1974).
      “Lot, width of.”  “Width of lot” means the width of a lot measured along
the minimum building setback line.
      “Major thoroughfare” and “collector thoroughfare” mean a thoroughfare
designated as such on the adopted Land Use and Thoroughfare Plan.
      “Marquee” means any hood or awning of permanent construction projecting
from the wall of a building above an entrance and extending over a sidewalk, or
part thereof.
      “Minimum building setback line” means a line parallel to the street
right-of-way line, at a distance therefrom equal to the required depth of the
front yard, and extending across the full width of the lot. Where the
established right-of-way line, if any, cannot be ascertained, it shall be
deemed to be 30 feet from the center of the line of the existing roadway. Where
a major thoroughfare or collector thoroughfare is designated on the Land Use
and Thoroughfare Plan, the setback line shall be measured from the proposed
right-of-way line.
      “Motel” means any building or group of buildings containing sleeping
rooms, with or without cooking facilities, designed as overnight sleeping
quarters for automobile tourists or transients, with a garage attached or a
parking space conveniently located to each unit, and includes auto courts,
motor lodges and tourist courts.
      “Net acre” means the land area of any lot or plot of ground after
deducting that portion within the right-of-way of any street, alley or road.
      “Nonconforming use” means any building, sign or land lawfully occupied by
a use on the effective date of this Zoning Code (Ordinance 74-O-128, passed
October 17, 1974), or any amendment or supplement thereto, which does not
conform to the use regulations of the district in which it is situated.
      “Outdoor advertising sign” means a fixed or portable appliance, structure
or surface, including the supporting structure made necessary thereby, which is
or shall be erected upon the ground or a wall of a building or above the roof
of a building, and which is used, erected, intended and/or designed to be used
for the public display of posters, painted displays, electrical displays,
pictures or other pictorial or reading matter, for the benefit of a person,
organization, business or cause not residing or located on the lot or in the
building or on a lot adjoining the lot or building where such appliance,
structure or surface is or shall be located. “Outdoor advertising sign”
includes any card, cloth, paper, metal, painted glass, wood, plaster or stone
sign or other sign of any kind or character placed for outdoor advertising
purposes on the ground or on any tree, wall, bush, rock, post, fence, building,
structure or thing. “Placed,” as used with “outdoor advertising sign” and
“outdoor advertising structure,” includes erecting, constructing, posting,
painting, printing, tacking, nailing, gluing, sticking, carving or otherwise
fastening, affixing or making visible a sign in any manner.
      “Parking space” means an off-street space or berth for the temporary
parking of a vehicle for a period longer than required to load or unload
persons or goods.
      “Performance bond” and “surety bond” mean an agreement by a subdivider or
developer with the municipality, for the amount of the estimated construction
cost, guaranteeing the completion of physical improvements in accordance with
plans and specifications within the time prescribed by the subdivider’s
agreement.
      “Planned unit residential development” means a planned, integrated
residential development where the minimum lot size and dwelling type may be
modified somewhat to achieve particular design objectives and economical
provision of open space and utilities while maintaining the same overall
density limitations of the district in which the planned unit residential
development is located and complying with other pertinent requirements of the
Planning Commission.
      “Public uses” means public parks, schools and administrative and cultural
buildings and structures, but does not include public lands or buildings
devoted solely to the storage and maintenance of equipment and material and
public service facilities.
      “Public utility” means any person, firm, corporation, governmental agency
or board who or which is fully authorized to furnish, and furnishes, to the
public electricity, gas, steam, telephone, telegraphy, transportation, water or
any other similar public utility.
      “Quasi-public use” means a church, Sunday school, parochial school,
college, hospital and any other facility of an educational, religious,
charitable, philanthropic or nonprofit nature.
      “Residential District” and “R District” mean any district in which
residential uses are permitted.
      “Roadside stand” means a removable structure used or intended to be used
solely by the owner or the tenant of a property on which it is located for the
sale of seasonal agricultural products produced on the premises and to be
removed and stored behind the building line on the property at the conclusion
of the seasonal sales.
      “Row house.”  See Town house.
      “Screening strip” means a strip of land used as a planting strip on which
are placed evergreens, hedges, shrubbery or other planting materials maintained
in a neat and orderly manner.
      “Seat” means, for the purpose of determining the number of off-street
parking spaces for certain uses, the number of seating units installed or
indicated, or each 24 linear inches of benches, pews or spaces for loose
chairs.
      “Setback line” means the line established by this Zoning Code, generally
parallel with and measured from the lot line, defining the limits of a yard in
which no building, other than an accessory building or structure, may be
located above ground, except as may be provided in this Zoning Code.
      “Sign” means any device or surface of a building or any other natural or
manmade object on which letters, illustrations, designs, figures or any other
symbols are painted, printed, stamped, raised, or in any manner outlined or
attached and used for display of or to attract attention to any object,
product, place, activity, person, issue, institution, organization or business,
but does not include the flag, pennant, badge or insignia of any government or
governmental agency or of any charitable, religious, education or similar
organization.
      “Sign, area of.”  “Area of sign” means that area which is normally
visible from any one direction. For example, a rectangular sign four feet by
five feet with a display on both sides shall be considered to be 20 square
feet. The square footage determination shall be ascertained by adding all sign
surface areas and dividing by two. In addition:
         A.   Signs which require other signs to display the full meaning, such
as individually displayed letters of the name of an establishment or adjacent
pictorial displays, shall be considered one sign, so long as such other signs
are physically connected to the principal sign and so long as the surface area
of such other signs, together with that of the principal sign, does not exceed
the maximum square footage permitted.
         B.   Sign supporting structures, which by size or ornateness have been
designed to attract attention, shall be considered part of the sign square
footage.
      “Sign, banner.” “Banner sign” means any sign made of canvas, plastic or
other cloth with or without a frame.
      “Sign, bulletin board.”  “Bulletin board sign” means any sign or
structure located on the property of a public, institutional, religious or
charitable organization which is used to announce their activities.
      “Sign, changeable copy.”  “Changeable copy sign” means a sign or any
portion thereof where the message or graphic is not permanently affixed to the
structure, framing or background and may be periodically replaced or covered
over, manually or by electric or manual devices.
      “Sign, directional.”  “Directional sign” means a sign indicating the
direction to which attention is called either on the lot on which the sign is
located or which directs attention to another location.
      “Sign, ground and pole.”  “Ground sign” and “pole sign” mean any sign
supported by uprights or braces placed on the ground or attached to any
building.
      “Sign, horizontal.”  “Horizontal sign” means any sign which is greater in
width than in height.
      “Sign, illuminated.” “Illuminated sign” means any sign which has
characters, letters, figures, or outlines illuminated by electric lights or
luminous tubes as a part of the sign proper.
      “Sign, political.”  “Political sign” means any sign which is portable or
non-portable that relates to an election of any kind involving a political
party, a candidate, or candidates for office and/or an issue or issues to be
decided at such election.
      “Sign, portable.”  “Portable sign” means any temporary sign which is
designed to be moved and is not permanently attached to any part of a building
or to the ground.
      “Sign, projecting.”  “Projecting sign” means any sign which is attached
to a building or other structure and extends beyond the line of such building
or structure or beyond the surface of that portion of the building or structure
to which it is attached.
      “Sign, roof.”  “Roof sign” means any sign erected, constructed and
maintained wholly upon or over the roof or parapet wall of any building with
the principal support on the roof structure.
      “Sign, temporary.”  “Temporary sign” means a sign which is intended to
advertise construction projects, real estate sales, civic, religious or
charitable events, leases or rentals, or political candidates, parties, or
issues, directional signs and banners where the duration of such sign is not
permanent, and the sign is not affixed in a lasting or permanent manner to the
ground or a building.
      “Sign, vertical.”  “Vertical sign” means any sign which is greater in
height than in width.
      “Sign, wall.” “Wall sign” means any sign painted on, attached to or
erected against the wall of a building or structure, with the exposed face of
the sign in a plane parallel to the plane of such wall.
      “Stable, private.”  “Private stable” means a stable, with a capacity of
not more than two animals, owned by the occupants of the dwelling to which it
is an accessory use.
      “Story” means that portion of a building included between the surface of
any floor and the surface of the next floor above it or, if there is no floor
above it, the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it.
      “Story, half.”  “Half story” means a space under a sloping roof which has
the line of intersection of the roof decking and a wall face not more than
three feet above the top floor level and in which space not more than two-
thirds of the floor area is finished off for use.
      “Street, private.”  “Private street” means a thoroughfare which affords a
principal means of access to abutting property, but which has not been
dedicated to public use or subject to public easements therefor.
      “Street, public.”  “Public street” means a public thoroughfare which has
been dedicated to public use and accepted by the municipality or subject to
public easements therefor and which affords a principal means of access to
abutting property.
      “Street right-of-way line” means a dividing line between a lot, tract or
parcel of land and a contiguous street. Where the lot, tract or parcel of land
has been conveyed to the center of the street, the street right-of-way line
then becomes the inside line of land reserved for street purposes.
      “Structure” means anything constructed or erected, the use of which
requires a permanent location on the ground or an attachment to something
having a permanent location on the ground, including advertising signs,
billboards, pergolas and farmers’ roadside stands, but not including fences or
walls used as fences.
      “Swimming pool, commercial.”  “Commercial swimming pool” means a body of
water in an artificial receptacle or other container, whether located indoors
or outdoors, used or intended to be used for public, semipublic or private
swimming by adults or children, or both, whether or not any charge or fee is
imposed upon such adults or children, operated and maintained by any person,
whether he or she is an owner, lessee, operator, licensee or concessionaire,
exclusive of a family swimming pool, and includes all structures,
appurtenances, equipment, appliances and other facilities appurtenant to and
intended for the operation and maintenance of a swimming pool, as well as all
swimming pools operated and maintained in conjunction with or by clubs, motels
and community associations.
      “Swimming pool, family.”  “Family swimming pool” means a swimming pool
used or intended to be used solely by the owner or lessee thereof and his or
her family and by friends invited to use it without payment of any fee.
      “Thoroughfare” means a street or alley or a boulevard as such terms are
defined in §
1240.12(b)(42) of the Codified Ordinances of the Municipality of Columbiana.
      “Tourist dwelling” means a dwelling where overnight accommodations are
provided for tourists.
      “Town house” means single-family attached dwelling units, not less than
three nor more than eight in any one single story building or two-story
building, if the second story space is part of the dwelling units, each of
which occupies at least an equal area of floor space on the first floor. Such
units are physically attached one to another by a combination of common or
adjoining vertical walls and floors, have individual heating and plumbing
systems and are individually owned, sold as condominiums or rented.
      “Usable open space” means the required portion of a lot, excluding the
required front yard area, which is unoccupied by principal or accessory
buildings and available to all occupants of the building for use for
recreational and other leisure activities normally carried on outdoors.
      “Use” means the purpose for which a building or premises is or may be
occupied. In the classification of uses, a use may be a use as commonly
understood, the name of an occupation, business, activity or operation carried
on, or intended to be carried on, in a building or on any premises, or the name
of a building, place or thing, which name indicates the use or intended use.
      “Used car lot” means any lot on which two or more motor vehicles, which
have been previously titled in a name other than the manufacturer or dealer, in
operating condition, are offered for sale or displayed to the public.
      “Variance” means a modification of the strict terms of the relevant
regulations of this Zoning Code, where such modification will not be contrary
to the public interest and where, owing to conditions peculiar to the property
and not the result of the action of the applicant for a variance, a literal
enforcement of such regulations would result in unnecessary and undue hardship.
      “Yard” means an open space on the same lot with a building, which is
unoccupied and unobstructed by any portion of a structure from the ground
upward, except as otherwise provided in this Zoning Code.
      “Yard, front.”  “Front yard” means a yard extending across the full width
of a lot and being the perpendicular distance between the street right-of-way
line and the nearest portion of any building or structure existing or proposed
for construction on such lot. Where the right-of-way is not established, the
right-of-way shall be assumed to be 60 feet. Where a major or collector
thoroughfare is designated on the Land Use and Thoroughfare Plan, the front
yard depth shall be measured from the proposed street right-of-way line.
      “Yard, rear.”  “Rear yard” means a yard extending across the full width
of a lot between the side lot lines and being the perpendicular distance
between the rear lot line and the nearest portion of any building or structure
existing or proposed to be constructed on such lot. On corner lots, the rear
yard shall be considered as parallel to the street upon which the lot has its
least dimension. On both corner lots and interior lots, the rear yard shall be,
in all cases, at the opposite end of the lot from the front yard.
      “Yard, side.”  “Side yard” means a yard between the nearest portion of
any building or structure existing or proposed to be constructed on such lot
and the side lines of the lot and extending from the front yard to the rear
yard.
      “Zoning Code” means Ordinance 74-O-128, passed October 17, 1974, as
amended, codified herein as Title Six of Part Twelve - the Planning and Zoning
Code.
      “Zoning Map” means the “Zoning Districts Map, Municipality of Columbiana,
Ohio.”
      “Zoning permit” means a document issued by the Zoning Inspector
authorizing the use of lots, structures, uses of land and structures and the
characteristics of the uses.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974; Ord. 92-O-1319, passed 11-3-1992; Ord. 98-O-
1698, passed 10-6-1998; Ord. 03-O-2067, passed 10-21-2003; Ord. 09-O-2511,
passed 2-17-2009; Ord. 15-O- 2826, passed 6-16-2015)
CHAPTER 1262:  ADMINISTRATION, ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTY
Section
1262.01   Building Officer is Zoning Inspector.
1262.02   Conditional zoning certificates; authority of Zoning Inspector and
Planning Commission.
1262.03   Applications for zoning certificates and conditional zoning
certificates.
1262.04   Zoning certificate required; issuance.
1262.05   Fees.
1262.06   Special costs.
1262.07   Performance bond or other financial guarantee required.
1262.08   Fee, bond and fine deposits.
1262.09   Certificates of occupancy required.
1262.10   Records.
1262.11   Amendments to Zoning Map and Zoning Code.
1262.12   Initiation of amendments.
1262.13   Applications for Zoning Code amendments.
1262.14   Referral of proposed amendments to Planning Commission.
1262.15   Public hearings; notice; file copies.
1262.16   Adoption or denial of amendments.
1262.17   Amendments to definitions.
1262.18   Application fee.
1262.19   Interpretation.
1262.20   Conflicts of laws.
1262.21   Separability.
1262.22   Equitable remedies.
1262.99   Penalty.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Municipal zoning - see Ohio R.C. 713.06 et seq.
   Administrative board; powers and duties - see Ohio R.C. 713.11
   Violation of zoning ordinances - see Ohio R.C. 713.13
   Conflicts of provisions of Zoning Code - see P. & Z.
1260.21
   Compliance with building regulations required - see P. & Z.
1260.24
   Board of Zoning Appeals - see P. & Z.
Ch. 1264
   Conditional zoning certificates - see P. & Z.
Ch. 1266
   Off-street parking and loading - see P. & Z.
Ch. 1292
   Signs - see P. & Z.
Ch. 1294
   Nonconforming uses - see P. & Z.
Ch. 1296
§ 1262.01  BUILDING OFFICER IS ZONING INSPECTOR.
   The Building Officer of the municipality shall be the Zoning Inspector for
the purpose of effecting proper enforcement of this Zoning Code.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1262.02  CONDITIONAL ZONING CERTIFICATES; AUTHORITY OF ZONING INSPECTOR AND
PLANNING COMMISSION.
   The Planning Commission has the authority to administer conditional zoning
certificates and shall consider all applications therefor. Such certificates
shall be issued or denied by the Zoning Inspector, but only upon the favorable
or unfavorable recommendation of the Commission, as specified and regulated
pursuant to all of the powers and duties granted to the Commission by this
Zoning Code.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1262.03  APPLICATIONS FOR ZONING CERTIFICATES AND CONDITIONAL ZONING
CERTIFICATES.
   All applications for zoning certificates shall be submitted to the Zoning
Inspector, who may issue such certificates when all applicable provisions of
this Zoning Code have been complied with. All applications for conditional
zoning certificates shall be made to the Zoning Inspector and submitted to the
Planning Commission, which may issue such conditional zoning certificates in
accordance with this Zoning Code. Applications shall be submitted on forms made
available by the Zoning Inspector.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1262.04  ZONING CERTIFICATE REQUIRED; ISSUANCE.
   (a)   No person shall construct, change the use of or alter any structure or
building, including an accessory building, or change the use of any premises,
without first applying to the Zoning Inspector for a zoning certificate, which
certificate may be affixed to, or made a part of, the building permit.
   (b)   Within 30 days after the receipt of such an application, the Zoning
Inspector shall issue a zoning certificate if the application complies with the
requirements of this Zoning Code and is accompanied by the proper fee and if
this Zoning Code does not require referral to the Planning Commission for a
site plan review. Otherwise, the Inspector shall give written notice of denial,
stating the reason therefor over his or her signature.
   (c)   If the applicable district regulations requires a site plan review by
the Commission, the Zoning Inspector shall, within ten days, transmit the
application for the zoning certificate to the Secretary of the Commission, who
shall cause the application to be placed on the agenda of the next regular
Commission meeting. The Commission shall have a maximum of 60 days in which to
review the application and either authorize the Zoning Inspector to issue a
zoning certificate on the basis of the plan as submitted or inform the
applicant of the necessary modifications to bring the application into
conformity with all applicable ordinances. If modifications are required, the
Commission shall have 30 days in which to authorize the issuance of a zoning
certificate once such modifications have been submitted at a regularly
scheduled Commission meeting. Once the Commission has authorized the issuance
of a zoning certificate, the Zoning Inspector shall issue the zoning
certificate within ten days of such authorization.
   (d)   The zoning certificate shall become void at the expiration of one year
after the date of issuance, unless construction is started or a use is changed.
If no construction is started or use changed within one year of the date of the
permit, a new permit is required and a reapplication therefor shall be made.
   (e)   If the application is for a conditional zoning certificate, the
application procedure outlined in §
1266.02 shall be followed in lieu of this section.
   (f)   A record of zoning certificates and conditional zoning certificates
issued shall be transmitted to the Manager and Council, monthly, by either a
list or copies thereof.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1262.05  FEES.
   (a)   The fee schedule for a zoning permit, which fee shall include the
issuance of an occupancy permit, shall be the following:
      (1)   The fee for multi-family new construction, additions or accessory
structures having four or more units shall be calculated by determining the
total gross cost of any such new construction, addition or accessory structure,
dividing the same by one thousand dollars ($1,000), which quotient shall then
be multiplied by one dollar ($1.00), and the product thereof shall be the fee
to be charged.
      (2)   The fee for commercial new construction, additions or accessory
structures shall be calculated by determining the total gross cost of any such
new construction, addition or accessory structure, dividing the same by one
thousand dollars ($1,000), which quotient shall them be multiplied by one
dollar ($1.00), and the product thereof shall be the fee to be charged.
      (3)   The fee for industrial new construction, additions or accessory
structures shall be calculated by determining the total gross cost of any such
new construction, addition or accessory structure, dividing the same by one
thousand dollars ($1,000), which quotient shall be multiplied by fifty cents
($.50), and the product thereof shall be the fee to be charged.
(Ord. 01-O-1909, passed 9-4-2001)
   (b)   The conditional zoning certificate fee schedule is as follows:
      (1)   A change in use with no construction involved, sixty-five dollars
($65.00);
      (2)   Multi-family or commercial structures and/or accessory buildings or
additions, sixty-five dollars ($65.00), plus an additional fee calculated by
determining the total gross cost of any such new construction, addition or
accessory structure, dividing the same by one thousand dollars ($1,000), which
quotient shall then be multiplied by one dollar ($1.00), and the product
thereof shall be the fee to be charged.
      (3)   Industrial, recreational, institutional, governmental, quasi-public
and miscellaneous structures and/or accessory structures or additions, sixty-
five dollars ($65.00), plus an additional fee calculated by determining the
total gross cost of any such new construction, addition, or accessory
structure, dividing the same by one thousand dollars ($1,000), which quotient
shall then be multiplied by fifty cents ($.50), and the product thereof shall
be the fee to be charged.
   (c)   The following fee schedule shall apply for permanent signs advertising
a business, service or other activity:
      (1)   Signs having an area of less than 50 square feet: twenty-five
dollars (25.00);
      (2)   Signs having an area of 50 square feet or larger: fifty dollars
(50.00); and
      (3)   Unlighted street identification signs not to exceed four square
feet in area and traffic control devices or signs erected by the city, state or
federal governments will be exempt from fees.
   (d)   An application for an interpretation, exception, variance or appeal to
the Board of Zoning Appeals shall include a minimum fee of sixty-five dollars
($65.00).
   (e)   An application for an amendment to this Zoning Code shall include a
fee of ninety dollars ($90.00).
   (f)   A re-application fee shall be the same as the initial application fee
as described in this section.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974; Ord. 92-O-1319, passed 11-3-1992; Ord. 96-O-
1528, passed 2-20-1996; Ord. 02-O-1980, passed 12-17-2002; Ord. 09-O-2511,
passed 2-17-2009; Ord. 11-O-2664, passed 11-15-2011)
§ 1262.06  SPECIAL COSTS.
   When the Planning Commission or Board of Zoning Appeals finds it necessary
to maintain a strict record of public hearing procedures, or when the
Commission or Board deems it necessary to cause special studies to be made, the
applicant for a zoning certificate or a conditional zoning certificate shall
bear all direct and related costs.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1262.07  PERFORMANCE BOND OR OTHER FINANCIAL GUARANTEE REQUIRED.
   In all cases where a performance bond or other financial guarantee is
required by this Zoning Code, an applicant shall place such bond or guarantee
with the municipality and such bond or guarantee shall be returned to the
applicant only if and after a certificate of occupancy is issued to the
applicant.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1262.08  FEE, BOND AND FINE DEPOSITS.
   All fees, bond forfeitures and fines shall be deposited in the General Fund
of the municipality and the Director of Finance is hereby authorized to accept
such monies and to deposit the same. The Director is hereby authorized to draw
his or her warrants upon such Fund in payment of any cost incurred.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1262.09  CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY REQUIRED.
   No premises shall have its use changed, and no structure erected, altered,
extended or changed in use shall be occupied, until the person wishing to make
such a change or occupancy obtains a certificate of occupancy therefor from the
Zoning Inspector stating that the structure or proposed use complies with this
Zoning Code.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1262.10  RECORDS.
   (a)   Permanent records of all applications, fees, bonds, certificates,
plans, meetings, notices, hearings, special studies, amendments and other
activities and actions conducted in the administration and enforcement of this
Zoning Code shall be maintained in municipality offices and available to the
public.
   (b)   A list of nonconforming uses, as prescribed in §§
1296.02 through
1296.15, shall be prepared and maintained in municipality offices.
   (c)   An original or master copy of this Zoning Code shall be retained in
municipality offices, maintained current with amendments and be available to
the public. All revisions or amendments shall be incorporated into the original
master text within two weeks from the effective date of the enacting ordinance.
Copies of each amendment set forth in the enacting ordinance shall be attached
as a permanent appendage to the original master text.
   (d)   The original or master of the Zoning Districts Map shall be retained
in municipality offices, maintained current with amendments and be available to
the public. All revisions or amendments shall be incorporated on the original
master Map within two weeks from the effective date of the enacting ordinance.
The boundary lines of each zoning change shall be described as shown on the
original master Map.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1262.11  AMENDMENTS TO ZONING MAP AND ZONING CODE.
   Council may, from time to time, amend by ordinance the number, shape, area
or regulations of the districts established on the Zoning Districts Map or the
regulations set forth in this Zoning Code.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1262.12  INITIATION OF AMENDMENTS.
   Amendments to this Zoning Code may be initiated by:
   (a)   A motion of the Planning Commission;
   (b)   The adoption of a resolution by the Board of Zoning Appeals and
certification to the Planning Commission;
   (c)   The adoption of a resolution by Council and certification to the
Planning Commission; or
   (d)   The filing of an application with the Manager by one or more owners of
property within the area proposed to be changed or affected by the proposed
amendment.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1262.13  APPLICATIONS FOR ZONING CODE AMENDMENTS.
   (a)   Applications for amendments to this Zoning Code shall include the
following, as applicable:
      (1)   Evidence that the proposed amendment would materialize in an equal
or better Zoning Code than the existing Code;
      (2)   A statement of the proposed text change in the regulations set
forth in this Zoning Code;
      (3)   A statement of the proposed change in the number, shape, area or
regulations of districts established on the Zoning Districts Map;
      (4)   Evidence that the existing Zoning Code is unreasonable with respect
to the particular property and that it deprives the property owner of his or
her lawful and reasonable use of the land, except that for the purposes of this
Zoning Code, a limitation upon the financial gain from the land in question
shall not constitute unreasonable zoning;
      (5)   A statement giving the names and addresses of the owners of all
properties lying within, contiguous to, and directly across the street from,
any part of the property, the zoning of which would be changed by the proposed
amendment if enacted; and
      (6)   If an application is initiated under §
1262.12(d), a fee as specified under §
1262.05, which fee shall not be refundable.
   (b)   Applications shall be submitted on forms made available by the Zoning
Inspector.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1262.14  REFERRAL OF PROPOSED AMENDMENTS TO PLANNING COMMISSION.
   (a)   The Planning Commission shall consider the text or a copy of the text
of any proposed amendment to this Zoning Code, together with any supporting
documents forming a part of, or referred to in, such proposed amendment, which
amendment is certified by the Clerk of Council to the Commission. The
Commission shall be allowed not more than 30 days for consideration and
recommendation to Council. All amendments certified to the Commission shall not
be acted upon by Council until the Commission has made a report thereon.
   (b)   In all cases in which the Planning Commission is required to consider
an amendment proposing a change in the Zoning District Map in accordance with
the provisions of division (a) above, the Planning Commission shall cause
notice of the date, time and place of the meeting at which any such proposed
change in the Zoning District Map shall be so considered by the Planning
Commission to be mailed by the Clerk of Council by certified mail at least 
ten  days before the date of such meeting to the owners of the property within,
contiguous to, and directly across the street from, any part of the property
the zoning of which would be changed by the proposed amendment, to the
addresses of such owners appearing on the County Auditor’s current tax list or
the Treasurer’s mailing list and such other lists that may be specified by
Council.
   (c)   In the event that an amendment proposing a change in the Zoning
District Map is initiated in accordance with the provisions of Zoning Code §
1262.12 (d), the cost of the certified mail notices required by the provisions
of division (b) above shall be borne by the applicant.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974; Res. 03-R-308, passed 11-5-2003)
§ 1262.15  PUBLIC HEARINGS; NOTICE; FILE COPIES.
   (a)   Before any amendment favorably or unfavorably recommended by the
Planning Commission is passed by Council, Council shall hold a public hearing
thereon.
   (b)   Council shall, upon receipt of such recommendation from the
Commission, set a time for a public hearing on such proposed amendment or
supplement, which time shall be not more than 60 days from the date of the
receipt of such recommendation from the Commission. Notice of such hearing
shall be given as follows:
      (1)   In all cases, notice shall be given by one publication of the time
and place of such hearing in a newspaper of general circulation in the
municipality at least 30 days prior to the hearing date. Such notice shall
include a statement that opportunity will be afforded to any person interested
to be heard.
      (2)   In cases of a proposed change in the Zoning Districts Map, written
notice of the hearing shall be mailed by the Clerk of Council by certified mail
at least 20 days before the date of the public hearing to the owners of the
property within, contiguous to, and directly across the street from, any part
of the property the zoning of which would be changed by the proposed amendment,
to the addresses of such owners appearing on the County Auditor’s current tax
list or the Treasurer’s mailing list and such other lists that may be specified
by Council.
   (c)   During the 30 days subsequent to giving the notice of the public
hearing, as required, the text of such proposed amendment, together with the
maps or plans or copies thereof forming a part of, or referred to in, such
proposed amendment and the recommendation and any other map, plan or report, if
any, or copies thereof, submitted by the Commission, shall be on file for
public examination in the municipality offices.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1262.16  ADOPTION OR DENIAL OF AMENDMENTS.
   Within 30 days after a public hearing, Council shall either adopt or deny
the proposed amendment. No such amendment which violates, differs from or
departs from the recommendation submitted by the Planning Commission shall take
effect unless passed or approved by not less than four of the members of
Council.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974; Res. 01-R-263, passed 11-20-2001)
§ 1262.17  AMENDMENTS TO DEFINITIONS.
   Whenever an amendment is made to the text of this Zoning Code, the
appropriate definitions pertinent to such amendment shall be included in §
1260.35.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1262.18  APPLICATION FEE.
   Any application for an amendment to this Zoning Code shall include the fee
specified under §
1262.05 to cover the cost of publishing, posting, mailing the notices of the
hearing and other expenses incident thereto. Such fee shall not apply to any
amendment initiated by Council, the Planning Commission or the Board of Zoning
Appeals.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1262.19  INTERPRETATION.
   In its interpretation and application, this Zoning Code, as amended, shall
be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of public health,
safety, morals and general welfare.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1262.20  CONFLICTS OF LAWS.
   Whenever any provision of this Zoning Code requires a greater width or size
of a yard or other open space, a lower height limit, a greater percentage of
lot to be left unoccupied, a lower density of population or a more restricted
use of land than is required in any other ordinance, resolution, regulation,
private deed restriction or private covenant, or imposes any other higher
standard than is required in any other ordinance, resolution, regulation,
private deed restriction or private covenant, the provision of this Zoning Code
shall govern.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1262.21  SEPARABILITY.
   If any section, division or any other provision of this Zoning Code, as
amended, is held to be invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such
decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this Zoning
Code or an amendment thereto.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1262.22  EQUITABLE REMEDIES.
   If any building is or is proposed to be located, erected, constructed,
reconstructed, enlarged, changed, maintained or used, or any land is or is
proposed to be used, in violation of any of the provisions of this Zoning Code,
as amended, Council, the Director of Law, the Zoning Inspector or any adjacent
or neighboring property owner who would be especially damaged by such
violation, in addition to other remedies provided by law, may institute
injunction, mandamus, abatement or any other appropriate action or proceeding
to prevent, enjoin, abate or remove such unlawful location, erection,
construction, reconstruction, enlargement, change, maintenance or use.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1262.99  PENALTY.
   Whoever violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of this
Zoning Code, as amended, is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree and
shall be fined not more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) or imprisoned
not more than 30 days, or both, for each offense. A separate offense shall be
deemed committed each day during or on which a violation or noncompliance
occurs or continues.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974)
CHAPTER 1264:  BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS
Section
1264.01   Establishment; general powers and duties.
1264.02   Membership.
1264.03   Officers; rules.
1264.04   Quorom; voting.
1264.05   Meetings.
1264.06   Witnesses.
1264.07   Records of proceedings.
1264.08   Advisory opinions of Planning Commission.
1264.09   Specific powers and duties.
1264.10   Applications for appeals; fees.
1264.11   Procedures for appeal.
1264.12   Notice of hearings.
1264.13   Decisions of Board.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Organization of boards and commissions - see CHTR.
9.09
   Vacancy on boards or commissions - see CHTR.
9.10
   Removal of members from boards and commissions - see CHTR.
9.11
   Municipal zoning - see Ohio R.C. 713.06 et seq.
   Administrative board; powers and duties - see Ohio R.C. 713.11
   Amendments to Zoning Districts Map and Zoning Code - see P. & Z.
1262.11 et seq.
   Nonconforming uses - see P. & Z.
Ch. 1296
§ 1264.01  ESTABLISHMENT; GENERAL POWERS AND DUTIES.
   There is hereby established a Board of Zoning Appeals which shall have the
powers and duties prescribed by law and by this Zoning Code.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1264.02  MEMBERSHIP.
   The Board of Zoning Appeals shall consist of five members appointed by the
Mayor and Council. Each member shall be appointed for three years, except that
two of the initial members shall be appointed for two years. In the event of
the death or resignation of a member, the Mayor, with the approval of Council,
shall make an appointment for the duration of the unexpired term of the member.
Members of the Board shall be residents of the municipality and shall serve
without compensation. This section shall have no effect on the status of the
Board existing on the date of the passage of this Zoning Code (Ordinance 74-O-
128, passed October 17, 1974), but shall regulate all appointments made after
the effective date of this Zoning Code.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1264.03  OFFICERS; RULES.
   The Board of Zoning Appeals shall elect a Chairperson from its membership,
appoint a Recording Secretary and prescribe rules for the conduct of its
affairs.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1264.04  QUORUM; VOTING.
   Three members of the Board of Zoning Appeals shall constitute a quorum. The
Board shall act by resolution. The concurring vote of three members of the
Board shall be necessary to reverse any order or determination of the Zoning
Inspector or to decide in favor of an applicant in any matter as to which the
Board has original jurisdiction under this Zoning Code.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1264.05  MEETINGS.
   The Board of Zoning Appeals shall meet at the call of its Chairperson and at
such other times as it may determine. All meetings of the Board shall be open
to the public.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1264.06  WITNESSES.
   The Chairperson of the Board of Zoning Appeals or the Acting Chairperson may
issue oaths and compel by issuance of a subpoena the attendance of witnesses in
all matters coming within the purview of the Board and take testimony of any
and all persons appearing before it.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1264.07  RECORDS OF PROCEEDINGS.
   The Board of Zoning Appeals shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing
the vote of each member upon each question or, if a member is absent or fails
to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and
over official actions, all of which shall be filed in the office of the Zoning
Inspector within ten days and the same shall be a public record.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1264.08 ADVISORY OPINIONS OF PLANNING COMMISSION.
   The Board of Zoning Appeals may request an advisory opinion from the
Planning Commission on any appeal. The Commission shall submit a report of such
advisory opinion within 30 days thereof.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1264.09  SPECIFIC POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Board of Zoning Appeals shall adopt such rules and regulations in
accordance with this Zoning Code as may be necessary to carry into effect the
powers and jurisdiction confirmed upon it as follows.
   (a)   The Board shall hear appeals on decisions made by the Zoning Inspector
or the Building Inspector, on matters relating to the Zoning Code, for relief
from any order, requirement, decision or determination, including the refusal,
granting or revocation of permits, and may decide appeals by reversing or
affirming, wholly or in part, or by modifying, such order, requirement,
decision or determination, in accordance with the purpose and intent of this
Zoning Code.
   (b)   The Board shall hear and decide upon an application for a variance
where, owing to exceptional circumstances, such as exceptional narrowness,
shallowness or unusual shape of a specific piece of property, on the effective
date of this Zoning Code (Ordinance 74-O-128, passed October 17, 1974), or
future legislative actions, or by reason of exceptional topographic conditions,
or any other extraordinary situation or condition of such piece of property, or
of the use or development of property immediately adjoining the piece of
property in question, the literal enforcement of the provisions of this Zoning
Code will result in hardship which is unnecessary to carry out the spirit and
purpose of this Zoning Code. In authorizing a variance, the Board may attach
thereto such conditions regarding the location, character and other features of
the proposed structure or use as it may deem necessary in the interest of the
furtherance of the purpose of any variance. The Board may require such bond as
may be necessary to guarantee that all special conditions required by the Board
will be complied with. Such bond shall be set by the Municipal Engineer and
shall not exceed the sum equal to the construction cost contemplated by any
special condition. Hardship complained of cannot be self-created and cannot be
claimed by one who purchases with or without the knowledge of restrictions; it
must result from the application of this Zoning Code or future legislation and
be suffered directly by the property in question. Evidence of a variance
granted under similar circumstances shall not be sufficient in and of itself.
For the purposes of this Zoning Code, a limitation upon the financial gain from
the land and use shall not in and of itself constitute a hardship. Any variance
requested or authorized shall be the minimum that will accomplish the purpose.
   (c)   The Board has the power to hear and decide, in accordance with this
Zoning Code, applications filed as provided in §
1264.10, for special exceptions in the use of land, buildings and other
structures, for interpretation of the Zoning Districts Map and for decisions
upon other special questions on which the Board is authorized by this Zoning
Code to pass. In considering a special exception or interpretation of such Map,
the Board shall give due regard to the nature and condition of all adjacent
uses and structures and, in authorizing a specific exception, may impose such
maintenance and operation, in addition to those expressly stipulated in this
Zoning Code for the particular exception, as the Board may deem necessary for
the protection of adjacent properties and the public interest. The Board is not
empowered to change the character or zoning classification in any district,
except in accordance with §§
1262.11 through
1262.18.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1264.10  APPLICATIONS FOR APPEALS; FEES.
   An appeal shall be entertained by the Board of Zoning Appeals only if formal
action has been taken by the Zoning Inspector or the Building Inspector with
regard to an application for a building permit or zoning certificate, the
issuance of a stop order, a specific referral, a notice of violation or some
similar action, provided that:
   (a)   The application for appeal from a decision shall be filed with the
Zoning Inspector or the Building Inspector within 30 days of the alleged
adverse decision.
   (b)   The application for appeal shall include reference to the decision and
provision of this Zoning Code from which the appeal or variance is sought and
the grounds thereof.
   (c)   The applicant for an appeal shall deposit, to secure costs, the fee
specified in §
1262.05. Such fee shall be deposited with the Zoning Inspector or the Building
Inspector to pay any costs that may be incurred. Such fee shall be deposited in
the General Fund of the municipality and the Director of Finance is hereby
authorized to accept such fee from the Zoning Inspector or the Building
Inspector and deposit the same in such Fund. The Director is hereby authorized
to draw his or her warrants upon such Fund in payment of such costs incurred
and there shall be no refund.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1264.11  PROCEDURES FOR APPEAL.
   The Board of Zoning Appeals shall act in accordance with the procedure
specified by statute and this Zoning Code. All appeals and applications made to
the Board shall be in writing and on the forms prescribed therefor. Every
appeal or application shall refer to the specified provision of this Zoning
Code involved and shall exactly set forth the interpretation that is claimed,
the details of the variance that is applied for and the grounds on which it is
claimed that the variance should be granted, as the case may be. Every decision
of the Board shall be by order granting or denying the relief requested, each
of which shall contain a full record of the findings of the Board by case
number, together with all documents pertaining thereto. The Board shall decide
all appeals within 60 days after the date of hearing, except that such time may
be extended by mutual consent.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1264.12  NOTICE OF HEARINGS.
   When a notice of appeal has been filed in proper form with the Board of
Zoning Appeals, the Secretary shall immediately place the request for appeal
upon the calendar for hearing and shall cause notices stating the time, place
and object of the hearing to be served personally or by certified mail,
addressed to the parties making the request for appeal and the owners of all
property lying within, contiguous to, and directly across the street from, any
part of the property for which a deviation from this Zoning Code is requested,
at least 15 days prior to the date of the scheduled hearing. All notices shall
be sent to addresses given in the last assessment roll. The Manager, the Mayor,
Council and the Planning Commission shall also be notified. Such hearings shall
be advertised by one publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the
municipality at least 15 days before the date of such hearing. The Board, at
its discretion, may send out further notices to publicize such hearings. The
Board may recess such hearings from time to time and, if the time and place of
the continued hearing is publicly announced at the time of adjournment, no
further notice shall be required.
(Ord. 75-O-162, passed 5-20-1975)
§ 1264.13  DECISIONS OF BOARD.
   A certified copy of any decision of the Board of Zoning Appeals shall be
transmitted to the applicant or appellant, the Zoning Inspector, the Manager,
the Mayor, Council and the Planning Commission. Such decision shall be binding
upon the Zoning Inspector and observed by him or her and he or she shall
incorporate the terms and conditions of the same in any permit or certificate
to the applicant or appellant, whenever a permit is authorized by the Board. A
decision of the Board shall not become final until the expiration of ten days
from the date such decision is made, unless the Board finds that the immediate
taking effect of such decision is necessary for the preservation of property or
personal rights and so certifies the same on the record.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974)
CHAPTER 1266:  CONDITIONAL ZONING CERTIFICATES
Section
1266.01   Purpose.
1266.02   Applications.
1266.03   Review of proposed developments.
1266.04   Public hearings.
1266.05   Issuance and revocation of certificates.
1266.06   Reapplications.
1266.07   Term.
1266.08   Evidence of compliance with Zoning Code.
1266.09   General standards for review of uses.
1266.10   Specific standards for conditionally permitted uses.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Municipal zoning - see Ohio R.C. 713.06 et seq.
   Authority of Zoning Inspector and Planning Commission re conditional zoning
certificates - see P. & Z.
1262.02
   Applications for conditional zoning certificates - see P. & Z.
1262.03
   Fees- see P. & Z.
1262.05
   Continuation of existing conditionally permitted uses - see P. & Z.
1296.15
§ 1266.01  PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the issuance of conditional
zoning certificates where conditionally permitted uses are provided for in this
Zoning Code.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1266.02  APPLICATIONS.
   An application for a conditional zoning certificate for any land or
structure use permitted under this Zoning Code shall be submitted in accordance
with the following procedures.
   (a)   An application for a conditional zoning certificate shall be submitted
to the Planning Commission on a special form for that purpose provided by the
Zoning Inspector. Each application shall be accompanied by the fee specified in
§
1262.05. In addition, the Commission, where appropriate, may refer an
application to qualified consultants for study and report if it deems the same
necessary. The cost of such study and report shall be borne by the applicant
and the report shall be completed as soon as is practical.
   (b)   An applicant for a conditional zoning certificate shall supply the
following information:
      (1)   The form supplied by the Zoning Inspector and completed by the
applicant;
      (2)   The site plan, plot plan or development plan of the entire property
being considered, drawn to a reasonable scale and showing the location of all
abutting streets, the location and dimensions of all existing and proposed
structures, the types of buildings and their uses, the acreage or area
involved, including that for parking, and any proposed planting and
landscaping;
      (3)   Complete architectural, engineering and constructional plans and
specifications for all proposed development and construction, including parking
and loading areas; and
      (4)   A statement supported by substantiating evidence regarding the
requirements of §§
1266.09 and
1266.10.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1266.03  REVIEW OF PROPOSED DEVELOPMENTS.
   The Planning Commission shall review a proposed development, as presented on
the submitted plans and specifications therefor, in terms of the standards
established in this Zoning Code. Such review shall be completed and made public
within 90 days of the regular monthly meeting of the Commission following the
submission of such application. In cases where the Commission requests a report
from a consultant, such time may be extended by mutual consent.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1266.04  PUBLIC HEARINGS.
   The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing or hearings upon every
application for a conditional zoning certificate after at least one publication
in a newspaper of general circulation in the municipality at least ten days
prior to the date of the hearing. Such notice shall indicate the place, time
and subject of the hearing. The Commission shall send a written notice of the
hearing to the owner of property within the concerned area, by certified mail.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1266.05  ISSUANCE AND REVOCATION OF CERTIFICATES.
   Only upon the conclusion of hearing procedures relative to a particular
application and an adequate review and study may the Planning Commission issue
a conditional zoning certificate. The breach of any condition, safeguard or
requirement shall automatically invalidate the certificate granted and shall
constitute a violation of this Zoning Code, punishable as provided in §
1262.99.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1266.06  REAPPLICATIONS.
   No application for a conditional zoning certificate, which has been denied
wholly or in part by the Planning Commission, shall be resubmitted until the
expiration of one year or more from the date of such denial, except on grounds
of newly discovered evidence or proof of changed conditions which would be
sufficient to justify reconsideration, as determined by the Commission. Each
reapplication shall be accompanied by the fee specified in §
1262.05.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1266.07  TERM.
   A conditional zoning certificate shall become void at the expiration of one
year after its date of issuance, unless construction has been started.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1266.08  EVIDENCE OF COMPLIANCE WITH ZONING CODE.
   An applicant for a conditional zoning certificate is required to establish
by clear and convincing evidence that the general standards of this Zoning Code
and the specific standards pertinent to each proposed use shall be complied
with throughout the period of the proposed use. The Planning Commission shall
determine compliance or noncompliance and shall ensure that the general and
specific standards and other provisions of this Zoning Code pertinent to the
proposed use shall be satisfied by the completion and operation of the proposed
development.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1266.09  GENERAL STANDARDS FOR REVIEW OF USES.
   The Planning Commission shall review the particular facts and circumstances
of each proposed use in terms of the following standards and shall find
adequate evidence showing that such use of the proposed location will:
   (a)   Be harmonious and in accordance with the general objectives or with
any specific objective of the Land Use and Thoroughfare Plan;
   (b)   Be designed, constructed, operated and maintained so as to be
harmonious and appropriate in appearance with the existing or intended
character of the general vicinity and not change the essential character of the
same area;
   (c)   Not be hazardous or disturbing to existing or future neighboring uses;
   (d)   Not be detrimental to property in the immediate vicinity or to the
community as a whole;
   (e)   Be served adequately by essential public facilities and services, such
as highways, streets, police and fire protection, drainage structures, refuse
disposal and schools, or that the persons or agencies responsible for the
establishment of the proposed use will be able to provide adequately any such
service; and
   (f)   Have vehicular approaches to the property which shall be so designed
as not to create an interference with traffic on surrounding public streets or
roads.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1266.10  SPECIFIC STANDARDS FOR CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED USES.
   Standards listed in this section apply to conditionally permitted uses
listed in Chapters
1268 through
1290.
   (a)   Traffic and location standards.
      (1)   All points of entrance or exit should be located not closer than
200 feet from the intersection of two arterial streets or an arterial and
collector street intersection.
      (2)   Truck routes shall be established for movement in and out of the
development in such a way that will minimize the wear on public streets and
prevent hazards and damage to other properties in the community.
      (3)   Not more than two accessways shall abut any one street.  Such
accessways shall not be less than 30 feet in width at the sidewalk line and
shall have a minimum side radius of 25 feet.
      (4)   If any property fronts on two or more streets, the driveways
thereto shall be located as far from the street intersections as is practical.
      (5)   Truck parking areas, maneuvering lanes and accessways to public
streets shall be designed to cause no interference with the safe and convenient
movement of automobile and pedestrian traffic on and adjacent to the site.
      (6)   The site shall not be used for the storage of trucks. Parking shall
be limited to a time not to exceed 24 hours.
      (7)   On-site circulation shall be designed to make possible adequate
fire and police protection.
      (8)   Paved off-street parking and service areas are required. Each
parking space shall be ten feet by 20 feet. Paved vehicular access drives of at
least ten feet in width shall be provided for parking areas of ten or less
vehicular capacity and two-way drives of 20 feet paving width shall be provided
for parking areas with a capacity of greater than ten vehicles.
      (9)   Drive-in facilities shall be large enough to permit five cars to
use such facilities without causing congestion to traffic on or off the site.
   (b)   Audio, visual and privacy standards.
      (1)   Loudspeakers which cause a hazard or annoyance shall not be
permitted unless they are in accordance with current Environmental Protection
Agency (EPA) standards.
      (2)   No use shall be permitted which may cause a nuisance by reason of
noise, odor, dust, vibration, fumes, smoke or electrical interference, unless
it is in accordance with current EPA standards.
      (3)   No lighting shall create a nuisance. No lighting shall shine
directly upon adjacent properties, unless it is in accordance with current EPA
standards.
      (4)   All structures and activity areas shall be located at least 50 feet
from all property lines.
      (5)   There shall be not more than one identification sign oriented to
each abutting road.
      (6)   Such uses shall be properly buffered and landscaped so as to be
harmonious with surrounding development.
      (7)   Architectural design should be developed with consideration of the
character of the surrounding area.
   (c)   Home occupations.
      (1)   Home occupations shall be conducted entirely within the dwelling
unit and no use of any accessory building or yard space shall be permitted for
such purposes.
      (2)   Such use shall be clearly incidental and secondary to the use of
the dwelling for dwelling purposes.
      (3)   Such use shall be conducted only by persons residing in the
dwelling unit.
      (4)   There shall be no displays or stocks in trade or commodities sold,
except those which are produced on the premises.
      (5)   The use shall not involve the use of more than 33-1/3% of the floor
area of only one story.
      (6)   One unlighted nameplate not more than one square foot in area
announcing the name of the home occupation is permitted.
      (7)   Such uses shall not create a nuisance by reason of noise, odor,
dust, vibration, fumes, smoke, electrical interference or other cause.
   (d)   Campsites and recreation areas.
      (1)   A minimum of 75% of the total campsite or recreation area shall be
devoted to open space devoid of campsites, refreshment stands and any other
service facilities.
      (2)   Only retail uses which are customarily accessory or incidental to
the main recreational use shall be permitted as part of the park, recreational
area or campground.
      (3)   All activities, programs and other events shall be adequately and
properly supervised so as to prevent any hazard and to ensure against any
disturbance or nuisance to surrounding properties, residents or to the
community in general.
      (4)   No campsite shall be occupied by the same occupant or group and/or
tent, trailer or other camping equipment for longer than 14 consecutive days.
No cabin, lodge, room or other rental accommodation shall be occupied by the
same occupant or group for longer than 30 consecutive days.
      (5)   A conditional zoning certificate for a use permitted under this
Zoning Code shall be issued for a three-year period only. After such three-year
period has elapsed, a new conditional zoning certificate shall be required and
may be issued, provided that the Planning Commission and the Zoning Inspector
determine that the use has been and is being operated in accordance with the
specifications of this Zoning Code and the previous conditional zoning
certificate. If necessary, the Board of Zoning Appeals may make additional
requirements for the continued operation of the use as a prerequisite for
reissuance of the conditional zoning certificate.
   (e)   Cemeteries.
      (1)   Except for office uses incidental to cemetery operations, no
business or commercial uses of any kind shall be permitted on a cemetery site.
      (2)   The minimum area required for a cemetery site is 40 acres.
      (3)   A building of brick and/or stone, solid and/or veneered, shall be
provided if storage of maintenance equipment and/or materials is necessary.
      (4)   The pavement width of driveways shall be at least 20 feet (ten feet
per moving lane).
      (5)   Drives shall be of usable shape, improved with bituminous, concrete
or equivalent surfacing and so graded and drained as to dispose of all surface
water accumulation within the area.
      (6)   Pavement shall be installed as development progresses and as
indicated on the final plans approved by the Commission.
      (7)   Sufficient parking space shall be provided so as not to deter
traffic flow within the cemetery.
      (8)   Area drainage and/or sanitary facilities are subject to approval by
the County Board of Health and the Municipal Engineer prior to the issuance of
a conditional zoning certificate.
      (9)   Only signs designating entrances, exits, traffic direction and
titles are permitted and such signs must be approved by the Commission.
      (10)   Adequate screening with shrubs, trees or compact hedges shall be
provided parallel to property lines adjacent to or abutting residential
dwellings. Such shrubs, trees and hedges shall be maintained in good condition.
      (11)   Provisions shall be made for landscaping throughout the cemetery.
      (12)   The locations of cemetery buildings and all other structures shall
conform to front, side and rear yard building lines of the particular district
in which the cemetery is located.
      (13)   No grave sites shall be located within 100 feet of the right-of-
way lines of any publicly dedicated thoroughfare.
      (14)   A grave site shall not be within 200 feet of an existing
residence.
      (15)   Guarantees shall be made that the cemetery will be developed as
proposed on the plans approved by the Commission, the Municipal Engineer and
the Board of Health. Guarantees shall be as follows.
         A.   A performance bond of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00)
for cemeteries of 40 acres or less is required. An additional five thousand
dollars ($5,000.00) is required for each ten acres over 40 acres or for each
ten acres added at a later date. The amount of the bond shall be reduced
annually and by an amount that will leave the balance of the bond proportional
to the portion of the cemetery not developed to the specifications of the plans
approved by the Commission, the Municipal Engineer and the County Board of
Health.
         B.   Other methods as might be worked out by the Commission, the
developers and their legal advisors may be required.
      (16)   A trust fund of an amount set by the Commission shall be
established by the cemetery developers for the perpetual maintenance of the
cemetery grounds. Such trust fund shall be established before any burial spaces
are sold or used and shall be held and invested by a financial institution
mutually agreed upon by the developers and the Commission. A percentage of the
money from the sale of each burial space shall be put into such trust fund. The
percentage shall be an amount set by the Commission. Interest yielded by the
fund shall be applied toward the maintenance of the cemetery grounds.
   (f)   Lodging and boarding houses.
      (1)   Lodging and boarding houses shall also be used for family dwelling
purposes.
      (2)   Such a use shall be maintained in a neat, orderly condition so as
to prevent injury to adjacent uses in particular and the community in general.
      (3)   Automobiles may not be parked in front or side yards and
automobiles not stored in closed structures shall be screened from view of
adjacent properties. All parking spaces must be directly accessible to a
driveway at least ten feet in width.
   (g)   Multi-family housing.  A proposed multi-family housing project shall
conform to all requirements and/or conditions as the Commission may deem
necessary to meet the following criteria.
      (1)   Vehicular approaches to the property shall be so designed as not to
create an interference with traffic on surrounding streets or roads. Curb cuts
to the street shall be limited to two and the parking layout shall not permit
vehicles to back into a street or road from a parking stall or service area.
      (2)   Maximum possible privacy for each apartment shall be provided
through good design and the use of proper building materials and landscaping.
Visual privacy shall be provided through structural screening and landscaping
treatment. Auditory privacy should be provided through soundproofing.
      (3)   The architectural design of apartment buildings shall be developed
with consideration given to the relationship of adjacent development in terms
of building height, mass, texture, line, pattern and character.
      (4)   Building location and placement shall be developed with
consideration given to minimizing the removal of trees and changes of
topography.
      (5)   Television antennas shall be centralized.
      (6)   On-site circulation shall be designed to make possible adequate
fire and police protection.
      (7)   In large parking areas, visual relief shall be provided through the
use of tree plantings and landscaped dividers, islands and walkways. No parking
or service areas shall be permitted between any street and the main building.
      (8)   Paved off-street parking and service areas are required. Parking
spaces shall contain at least 200 square feet and shall be provided at the rate
of two spaces per dwelling unit in each apartment building. All parking and
service areas shall be paved with concrete, asphalt or an equivalent pavement
and shall be located not closer than 20 feet from any residential structure.
Paved vehicular access drives of at least ten feet in width shall be required
for parking areas of ten vehicles or less in capacity, and two-way drives of a
20-foot paving width minimum shall be required for parking areas of an 11 or
more vehicle capacity.
      (9)   Refuse areas shall be noted on the plot plan.
   (h)   Planned unit developments.  It is the intent of this division to
permit in large scale subdivisions greater flexibility of design in order to
preserve the natural character of the land, provide more useful arrangements of
open spaces, promote a greater sense of community, reduce the amount of paved
areas, shorten the length of utility lines, provide for a greater variety of
housing types, and encourage the coordination of compatible architectural
styles. The conditions which shall be met for a planned unit development are as
follows:
      (1)   An application shall be filed with the Planning Commission.
      (2)   The application shall include a master plan of the entire area
being considered.
      (3)   The area proposed shall be in one ownership or, if in several
ownerships, the application must be filed jointly by all owners of the
properties included in the plan.
      (4)   The plan shall comply with the general standards listed in §
1266.09.
      (5)   The plan shall include, in addition to the requirements listed in
this section:
         A.   A topographic map showing contours at an interval not greater
than two feet, except that slopes of greater than 20% may be shown at ten-foot
intervals, provided that no structures or roads are intended to be constructed
on such slopes;
         B.   A table showing the total number of acres to be developed and the
amount of acreage to be used for each type of development, including each
dwelling type, streets, parking areas, community open spaces, recreation areas,
schools and other facilities. Such table shall list the total number of
dwellings proposed as well as the number of each type of dwelling unit; and
         C.   Any other data that the Commission may deem necessary.
      (6)   The minimum area in a planned unit development shall be as follows:
         A.   Twenty acres in an R-1 District;
         B.   Ten acres in an R-2 District; and
         C.   Five acres in an R-3 District.
      (7)   Central sanitary sewer facilities are required.
      (8)   The overall density of a residential development shall not exceed
the average density that would have been permitted if the area were developed
under the conventional regulations for the district in which the property is
located. The maximum number of lots that may be created shall be computed by
subtracting 20% of the total area from the site size and dividing the remaining
land area by the minimum lot size requirement of the district in which the
planned unit development is located, or by submitting a site plan indicating
the number of lots that could be created on the site in question while
complying with conventional lot size regulations for the district.
      (9)   A.   The minimum area regulations for conventional developments may
be modified for planned unit developments at the discretion of the Commission
up to the maximum reduction stipulated in the following schedule.
 
 R-1              R-2              R-3
 Conventional PUD Conventional PUD Conventional PUD
Minimum lot 11,250 sq.  7,000 sq. 8,000 sq.   6,000 sq. 7,500 sq. 5,000 sq.
area per    ft.         ft.       ft.         ft.       ft.       ft.
dwelling
Minimum lot
width at    75 ft.      60 ft.    65 ft.      50 ft.    60 ft.    45 ft.
building
line
Minimum
front yard  45 ft.      35 ft.    35 ft.      30 ft.    30 ft.    25 ft.
depth
Minimum
rear yard   45 ft.      30 ft.    30 ft.      25 ft.    30 ft.    20 ft.
depth
Minimum                 Total 16              Total 14  8 ft.     Total 12 ft.
side yard   10 ft. each ft. (both 10 ft. each ft. (both minimum   (both
width       side        sides)    side        sides)*   total 20  sides)*
                                                        ft.
* May have a zero lot line on one side, provided that the wall on the lot line
has no openings, thus providing a privacy enclosure for the house on the
adjacent lot.
 
         B.   In no case shall any lot be created with less than 35 feet of
frontage on a public dedicated street. Yards adjacent to a Residential District
on the perimeter of the planned unit development shall not be reduced, but
shall comply with the yard requirements of the applicable district regulations.
      (10)   Not more than 35% of the total number of dwelling units in an R-
1 District, nor more than 50% in an R-2 District, may be multi-family units.
Such units shall be located so as not to cause traffic congestion. Minimum lot
areas for multi-family dwellings shall be 12,000 square feet for the first
three units, plus 2,500 square feet for each dwelling unit over three. Yard
depths shall not exceed those listed in the schedule in division (h)(9) hereof.
In no instance, however, may the overall density exceed that stipulated in
division (h)(8) hereof.
      (11)   Off-street parking shall be provided as regulated in
Chapter 1292.
      (12)   Developments regulated by this division shall conform to the
subdivision regulations.
      (13)   The developer of a planned unit development shall submit a
preliminary plan of the project to the Commission which shall investigate and
ascertain that the location, size and other characteristics of the site comply
with the following conditions as well as with the requirements of the district
in which the site is located and the other provisions of this division:
         A.   The proposed project is consistent with the Land Use and
Thoroughfare Plan.
         B.   The proposed project will not adversely affect neighboring
property.
         C.   The plan for the project provides for an integrated and
harmonious design of buildings and open spaces, for adequate and properly
arranged facilities and for interior traffic circulation, off-street parking
and such other features and facilities as may be necessary to protect
surrounding developments and promote orderly growth.
      (14)   Upon a determination by the Commission that the proposed
development project, as shown by the preliminary plan thereof, conforms to the
requirements of all applicable provisions of this Zoning Code and the
subdivision regulations, the proponent shall incorporate any changes or
modifications required or suggested by the Commission.
      (15)   Commercial uses may be included as a part of residential planned
unit developments, but they are intended only to serve that residential
development.
   (i)   Planned commercial developments.  An integrated planned commercial
development, which is a grouping of three or more commercial establishments
which have common vehicular parking facilities and controlled access to
abutting streets and which are developed under a unified site plan, shall be
permitted, provided that the following conditions are met.
      (1)   Only those types of business uses permitted for conventional
development in the district shall be permitted in integrated planned business
developments.
      (2)   The minimum setback building line shall be 60 feet measured from
the street right-of-way line.
      (3)   Side yards and rear yards shall be required only on the perimeter
of the planned development and shall be 50 feet where the business development
is adjacent to a residential zone and thirty feet elsewhere.
      (4)   All points of entrance and/or exit shall be located not closer than
200 feet to the intersection of two thoroughfares.
      (5)   The minimum site size to be considered for an integrated planned
commercial development shall be two acres.
   (j)   Automobile service stations.
      (1)   Automobile service stations shall conform to all setback
requirements of the district in which they are permitted, except that gasoline
pump islands need not conform to the building setback lines, but shall be set
back from all road right-of-way lines at least 25 feet. Lubrication, washing
and other incidental servicing of motor vehicles and all supply and merchandise
storage shall be completely within an enclosed building, except as provided
elsewhere in this Zoning Code. Lighting, including permitted illuminated signs,
shall be arranged so as not to reflect or cause glare that would constitute a
nuisance to any residential district or a hazard to traffic on any public
thoroughfare. Ingress and egress driveways shall be limited to two for any one
road, shall not exceed 30 feet each in width, shall be separated from each
other by at least 20 feet and shall be separated from the intersection of any
two road right-of-way lines by at least 40 feet and from the intersection of
any other property line with any road right-of-way line by at least ten feet.
At least a six-inch high pedestrian safety curb shall be installed where any
service area adjoins a road right-of-way line, except at a driveway approach.
      (2)   Employee vehicles and vehicles awaiting servicing or return to
customers following servicing shall be parked in areas indicated for such
parking on the approved site plan. Such parking areas shall not be closer than
50 feet to any road right-of-way line.
      (3)   Not more than 80 square feet of ground area may be used for the
outdoor storage of discarded materials, automobile parts, scrap and other waste
prior to their collection and subsequent disposal. Such storage areas shall be
completely obscured from view from any point off the site by a masonry wall not
less than five feet in height. Such a storage area shall not be located between
the principal building and any road right-of-way line and shall be made
structurally a part of the principal building or shall be located a distance
from the principal building not greater than ten feet.
      (4)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this or other sections
relating to the development of gasoline service stations, no signs, product
displays, parked vehicles or other obstructions which adversely affect
visibility at intersections or station driveways shall be permitted.
      (5)   The rental of utility trailers and trucks and the storage of
utility trailers and trucks offered for rent shall be permitted in conjunction
with an automobile service station upon compliance with the following
conditions:
         A.   Storage areas for rental trailers and trucks shall conform to all
building setback lines.
         B.   Storage areas shall be screened from any abutting land zoned for
residential purposes by fencing and/or landscaping considered by the Commission
to constitute an effective visual screen.
         C.   Storage areas shall be clearly separated from, and shall not
interfere with, areas approved on the site plan for vehicular circulation or
automobile servicing and vehicular parking areas necessary and incidental to
the primary purpose of the gasoline service station operation.
         D.   Storage areas shall be permitted only on paved portions of the
site.
   (k)   Outdoor display areas.  Outdoor display areas may be permitted by the
Commission provided that the Commission determines that surrounding properties
will not be adversely affected and that the following conditions are met.
      (1)   No outdoor display shall be closer than 50 feet from any
residential zoning district boundary or road right-of-way line abutting any
residential zoning district. In no event shall outdoor displays be within ten
feet of any road right-of-way line.
      (2)   The view of outdoor display areas shall be screened from abutting
residential districts by a landscape buffer strip sufficient to minimize any
undesirable visual effects of such display area on abutting residential
properties.
      (3)   Artificial illumination for such display areas shall be designed so
that the direct rays from the light source are not visible beyond the property
lines on which the outdoor display area is located.
      (4)   Outdoor display areas shall be maintained in a neat and orderly
fashion.
      (5)   Outdoor display areas shall not occupy any required parking area or
driveway.
      (6)   A plot plan indicating the area to be used for outdoor display, the
location and type of any artificial illumination devices contemplated, a list
of the types of merchandise to be displayed and a detailed planting plan (where
a landscape buffer strip is required), indicating materials, spacing and size,
shall be submitted to the Commission with the conditional zoning certificate
application. The plan, as approved or modified by the Commission, shall be a
part of the conditional zoning certificate, if granted.
   (l)   Mining, soil removal, gravel extraction and processing.
      (1)   To use land for mining or soil, sand and gravel removal and
processing in a district permitting such use, an application for a conditional
zoning certificate must be accompanied by a plan recommended and approved by an
appropriate state or federal department concerned with soil science and land
conservation, indicating proposed stages and specific places of operation,
providing for progressive rehabilitation of the land during operations so that
at the termination of operations the land will not be more detrimental to
persons or property than it was prior to the start of operations, and providing
for adequate safety measures to protect the public.
         A.   The area being mined or excavated shall be enclosed by a fence
six feet or more in height for the entire periphery of the development. Fences
shall be adequate to prevent trespass and shall be placed not closer than 50
feet to the top or bottom of any slope. No sand or gravel shall be removed or
stored and no overburden shall be stored within 100 feet of any lot line not
owned or controlled by the developer or operator of such business or his or her
agent, nor shall such mineral extraction business be conducted closer to any
lot line or road so that areas contiguous and adjacent thereto do not have
adequate lateral support.
         B.   A bond guaranteeing performance in accordance with plans and the
removal from the site, after termination of operations, of any abandoned
equipment and accessories, shall be submitted to the municipality in an amount
per acre or fraction thereof to be set by the Commission after consultation
with the state or federal department approving the plans. The amount of the
bond shall be sufficient to ensure rehabilitation for the number of acres
planned for operations during at least the ensuing 12 consecutive months. Such
bond shall be of the type recognized in the state.
      (2)   The Commission, after a public hearing to which all contiguous
property owners have been invited, shall issue the conditional zoning
certificate if it is satisfied that the plan of operation is such that
emissions from the operation, such as sound, odor, debris, dust and
electromagnetism, will not have a deleterious effect on the inhabitants of the
nearest residence (other than the residence of the owner of the site) existing
at the start of operations, in such a quality or quantity to be detrimental to
such residence or its occupants. A distance of not less than 200 feet must be
maintained at all times from the nearest edge of the operating site to any
residence (other than that of the owner) existing at the site of operations.
The front yard, side yard and rear yard shall have a depth of not less than 100
feet to the nearest edge of operations.
      (3)   Equipment and trucks shall be operated not earlier than 7:00 a.m.
or later than 8:00 p.m., except on Sundays and holidays when there shall be no
equipment operations.
      (4)   Asphalt, cement or resins may not be brought to the site to be
processed.
      (5)   The conditional zoning certificate shall be issued for a period not
in excess of 12 consecutive months, subject to renewal for 12 consecutive month
periods, provided that the Commission is satisfied that no detriment to persons
or property is happening.  If, at any time, the Commission finds that
operations are being pursued in a detrimental way, Council shall notify the
applicant to take remedial action and if the condition is not remedied within
30 days of such notice, Council shall order cessation of operations until
corrections are made.
      (6)   A plan showing provisions for control of erosion and sedimentation
during and after the development, construction, extraction or other use of the
site shall be prepared. Such plan shall show proposals for restoration,
rehabilitation and reclamation where necessary and shall be accompanied by
documentation indicating the review and recommendation of such plan by the Soil
and Water Conservation District, the Division of Lands and Soil of the
Department of Natural Resources or by another competent agency or soil
scientist.  Effective erosion and sediment controls shall be planned and
applied in accordance with the following principles.
         A.   Only the smallest practical area of land should be exposed at any
one time during development, construction, extraction or other use.
         B.   When land is exposed during development, construction, extraction
or other use, the exposure should be kept to the shortest practical period of
time.
         C.   Temporary vegetation and/or mulching shall be used to protect
critical areas exposed during development, construction, extraction or other
use.
         D.   Sediment basins (debris basins, desilting basins or silt traps)
shall be installed and maintained to remove sediment from run-off waters from
land undergoing development, construction, extraction or other use.
         E.   Provisions shall be made to effectively accommodate the increased
run-off caused by changed soil and surface conditions during and after 
development, construction, extraction or other use.
         F.   The permanent final vegetation and structures shall be installed
as soon as practical in the development, use restoration and rehabilitation of 
land.
         G.   The development, extraction or use plan shall be fitted to the
topography and soils so as to create the least erosion potential.
         H.   Wherever feasible, natural vegetation should be retained and
protected.
   (m)   Oil, gas and brine wells.
      (1)   A plan of the property, including all structures, fences and
drives, shall be submitted to the Commission for approval.
      (2)   The well site and all above-ground facilities, including storage
tanks, shall be located not less than 500 feet from any existing dwelling.
      (3)   All well facilities (service, storage and otherwise) shall be
enclosed by an eight-foot high chain link fence, which shall be installed prior
to any drilling.
      (4)   Well site restoration following drilling shall be completed within
a time period agreed upon at the time of site plan approval, but in no case
shall that time period be more than six months. A bond of one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) shall be deposited with the municipality prior to any construction
or drilling to ensure site restoration.
      (5)   Permanent and/or temporary waste holes, storage lagoons, service
ponds or similar storage facilities shall be designed, constructed and
maintained so as to prevent any drainage and/or seepage onto adjacent property
or into road drainage ditches, natural watercourses or natural or manmade
bodies of water and shall be enclosed by a fence adequate to prevent
unauthorized access.
      (6)   A permanent access drive shall be installed from the road to the
well site and to any storage facility from which a natural resource will be
removed from the site.
      (7)   Storage tanks, both at and off the well site, shall be located on a
prepared site and shall be diked or otherwise designed, constructed and
maintained so as to prevent any seepage or drainage beyond a five-foot distance
from each tank. Such seepage or drainage shall, under no circumstances, be
allowed to enter upon adjacent property or any road drainage ditch, natural
watercourse or other natural or manmade body of water.
      (8)   All well site operations shall conform to Ohio R. C. Chapter 1509
and to the rules and regulations of the Ohio Department of Natural Resources,
Division of Oil and Gas, Chapter NRO-1. If there is any conflict between any
regulation cited in this division and any of the provisions of this Zoning
Code, the more stringent regulation or provision shall apply.
   (n)   Sanitary landfills.
      (1)   All sanitary landfill sites shall be subject to the approval of the
County Board of Health.
      (2)   A topographic map showing the design of the sanitary landfill site
at a scale of not over 200 feet to the inch and with five-foot contour
intervals shall be submitted with the application.
      (3)   The applicant shall submit information describing the geological
characteristics of the site.
      (4)   The site shall be limited to areas where water pollution will not
occur.
      (5)   The site shall be accessible from at least two directions.
      (6)   The site shall be so located as to minimize the effect of winds
carrying objectionable odors to urbanized or urbanizing areas.
      (7)   The sanitary landfill site shall be designed and submitted to the
County Board of Health for approval.
      (8)   Shelter for landfill equipment shall be provided.
      (9)   Shelter and sanitary facilities shall be provided for personnel.
      (10)   Suitable measures shall be taken to control fires.
      (11)   An attendant shall be on duty, during the time the sanitary
landfill site is open, to supervise the unloading of refuse.
      (12)   Blowing paper shall be controlled by providing a portable fence
near the working area.
      (13)   Sewer solids or liquids and other hazardous materials shall not be
disposed of on the site.
      (14)   There shall be no open storage or burning of refuse or garbage.
      (15)   No bulky items such as car bodies, refrigerators and large tires
shall be disposed of on the site.
      (16)   Refuse shall be spread and compacted in shallow layers not
exceeding a depth of two feet of compacted material.
      (17)   A compacted layer of at least six inches of suitable cover
material shall be placed on all exposed refuse by the end of each working day.
      (18)   In all but the final layer of a landfill, a layer of suitable
cover material compacted to a minimum depth of one foot shall be placed daily
on all surfaces of the fill, except those where operations will continue on the
following working day.
      (19)   A layer of suitable cover material compacted to a minimum
thickness of two feet shall be placed over the entire surface of each portion
of the final fill not later than one week following the placement of refuse
within that portion.
      (20)   Conditions unfavorable for the production of insects and rodents
shall be maintained by carrying out routine landfill operations promptly in a
systematic manner.
      (21)   Suitable control measures shall be taken whenever dust is a
problem.
      (22)   The entire site, including the fill surface, shall be graded and
provided with drainage facilities to minimize runoff onto and into the fill, to
prevent erosion or washing of the fill, to drain off rain water falling on the
fill and to prevent the collection of standing water.
      (23)   An inspection of the entire site shall be made by a representative
of the County Board of Health before any earth-moving equipment is removed from
the site. Any necessary corrective work shall be performed before the landfill
project is accepted as completed. Arrangement shall be made for the repair of
all cracked, eroded and uneven areas in the final cover during the year
following completion of the fill.
   (o)   Scrap yards and junk yards.
      (1)   All sites, procedures and processes shall be subject to the
approval of the appropriate city, county and state agencies. No conditional
zoning certificate shall be issued until the necessary approvals are obtained.
      (2)   The site shall be located so as to minimize the potential effect of
winds carrying objectionable odors to urbanized or urbanizing areas.
      (3)   Suitable control measures shall be taken whenever dust is a problem
or potential problem.
      (4)   There shall be no burning or incineration of refuse, garbage or
other waste materials.
      (5)   Scrap yards or junk yards shall be located not closer than 500 feet
to any R District and/or public street right-of-way line and shall otherwise
have front, side and rear setbacks of at least 150 feet. At least a 100-foot
wide strip in the 500-foot setback shall be planted for camouflaging purposes
in accordance with the following specifications.
         A.   The 100-foot wide strip shall be planted with pine, Norway spruce
or other trees or plants of similar screening value.
         B.   Such trees shall be planted on a staggered pattern with not more
than ten feet between each tree.
         C.   The 100-foot wide planting strips shall be so located as to
achieve the greatest screening or camouflaging effect and no visual openings
shall exist.
         D.   Trees should be planted that are at the optimum transplanting
size and age, while still being as large as possible.
      (6)   A minimum of ten acres shall be required for a use proposed under
this category.
      (7)   A bond, as determined by the Commission, shall be posted with the
municipality for site restoration in cases of yard abandonment or
discontinuance or transfer of business.
   (p)   Trucking terminals.
      (1)   Every portion of the property used for buildings shall be located
not closer than 100 feet to any R District. At least 50 feet (nearest the
residential zone) of the 100 feet shall be landscaped and orderly fashioned and
a solid board fence, masonry wall or other type of fence approved by the
Commission shall be constructed along the interior line of the required
landscaped area to a height of six feet, effectively screening truck loading,
unloading and maneuvering activities from the view of any abutting R District.
      (2)   Access for motor freight vehicles shall be by way of streets of
adequate width, construction and existing or planted function in accordance
with the Land Use and Thoroughfare Plan of current adoption.
      (3)   In addition to adequate area within the site for docking,
manipulation and maneuvering of motor freight vehicles, a reservoir of parking
area for motor freight vehicles waiting to be loaded or unloaded shall be
provided at the rate of one parking space sufficient to park a motor freight
vehicle for every four loading docks.
      (4)   The site shall be designed in such a manner as to permit forward
movement of all vehicles both upon entering and upon leaving the site.
      (5)   The number, location and width of entrances to and exits from the
site shall be determined by the Commission. The Commission may obtain an expert
opinion on the specific site proposal.
   (q)   Airports.  Airports shall be located on major thoroughfares adjacent
to nonresidential uses, such as commerce, industry or recreation, or adjacent
to sparsely settled residential uses.
   (r)   Temporary buildings.  Any temporary structure shall be indicated as
such on a site plan submitted to the Commission for approval. Such a structure
shall not be continued as a permanent structure. The period of continuance
shall be set by the Commission.
   (s)   Additional conditions. The Commission shall have the power to impose
additional conditions where it deems it necessary to safeguard the health,
safety and welfare of the community.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974; Ord. 13-O-2735, passed 7-16-2013)
CHAPTER 1268:  A-O-C AGRICULTURAL-OPEN SPACE-CONSERVATION DISTRICTS
Section
1268.01   Purposes.
1268.02   Uses.
1268.03   Lot area, width and frontage.
1268.04   Yards.
1268.05   Building height.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Municipal zoning - see Ohio R.C. 713.06 et seq.
   Permitted height exceptions - see P. & Z.
1260.06
   Yards and open spaces - see P. & Z.
1260.16
   Prohibited uses - see P. & Z.
1260.22
   Usable open space - see P. & Z.
1260.29
   Zoning certificate required - see P. & Z.
1262.04
   Signs permitted in A-O-C Districts - see P. & Z.
1294.04
§ 1268.01  PURPOSES.
   The purposes of A-O-C Districts are as follows:
   (a)   To preserve and protect land for agricultural uses, including, but not
limited to, farming, dairying, pasturage, apiculture, horticulture, viticulture
and animal and poultry husbandry;
   (b)   To preserve and protect open spaces which have historic, scenic or
recreational value; and
   (c)   To conserve natural resources, such as river valleys and tracts of
forests, and to reduce problems created by intensive development in areas
having excessively high water tables or which are subject to flooding or which
are topographically unsuited to urban uses.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1268.02  USES.
   Within an A-O-C District, no building, structure or premises shall be used,
arranged to be used or designed to be used, except for one or more of the
following uses.
   (a)   Permitted uses.
      (1)   Single-family dwellings;
      (2)   Agricultural uses and buildings, provided that agricultural
buildings used to house farm animals shall be located not less than 200 feet
from all property lines;
      (3)   Accessory buildings clearly related to the principal use which do
not include any activity conducted as a business, except that one roadside
stand offering for sale only agricultural products which are produced on the
premises, including only one unlighted sign not exceeding 20 square feet in
area advertising such products, may be erected. Such roadside stand shall not
be erected closer than 30 feet from either side lot line. Such stand and sign
and required off-street parking therefor shall be located and set back from the
street in such a manner so as not to create a traffic hazard.
      (4)   Wildlife and game preserves; and
      (5)   Signs, as regulated by
Chapter 1294.
   (b)   Conditionally permitted uses.  The Planning Commission may issue
conditional zoning certificates for uses listed in this division, subject to
the general requirements of
Chapter 1266 and the following specific requirements.
      (1)   Cemeteries are subject to §§
1266.10(a)(3), (a)(5) and (e).
      (2)   Governmentally owned and/or operated buildings and facilities are
subject to §§
1266.10(a)(3), (a)(12) and (b).
      (3)   Commercial recreation areas, including swimming facilities, golf
courses, tennis clubs, riding academies, picnic grounds and similar
recreational uses, but excluding drive-in theaters, miniature golf courses,
golf driving ranges and pistol ranges or other ranges for the use of firearms,
are subject to §§
1266.10(a)(3), (a)(5), (a)(12), (b), (d)(2), (d)(3) and (d)(5).
      (4)   Campgrounds and camps are subject to §§
1266.10 (a)(3), (a)(12) and (d).
      (5)   Airports and landing strips are subject to §
1266.10(q).
      (6)   Oil, gas and brine wells and drilling and operations necessary for
oil, gas and brine extraction are subject to §§
1266.10(a)(6) through (a)(10) and (m).
      (7)   Soil removal and gravel extraction are subject to §§
1266.10(a)(6) through (a)(10) and (l).
      (8)   Sanitary landfill sites are subject to §§
1266.10(a)(6) through (a) (10) and (n).
      (9)   Public utility structures and right-of-way are subject to §
1266.10(b)(6).
      (10)   Churches are subject to §§
1266.10 (a)(5), (a)(12) and (b)(4) through (b)(6).
      (11)   Home occupations are subject to §
1266.10(c).
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1268.03  LOT AREA, WIDTH AND FRONTAGE.
   (a)   The minimum lot area per dwelling unit is five acres.
   (b)   The minimum lot width at the building line is 300 feet.
   (c)    The minimum lot frontage is 60 feet.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1268.04  YARDS.
   (a)   The minimum front yard depth is 100 feet for all buildings.
   (b)   The minimum rear yard depth is 50 feet.
   (c)   The minimum side yard depth is 25 feet.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974; Ord. 09-O-2517, passed 3-17-2009)
§ 1268.05  BUILDING HEIGHT.
   The maximum building height in A-O-C Districts is 35 feet, except that
agricultural structures may be 60 feet.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974)
CHAPTER 1270:  R-1 LOW DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
Section
1270.01   Purposes; density.
1270.02   Uses.
1270.03   Lot area, width and frontage.
1270.04   Yards.
1270.05   Building height.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Restrictions on location, bulk and height of buildings and structures,
percentage of lot occupancy and setback building lines - see Ohio R.C. 713.07
et seq.
   Front yard variances in R Districts - see P. & Z.
1260.07
   Prohibited uses - see P. & Z.
1260.22
   Parking lots in R Districts - see P. & Z.
1292.11
   Signs permitted in R Districts - see P. & Z.
1294.04
§ 1270.01  PURPOSES; DENSITY.
   (a)   The purpose of R-1 Districts is to accommodate residential development
in areas which cannot be reasonably serviced by central water and/or sanitary
sewer facilities and where the underground water supply or the soil conditions
for septic tanks are inadequate to accommodate a higher density.
   (b)   The density for development of areas without sewers and/or water
facilities is one through five acres per unit.
   (c)   It is also the purpose of R-1 Districts to provide for single-family
residences at a density of two to four dwelling units per net acre in areas
that are or may reasonably be expected to be provided with central sewer and
water facilities. The stipulated densities are intended to provide for areas of
suburban character in the community and to prevent excessive demands on
sewerage and water systems, streets, schools and other community facilities.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1270.02  USES.
   Within an R-1 District, no building, structure or premises shall be used,
arranged to be used or designed to be used, except for one or more of the
following uses.
   (a)   Permitted uses.
      (1)   Single-family dwellings;
      (2)   Accessory buildings incidental to the principal use which do not
include any activity conducted as a business; and
      (3)   Signs, as regulated by
Chapter 1294.
   (b)   Conditionally permitted uses.  The Planning Commission may issue
conditional zoning certificates for uses listed in this division, subject to
the general requirements of
Chapter 1266 and the following specific requirements.
      (1)   Cemeteries are subject to §§
1266.10(a)(3), (a)(5) and (e).
      (2)   Governmentally owned and/or operated buildings and facilities are
subject to §§
1266.10 (a)(3), (a)(12) and (b).
      (3)   Commercial recreation areas, including swimming facilities, golf
courses, tennis clubs, riding academies, picnic grounds and similar
recreational uses, but excluding drive-in theaters, miniature golf courses,
golf driving ranges and pistol ranges or other ranges for the use of firearms,
are subject to §§
1266.10(a)(3), (a)(5), (a)(12), (b), (d)(2), (d)(3) and (d)(5).
      (4)   Public utility structures and rights-of-way are subject to §
1266.10(b)(6).
      (5)   Institutions for human care, such as hospitals, clinics, nursing
homes and the like, are subject to §§
1266.10(a)(2), (a)(12) and (b).
      (6)   Planned unit developments are subject to §
1266.10(h).
      (7)   Churches are subject to §§
1266.10(a)(5), (a)(12) and (b)(4) through (b)(6).
      (8)   Quasi-public recreational and/or instructional uses or fraternal or
community service uses are subject to §§
1266.10(a)(3), (a)(7), (a)(8), (a)(11), (a)(12) and (b).
      (9)   Home occupations are subject to §
1266.10(c).
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1270.03  LOT AREA, WIDTH AND FRONTAGE.
   (a)   The minimum lot area is one acre without centralized water and sewer
facilities and 11,250 square feet with centralized water and sewer facilities.
   (b)   The minimum lot width at the building line is 150 feet without
centralized water and sewer facilities and 75 feet with centralized water and
sewer facilities.
   (c)   The minimum lot frontage is 60 feet.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1270.04  YARDS.
   (a)   The minimum front yard depth is 45 feet for all buildings.
   (b)   The minimum rear yard depth is 45 feet.
   (c)   The minimum side yard width, with centralized water and sewer
facilities, is eight feet, with a total of both sides equal to 17 feet.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974; Ord. 09-O-2517, passed 3-17-2009)
§ 1270.05  BUILDING HEIGHT.
   The maximum building height in R-1 Districts is 35 feet.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974)
CHAPTER 1272:  R-2 MEDIUM DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
Section
1272.01   Purpose; density.
1272.02   Uses.
1272.03   Lot area, width and frontage.
1272.04   Yards.
1272.05   Building height.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Restrictions on location, bulk and height of buildings and structures,
percentage of lot occupancy and setback building lines - see Ohio R.C. 713.07
et seq.
   Front yard variances in R Districts - see P. & Z.
1260.07
   Prohibited uses - see P. & Z.
1260.22
   Parking lots in R Districts - see P. & Z.
1292.11
   Signs permitted in R Districts - see P. & Z.
1294.04
§ 1272.01  PURPOSE; DENSITY.
   The purpose of R-2 Districts is to encourage relatively high density
residential development in areas generally adjacent to the built-up sections of
the community or in areas of existing development of such density, thereby
providing a more orderly and efficient extension of public facilities. Such
development shall consist of single-family, two-family and limited multi-family
dwellings not exceeding a density of six dwelling units per net acre and only
in areas served with centralized sewer and water facilities.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1272.02  USES.
   Within an R-2 District, no building, structure or premises shall be used,
arranged to be used or designed to be used, except for one or more of the
following uses.
   (a)   Permitted uses.
      (1)   Single-family dwellings;
      (2)   Two-family dwellings;
      (3)   Accessory buildings incidental to the principal use which do not
include any activity conducted as a business; and
      (4)   Signs, as regulated by
Chapter 1294.
   (b)   Conditionally permitted uses.  The Planning Commission may issue
conditional zoning certificates for uses listed in this division, subject to
the general requirements of
Chapter 1266 and the following specific requirements.
      (1)   Multi-family dwellings of the row house or town house type are
subject to §
1266.10(g).
      (2)   Cemeteries are subject to §§
1266.10(a)(3), (a)(5) and (e).
      (3)   Governmentally owned and/or operated buildings and facilities are
subject to §§
1266.10(a)(3), (a)(12) and (b).
      (4)   Public utility structures and rights-of-way are subject to §
1266.10(b)(6).
      (5)   Churches are subject to §§
1266.10(a)(5), (a)(12) and (b)(4) through (b)(6).
      (6)   Quasi-public recreational and/or instructional uses or fraternal or
community service uses are subject to §§
1266.10(a)(3), (a)(7), (a)(8), (a)(11), (a)(12) and (b).
      (7)   Home occupations are subject to §
1266.10(c).
      (8)   Lodging house or boarding house accommodations are subject to §
1266.10(f).
      (9)   Planned unit developments are subject to §
1266.10(h).
      (10)   Commercial recreation area, including swimming facilities, golf
courses, tennis clubs, riding academies, picnic grounds, and similar
recreational uses, but excluding drive-in theaters, miniature golf courses,
golf driving ranges, and pistol ranges or other ranges for the use of firearms,
are subject to §§
1266.10(a)(3), (a)(5),(b) (d)(2), (d)(3) and (d)(5).
      (11)   Institutions for human care, such as hospitals, clinics, nursing
homes and the like, are subject to §§
1266.10(a) and (b).
      (12)   Bed and breakfast.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974; Ord. 01-O-1890, passed 5-15-2001; Ord. 07-O-
2380, passed 4-17-2007; Ord. 09-O-2511, passed 2-17-2009)
§ 1272.03  LOT AREA, WIDTH AND FRONTAGE.
   (a)   Minimum lot areas are as follows:
      (1)   Single-family dwellings:  8,000 square feet;
      (2)   Two-family dwellings:  12,000 square feet; and
      (3)   Multi-family dwellings:  18,000 square feet for the first three
units, plus 4,000 square feet for each dwelling unit over three.
   (b)   Minimum lot widths at the building line are as follows:
      (1)   Single-family dwellings:  75 feet;
      (2)   Two-family dwellings:  100 feet; and
      (3)   Multi-family dwellings:  100 feet.
   (c)   The minimum lot frontage is 50 feet.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1272.04  YARDS.
   (a)   The minimum front yard depth is 35 feet for all buildings.
   (b)   The minimum rear yard depth is 30 feet.
   (c)   Minimum side yard widths are as follows:
      (1)   Single-family dwellings:  seven feet minimum, with a total of both
sides equal to a minimum of 15 feet;
      (2)   Two-family dwellings:  ten feet each side; and
      (3)   Multi-family dwellings:  ten feet each side.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974; Ord. 09-O-2517, passed 3-17-2009)
§ 1272.05  BUILDING HEIGHT.
   The maximum building height in R-2 Districts is 35 feet.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974)
CHAPTER 1274:  R-3 HIGH DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
Section
1274.01   Purpose.
1274.02   Uses.
1274.03   Lot area, width and frontage.
1274.04   Yards.
1274.05   Building height.
1274.06   Site plan review.
1274.07   Off-street parking and loading.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Restrictions on location, bulk and height of buildings and structures,
percentage of lot occupancy and setback building lines - see Ohio R.C. 713.07
et seq.
   Front yard variances in R Districts - see P. & Z.
1260.07
   Prohibited uses - see P. & Z.
1260.22
   Parking lots in R Districts - see P. & Z.
1292.11
   Signs permitted in R Districts - see P. & Z.
1294.05
§ 1274.01  PURPOSE.
   The purpose of R-3 Districts is to encourage apartment development at
densities up to 16 dwelling units per net acre in areas adjacent to community
facilities and neighborhood shops. Such development shall consist primarily of
row houses and garden apartments and in groupings which will provide for the
efficient development and utilization of community facilities such as water,
sewers, streets and parks.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1274.02  USES.
   Within an R-3 District, no building, structure or premises shall be used,
arranged to be used or designed to be used, except for one or more of the
following uses.
   (a)   Permitted uses.
      (1)   Single-family dwellings;
      (2)   Two-family dwellings;
      (3)   Multi-family dwellings;
      (4)   Accessory buildings incidental to the principal use which do not
include any activity conducted as a business; and
      (5)   Signs, as regulated by
Chapter 1294.
   (b)   Conditionally permitted uses.  The Planning Commission may issue
conditional zoning certificates for uses listed in this division, subject to
the general requirements of
Chapter 1266 and the following specific requirements.
      (1)   Governmentally owned and/or operated buildings and facilities are
subject to §§
1266.10(a)(3), (a)(12) and (b).
      (2)   Public utility structures and rights-of-way are subject to §
1266.10(b)(6).
      (3)   Home occupations are subject to §
1266.10(c).
      (4)   Planned unit developments are subject to §
1266.10(h).
      (5)   Mortuaries are subject to §§
1266.10(a)(3), (a)(7), (a)(8), (a)(11) and (b).
      (6)   Churches are subject to §§
1266.10(a)(5), (a)(12) and (b)(4) through (b)(6).
      (7)   Institutions for human care, such as hospitals, clinics, nursing
homes and the like, are subject to §§
1266.10(a) and (b).
      (8)   Commercial recreation area, including swimming facilities, golf
courses, tennis clubs, riding academies, picnic grounds, and similar
recreational uses, but excluding drive-in theaters, miniature golf courses,
golf driving ranges, and pistol ranges or other ranges for the use of firearms,
are subject to §§
1266.10(a)(3), (a)(5),(b) (d)(2), (d)(3) and (d)(5).
      (9)   Bed and breakfast.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974; Ord. 75-O-195, passed 10-7-1975; Ord. 98-O-
1705, passed 12-15-1998; Ord. 01-O-1890, passed 5-15-2001; Ord. 09-O-2511,
passed 2-17-2009)
§ 1274.03  LOT AREA, WIDTH AND FRONTAGE.
   (a)   Minimum lot areas are as follows:
      (1)   Single-family dwellings:  7,500 square feet;
      (2)   Two-family dwellings:  10,000 square feet; and
      (3)   Multi-family dwellings:  12,000 square feet for the first three
dwelling units, plus 2,500 square feet for each dwelling unit over three.
   (b)   Minimum lot widths at the building line are as follows:
      (1)   Single-family dwellings:  60 feet;
      (2)   Two-family dwellings:  80 feet; and
      (3)   Multi-family dwellings: 100 feet.
   (c)   The minimum lot frontage is 40 feet.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1274.04  YARDS.
   (a)   The minimum front yard depth is 30 feet, plus one foot for each two
feet of building height in excess of 35 feet above grade for all buildings.
   (b)   The minimum rear yard depth is 30 feet, plus one foot for each two
feet of building height in excess of 25 feet above grade.
   (c)   Minimum side yard widths are as follows:
      (1)   Single-family dwellings:  five feet minimum with a total of both
sides equal to a minimum of 12 feet;
      (2)   Two-family dwellings: ten feet; and
      (3)   Multi-family dwellings:  ten feet, plus one foot for each two feet
of building height in excess of 35 feet above grade.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974; Ord. 09-O-2517, passed 3-17-2009)
§ 1274.05  BUILDING HEIGHT.
   The maximum building height in R-3 Districts is 75 feet.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1274.06  SITE PLAN REVIEW.
   All multi-family uses specified under §
1274.02 shall be permitted only after the review and approval of site plans
therefor by the Planning Commission and upon a finding by the Commission that
this chapter and §
1260.32 will be complied with.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1274.07  OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING.
   Off-street parking and loading shall be as regulated by
Chapter 1292.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974)
CHAPTER 1276:  C-1 LOCAL COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
Section
1276.01   Purpose.
1276.02   Uses.
1276.03   Lot area, width and frontage.
1276.04   Yards.
1276.05   Building height.
1276.06   Site plan review.
1276.07   Off-street parking and loading.
1276.08   Outdoor display areas.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Restrictions on location, bulk and height of buildings and structures,
percentage of lot occupancy and setback building lines - see Ohio R.C. 713.07
et seq.
   Prohibited uses - see P. & Z.
1260.22
   Businesses and merchandise displays - see P. & Z.
1260.27
   Off-street parking and loading - see P. & Z.
Ch. 1292
   Signs permitted in C Districts - see P. & Z.
1294.05
§ 1276.01  PURPOSE.
   The purpose of C-1 Districts is to provide for uses principally to
accommodate the sale of convenience retail goods and personal services
purchased frequently for daily or weekly needs. It is intended that the design
of C-1 Districts will encourage groupings of establishments located on a
unified site providing adequate off-street parking facilities as well as an
efficient and safe method of handling vehicular and pedestrian traffic.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1276.02  USES.
   Within a C-1 District, no building, structure or premises shall be used,
arranged to be used or designed to be used, except for one or more of the
following uses.
   (a)   Permitted uses.
      (1)   Drug stores;
      (2)   Florist and gift shops;
      (3)   Food sales not exceeding 7,500 square feet;
      (4)   Personal services, including dry cleaning and laundry agencies,
barber and beauty shops and tailors and dressmakers;
      (5)   The preparation and processing of food and drink to be retailed on
the premises, including bakeries, delicatessens and meat markets;
      (6)   Accessory uses clearly incidental to the principal uses permitted
on the same premises;
      (7)   Other uses similar in character to those listed in this division;
      (8)   Signs, as regulated by
Chapter 1294; and
      (9)   Bed and breakfast.
   (b)   Conditionally permitted uses.  The Planning Commission may issue
conditional zoning certificates for uses listed in this division, subject to
the general requirements of
Chapter 1266 and the following specific requirements.
      (1)   Churches are subject to §§
1266.10 (a)(5), (a)(12) and (b)(4) through (b)(6).
      (2)   Governmentally owned and/or operated buildings and facilities are
subject to §§
1266.10 (a)(3), (a)(12) and (b).
      (3)   Planned integrated commercial developments are subject to §
1266.10(i).
      (4)   Public utility structures and rights-of-way are subject to §
1266.10(b)(6).
      (5)   Institutions for human care, such as hospitals, clinics, nursing
homes and the like, are subject to §§
1266.10(a) and (b).
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974; Ord. 98-O-1705, passed 12-15-1998; Ord. 09-
O-2511, passed 2-17-2009)
§ 1276.03  LOT AREA, WIDTH AND FRONTAGE.
   There are no minimum lot area, minimum lot width at the building line or
minimum lot frontage requirements.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1276.04  YARDS.
   (a)   The minimum front yard depth shall be equal to the setback of the
residential uses in the immediate vicinity.
   (b)   The minimum rear yard depth is 25 feet.
   (c)   There is no minimum side yard width, except 30 feet when such yard is
adjacent to a Residential District and on the side adjacent to the Residential
District only.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1276.05  BUILDING HEIGHT.
   The maximum building height in C-1 Districts is 45 feet.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974; Ord. 13-O-2736, passed 7-16-2013)
§ 1276.06  SITE PLAN REVIEW.
   All business uses specified under §
1276.02 shall be permitted only after the review and approval of the site plans
therefor by the Planning Commission and upon a finding by the Commission that
this chapter and §
1260.32 will be complied with.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1276.07  OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING.
   Off-street parking and loading shall be as regulated by
Chapter 1292.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1276.08  OUTDOOR DISPLAY AREAS.
   Merchandise to be sold at retail on the premises may be displayed out of
doors, except that no such display shall be within 50 feet of any R-District.
Display areas shall be screened from abutting residential users by landscaping
sufficient to limit to a minimum all visual effects of such display areas. Such
landscape buffer shall be maintained in a neat and orderly fashion. Such area
shall also meet the requirements of Zoning Code §
1266.10(k).
(Ord. 93-O-1338, passed 2-16-1993)
CHAPTER 1278:  C-2 OFFICE AND LIMITED BUSINESS DISTRICTS
Section
1278.01   Purpose.
1278.02   Uses.
1278.03   Lot area, width and frontage.
1278.04   Yards.
1278.05   Building height.
1278.06   Site plan review.
1278.07   Off-street parking and loading.
1278.08   Outdoor display areas.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Restrictions on location, bulk and height of buildings and structures,
percentage of lot occupancy and setback building lines - see Ohio R.C. 713.07
et seq.
   Prohibited uses - see P. & Z.
1260.22
   Businesses and merchandise displays - see P. & Z.
1260.27
   Off-street parking and loading - see P. & Z.
Ch. 1292
   Signs permitted in C Districts - see P. & Z.
1294.05
§ 1278.01  PURPOSE.
   The purpose of C-2 Districts is to create an environment conducive to well
located and designed office building sites to accommodate professional offices,
nonprofit organizations, limited business service activities and limited retail
activities designed and operated to be compatible with such uses.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1278.02  USES.
   Within a C-2 District, no building, structure or premises shall be used,
arranged to be used or designed to be used, except for one or more of the
following uses.
   (a)   Permitted uses.
      (1)   Administrative, business or finance offices;
      (2)   Professional offices and clinics;
      (3)   Offices of organizations primarily engaged in accounting,
architecture, advertising, art, correspondence, design, editing, engineering,
insurance, photography, realty, research and other similar uses;
      (4)   Banks, excluding drive-in banking facilities;
      (5)   Radio and television broadcasting stations, excluding transmission
towers;
      (6)   Accessory uses clearly incidental to the principal uses permitted
on the same premises;
      (7)   Personal services, including dry cleaning and laundry agencies,
barber and beauty shops, shoe repair shops, tailors and dressmakers, retail
uses such as apparel, art, photography, stationery, notions, hobbies, toys,
books, music, flowers, jewelry, gift sales, drugs, optical goods and groceries,
business services, including interior decorating offices and novelty and
business forms printing, the retail sale of plumbing fixtures and hardware
stores;
      (8)   Other uses deemed by the Planning Commission to be similar in
character to those listed in this division, but excluding drive-in facilities;
      (9)   Signs, as regulated by
Chapter 1294; and
      (10)   Bed and breakfast.
   (b)   Conditionally permitted uses.  The Planning Commission may issue
conditional zoning certificates for uses listed in this division, subject to
the general requirements of
Chapter 1266 and the following specific requirements.
      (1)   Churches are subject to §§
1266.10(a)(5), (a)(12) and (b)(4) through (b)(6).
      (2)   Governmentally owned and/or operated buildings and facilities are
subject to §§
1266.10(a)(3), (a)(12) and (b).
      (3)   Planned integrated commercial developments are subject to §
1266.10(i).
      (4)   Clubs, lodges and fraternal, charitable and social organizations
are subject to §§
1266.10(a)(3), (a)(7), (a)(8), (a)(11), (a)(12) and (b).
      (5)   Drive-in banking facilities are subject to §§
1266.10(a)(2), (a)(7) and (a)(11) through (a)(13).
      (6)   Public utility structures and rights-of-way are subject to §
1266.10(b)(6).
      (7)   Multi-family dwellings are subject to §
1266.10(g) at densities specified in R-2 Medium Density Residential Districts.
      (8)   Mortuaries are subject to §
1266.10(a)(3), (a)(7), (a)(8), (a)(11), (a)(12) and (b).
      (9)   Repair garages and specialty establishments, such as motor, body
and fender, radiator, motor tune-up and muffler shops and auto sales and
service are subject to §§
1266.10(a)(7), (b)(6) and (j)(1) through (j)(4).
      (10)   Automobile laundries are subject to §
1266.10(a)(2), (a)(7), (a)(11), (a)(13) and (b)(3).
      (11)   Gasoline service stations are subject to §
1266.10(a)(7), (b)(3), (j)(1), (j)(4) and (j)(5).
      (12)   Sales of beverages are subject to §
1266.10(a)(2), (a)(7), (a)(8), (a)(11), (a)(12) and (b)(1).
      (13)   Institutions for human care, such as hospitals, clinics, nursing
homes and the like, are subject to §
1266.10(a) and (b).
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974; Ord. 77-O-320, passed 8-16-1977; Ord. 77-O-
338, passed 12-6-1977; Ord. 98-O-1705, passed 12-15-1998; Ord. 09-O-2511,
passed 2-17-2009)
§ 1278.03  LOT AREA, WIDTH AND FRONTAGE.
   There are no minimum lot area, minimum lot width at the building line or
minimum lot frontage requirements.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1278.04  YARDS.
   (a)   There is no minimum front yard depth, but it should be compatible with
adjacent uses.
   (b)   The minimum rear yard depth is 25 feet.
   (c)   There is no minimum side yard width, except 30 feet when such side
yard is adjacent to a Residential District and on the side adjacent to the
Residential District only.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1278.05  BUILDING HEIGHT.
   The maximum building height in C-2 Districts is 45 feet.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974; Ord. 13-O-2736, passed 7-16-2013)
§ 1278.06  SITE PLAN REVIEW.
   All business uses specified under §
1278.02 shall be permitted only after the review and approval of the site plans
therefor by the Planning Commission and upon a finding by the Commission that
this chapter and §
1260.32 will be complied with.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1278.07  OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING.
   Off-street parking and loading shall be as regulated by
Chapter 1292.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1278.08  OUTDOOR DISPLAY AREAS.
   Merchandise to be sold at retail on the premises may be displayed out of
doors, except that no such display shall be within 50 feet of any R-District.
Display areas shall be screened from abutting residential users by landscaping
sufficient to limit to a minimum all visual effects of such display areas. Such
landscape buffer shall be maintained in a neat and orderly fashion. Such area
shall also meet the requirements of Zoning Code §
1266.10(k).
(Ord. 93-O-1338, passed 2-16-1993)
CHAPTER 1280:  C-3 CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICTS
Section
1280.01   Purposes.
1280.02   Uses.
1280.03   Lot area, width and frontage.
1280.04   Yards.
1280.05   Building height.
1280.06   Site plan review.
1280.07   Off-street parking and loading.
1280.08   Outdoor display areas.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Restrictions on location, bulk and height of buildings and structures,
percentage of lot occupancy and setback building lines - see Ohio R.C. 713.07
et seq.
   Prohibited uses - see P. & Z.
1260.22
   Businesses and merchandise displays - see P. & Z.
1260.27
   Off-street parking and loading - see P. & Z.
Ch. 1292
   Signs permitted in C Districts - see P. & Z.
1294.05
§ 1280.01  PURPOSES.
   The purpose of C-3 Districts is to provide for a variety of retail, service
and administrative establishments which are required to serve a large trading
area population. C-3 Districts are also intended to accommodate retail trade
establishments in the community which cannot be practically provided for in a
neighborhood commercial development. C-3 Districts shall also provide limited
apartment developments in the central core of the community to enhance the
viability of the central business area and encourage its redevelopment on an
economic basis.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1280.02  USES.
   Within a C-3 District, no building, structure or premises shall be used,
arranged to be used or designed to be used, except for one or more of the
following uses:
   (a)   Permitted uses.
      (1)   All permitted uses specified in C-1 and C-2 Districts;
      (2)   Establishments engaged primarily in the fields of finance,
insurance and real estate, such as:
         A.   Banks;
         B.   Credit agencies other than banks;
         C.   Investment firms;
         D.   Insurance carriers;
         E.   Real estate and insurance companies; and
         F.   Investment companies.
      (3)   Establishments engaged in providing a variety of services to
individuals and business establishments, such as:
         A.   Personal services, such as barber and beauty shops, tailors, shoe
repair shops, laundries and dry cleaning establishments;
         B.   Miscellaneous business services, such as advertising news
syndicates and employment agencies;
         C.   Medical and other health services;
         D.   Engineering and architectural services;
         E.   Legal services;
         F.   Accounting, auditing and bookkeeping services;
         G.   Nonprofit, professional, charitable and labor organizations;
         H.   Dance studios and schools; and
         I.   Motion picture and theatrical playhouses;
         J.   Mortuaries; and
         K.   Monument sales and displays.
      (4)   Establishments engaged in retail trade, such as:
         A.   Drug stores;
         B.   Book and stationery stores;
         C.   Apparel stores;
         D.   Florist shops;
         E.   Antique stores;
         F.   Sporting goods stores;
         G.   Jewelry stores;
         H.   Optical goods stores;
         I.   Furniture, home furnishing, office equipment and office supplies
stores;
         J.   Beverages; and
         K.   Restaurants.
      (5)   Hotels;
      (6)   Parking lots and garages;
      (7)   Accessory uses clearly incidental to the principal uses permitted
on the same premises;
      (8)   Other uses similar in character to those listed in this division;
      (9)   Signs, as regulated by
Chapter 1294; and
      (10)   Bed and breakfast.
   (b)   Conditionally permitted uses. The Planning Commission may issue
conditional zoning certificates for uses listed in this division, subject to
the general requirements of
Chapter 1266 and the following specific requirements.
      (1)   Churches and other buildings for the purpose of religious worship
are subject to §§
1266.10(a)(5), (a)(12) and (b)(4) through (b)(6).
      (2)   Governmentally owned and/or operated buildings and facilities are
subject to §§
1266.10(a)(3), (a)(12) and (b).
      (3)   Multi-family dwellings are subject to §
1266.10(g).
      (4)   Clubs, lodges and fraternal, charitable and social organizations
are subject to §§
1266.10(a)(3), (a)(7), (a)(8), (a)(11), (a)(12) and (b).
      (5)   Public utility structures and rights-of-way are subject to §
1266.10(b)(6).
      (6)   Repair garages and specialty establishments, such as motor, body
and fender, radiator, motor tune-up and muffler shops and auto sales and
service are subject to §§
1266.10(a)(7), (b)(3) and (j)(1) through (j)(4).
      (7)   Gasoline service stations are subject to §§
1266.10(a)(7), (b)(3), (j)(1), (j)(4) and (j)(5).
      (8)   Institutions for human care, such as hospitals, clinics, nursing
homes and the like, are subject to §§
1266.10(a) and (b).
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974; Ord. 77-O-320, passed 8-16-1977; Ord. 82-O-
626, passed 7-20-1982; Ord. 98-O-1705, passed 12-15-1998; Ord. 03-O-2051,
passed 8-19-2003; Ord. 09-O-2511, passed 2-17-2009)
§ 1280.03  LOT AREA, WIDTH AND FRONTAGE.
   There are no minimum lot area, minimum lot width at the building line or
minimum lot frontage requirements.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1280.04  YARDS.
   (a)   There are no rear yard depth requirements.
   (b)   There are no minimum front yard depths or side yard widths, except
that the minimum front yard depth and side yard width abutting a Residential
District shall not be less than the yard requirements of such Residential
District.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1280.05  BUILDING HEIGHT.
   The maximum building height in C-3 Districts is 75 feet.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1280.06  SITE PLAN REVIEW.
   All business uses specified under §
1280.02 shall be permitted only after the review and approval of the site plans
therefor by the Planning Commission and upon a finding by the Commission that
this chapter and §
1260.32 will be complied with.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1280.07  OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING.
   Off-street parking and loading shall be as regulated by
Chapter 1292.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1280.08  OUTDOOR DISPLAY AREAS.
   Merchandise to be sold at retail on the premises may be displayed out of
doors, except that no such display shall be within 50 feet of any R-District.
Display areas shall be screened from abutting residential users by landscaping
sufficient to limit to a minimum all visual effects of such display areas. Such
landscape buffer shall be maintained in a neat and orderly fashion. Such area
shall also meet the requirements of Zoning Code §
1266.10(k).
(Ord. 93-O-1338, passed 2-16-1993)
CHAPTER 1282:  C-4 INTENSIVE AND AUTOMOBILE-ORIENTED COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
Section
1282.01   Purpose.
1282.02   Uses.
1282.03   Lot area, width and frontage.
1282.04   Yards.
1282.05   Building height.
1282.06   Site plan review.
1282.07   Off-street parking and loading.
1282.08   Outdoor display areas.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Restrictions on location, bulk and height of buildings and structures,
percentage of lot occupancy and setback building lines - see Ohio R.C. 713.07
et seq.
   Prohibited uses - see P. & Z.
1260.22
   Businesses and merchandise displays - see P. & Z.
1260.27
   Off-street parking and loading - see P. & Z.
Ch. 1292
   Signs permitted in C Districts - see P. & Z.
1294.05
§ 1282.01  PURPOSE.
   The purpose of C-4 Districts is to provide for uses in addition to those
specified for C-3 Districts and thereby provide service and sales in support of
the primary business activities in the community. C-4 Districts include
activities which, because of their tendency to encourage traffic congestion and
parking or storage problems or certain other inherent dangers, create special
problems and are, therefore, best distinguished from other commercial activity.
The location of C-4 Districts is advantageous at specified points on major
thoroughfares at outlying locations in the community.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1282.02  USES.
   Within a C-4 District, no building, structure or premises shall be used,
arranged to be used or designed to be used, except for one or more of the
following uses.
   (a)   Permitted uses.
      (1)   All permitted uses specified in the C-1 and C-2 Districts;
      (2)   Radio and television broadcasting stations;
      (3)   Printing, blueprinting, newspaper printing and telegraphic
services;
      (4)   Displays or showrooms where the merchandise sold is stored
elsewhere;
      (5)   Wholesale establishments;
      (6)   Fuel, food and goods distribution stations, excluding coal, coke
and bulk storage;
      (7)   Plant greenhouses and garden supply sales;
      (8)   Hotels, motels and tourist homes;
      (9)   Mortuaries;
      (10)   Monument sales and displays;
      (11)   Automobile, truck, trailer, boat and farm implement sales, service
and storage, both new and used;
      (12)   Tool and equipment rentals;
      (13)   Drive-in establishments, including banks, restaurants and
amusement and recreation establishments, but excluding drive-in theaters;
      (14)   The following uses may be conducted not closer than 50 feet from
any R District. Where a C-4 District abuts upon any R District, but is
separated from such District by a street, the width of the street may be
considered as part of the required setback.
         A.   Carpenter, cabinet, upholstering, sheet metal, plumbing, heating,
roofing, air conditioning, sign painting, painting and other similar
establishments; and
         B.   Repair services for machinery and equipment, including repair
garages and specialty establishments such as motor, body and fender, radiator,
motor tune-up and muffler shops and tire repairing sales and service, including
vulcanizing.
      (15)   Accessory uses clearly incidental to the principal uses permitted
on the same premises;
      (16)   Other uses similar in character to those listed in this division;
      (17)   Signs, as regulated by
Chapter 1294;
      (18)   A.   Sexually oriented businesses subject to the provisions of
Chapter 868 of the Business Regulation Code of the Municipality of Columbiana
and the further regulation that sexually oriented businesses shall not be
operated within 1,000 feet of:
            1.   A church, synagogue, mosque, temple or building which is used
primarily for religious worship and related religious activities;
            2.   A public or private education facility including, but not
limited to, a day care center for minor children;
            3.   A boundary of a residential, multi-family or historical
district as defined in the codified ordinances of the municipality;
            4.   A public park or recreational area designed as such by the
municipality and maintained as such by the municipality;
            5.   Any public library;
            6.   A hospital, nursing home, assisted living or other institution
used for human medical care; or
            7.   Another sexually oriented business.
         B.   For the purpose of this division, measurements shall be made in a
straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects from the
nearest portion of the sexually oriented business premises to the nearest
property line of the restricted locations designated in this division.
         C.   Any sexually oriented business lawfully operating on the
effective date of this division that is in violation of this division shall be
deemed a nonconforming use. The nonconforming use will be permitted to continue
for a period not to exceed 18 months, unless sooner terminated for any reason
or voluntarily discontinued for a period of 30 days or more. Such nonconforming
uses shall not be increased, enlarged, extended or altered except that the use
may be changed to a conforming use.
         D.   A sexually oriented business lawfully operating as a conforming
use is not rendered a nonconforming use by the subsequent location of an
establishment identified in this division. This provision applies only to the
renewal of a valid sexually oriented business license, and does not apply when
an application for a sexually oriented business license is submitted after a
sexually oriented business license has expired or has been revoked.
         E.   A sexually oriented business shall not be substantially enlarged;
and
      (19)   Bed and breakfast.
   (b)   Conditionally permitted uses.  The Planning Commission may issue
conditional zoning certificates for uses listed in this division, subject to
the general requirements of
Chapter 1266 and to the following specific requirements.
      (1)   Churches and other buildings for the purpose of religious worship
are subject to §§
1266.10(a)(5), (a)(12) and (b)(4) through (b)(6).
      (2)   Governmentally owned and/or operated buildings and facilities are
subject to §
1266.10(a)(3), (a)(12) and (b).
      (3)   Clubs, lodges and fraternal, charitable and social organizations
are subject to §
1266.10(a)(3), (a)(7), (a)(8), (a)(11), (a)(12) and (b).
      (4)   Automobile laundries are subject to §§
1266.10(a)(2), (a)(7), (a)(11) and (a)(13).
      (5)   Public utility structures and rights-of-way are subject to §
1266.10(b)(6).
      (6)   Gasoline service stations are subject to §§
1266.10(b)(3) and (j)(1) through (i)(5).
      (7)   Outdoor displays are subject to §
1266.10(k).
      (8)   Institutions for human care, such as hospitals, clinics, nursing
homes and the like, subject to §
1266.10(a) and (b).
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974; Ord. 98-O-1705, passed 12-15-1998; Ord. 01-
O-1889, passed 5-15-2001; Ord. 09-O-2511, passed 2-17-2009)
§ 1282.03  LOT AREA, WIDTH AND FRONTAGE.
   There are no minimum lot area, minimum lot width at the building line or
minimum lot frontage requirements.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1282.04  YARDS.
   (a)   The minimum front yard depth is 50 feet.
   (b)   The minimum rear yard depth is 25 feet.
   (c)   There is no minimum side yard width, except 50 feet when such side
yard is adjacent to a Residential District and on the side adjacent to the
Residential District only.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1282.05  BUILDING HEIGHT.
   The maximum building height in C-4 Districts is 25 feet.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1282.06  SITE PLAN REVIEW.
   All business uses specified under §
1282.02 shall be permitted only after the review and approval of the site plans
therefor by the Planning Commission and upon a finding by the Commission that
this chapter and §
1260.32 will be complied with.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1282.07  OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING.
   Off-street parking and loading shall be as regulated by
Chapter 1292.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1282.08  OUTDOOR DISPLAY AREAS.
   Merchandise to be sold at retail on the premises may be displayed out of
doors, except that no such display shall be within 50 feet of any R-District.
Display areas shall be screened from abutting residential users by landscaping
sufficient to limit to a minimum all visual effects of such display areas. Such
landscape buffer shall be maintained in a neat and orderly fashion. Such area
shall also meet the requirements of Zoning Code §
1266.10(k).
(Ord. 93-O-1338, passed 2-16-1993)
CHAPTER 1284:  C-5 HIGHWAY COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
Section
1284.01   Purpose.
1284.02   Uses.
1284.03   Lot area, width and frontage.
1284.04   Yards.
1284.05   Building height.
1284.06   Site plan review.
1284.07   Off-street parking and loading.
1284.08   Outdoor display areas.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Restrictions on location, bulk and height of buildings and structures,
percentage of lot occupancy and setback building lines - see Ohio R.C. 713.07
et seq.
   Prohibited uses - see P. & Z.
1260.22
   Businesses and merchandise displays - see P. & Z.
1260.27
   Off-street parking and loading - see P. & Z.
Ch. 1292
   Signs permitted in C Districts - see P. & Z.
1294.05
§ 1284.01  PURPOSE.
   The purpose of C-5 Districts is to provide for uses which are compatible
only with highway travel and the accommodation of all-night and rest stop
services. It is not the purpose of C-5 Districts to establish or encourage
local or regional shopping areas which would inhibit the use of the interchange
for its primary purpose of access between several highways and local roads.
Where possible, access roads with controlled ingress to and egress from
highways and local roads should be encouraged.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1284.02  USES.
   Within a C-5 District, no building, structure or premises shall be used,
arranged to be used or designed to be used, except for one or more of the
following uses.
   (a)   Permitted uses.
      (1)   Refreshment stands;
      (2)   Restaurants and eating places;
      (3)   Hotels, motels and tourist homes;
      (4)   Accessory uses clearly incidental to the principal uses permitted
on the same premises;
      (5)   Signs, as regulated by
Chapter 1294; and
      (6)   Bed and breakfast.
   (b)   Conditionally permitted uses.  The Planning Commission may issue
conditional zoning certificates for uses listed in this division, subject to
the general requirements of
Chapter 1266 and the following specific requirements.
      (1)   Truck servicing, including the provision of fuel, food and sleeping
rooms, is subject to §§
1266.10(a)(2), (a)(7), (a)(8), (a)(10) and (a)(11).
      (2)   Truck or transfer terminals and motor freight garages, excluding
warehousing, are subject to §§
1266.10(a)(2), (a)(7), (a)(8), (a)(10), (a)(11) and (p).
      (3)   Public utility structures and rights-of-way are subject to §
1266.10(b)(6).
      (4)   Gasoline service stations are subject to §
1266.10(b)(3) and (j).
      (5)   Outdoor displays are subject to §
1266.10(k).
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974; Ord. 09-O-2511, passed 2-17-2009)
§ 1284.03  LOT AREA, WIDTH AND FRONTAGE.
   There are no minimum lot area, minimum lot width at the building line or
minimum lot frontage requirements.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1284.04  YARDS.
   (a)   The minimum front yard depth is 50 feet.
   (b)   The minimum rear yard depth is 25 feet.
   (c)   There is no minimum side yard width, except 50 feet when such side
yard is adjacent to a Residential District and on the side adjacent to the
Residential District only.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1284.05  BUILDING HEIGHT.
   The maximum building height in C-5 Districts is 45 feet.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974; Ord. 13-O-2736, passed 7-16-2013)
§ 1284.06  SITE PLAN REVIEW.
   All business uses specified under §
1284.02 shall be permitted only after the review and approval of the site plans
therefor by the Planning Commission and upon a finding by the Commission that
this chapter and §
1260.32 will be complied with.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1284.07  OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING.
   Off-street parking and loading shall be as regulated by
Chapter 1292.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1284.08  OUTDOOR DISPLAY AREAS.
   Merchandise to be sold at retail on the premises may be displayed out of
doors, except that no such display shall be within 50 feet of any R-District.
Display areas shall be screened from abutting residential users by landscaping
sufficient to limit to a minimum all visual effects of such display areas. Such
landscape buffer shall be maintained in a neat and orderly fashion. Such area
shall also meet the requirements of Zoning Code §
1266.10(k).
(Ord. 93-O-1338, passed 2-16-1993)
CHAPTER 1286:  I-1 INDUSTRIAL RESEARCH AND OFFICE DISTRICTS
Section
1286.01   Purpose.
1286.02   Uses.
1286.03   Lot area, width and frontage.
1286.04   Yards.
1286.05   Building height.
1286.06   Site plan review.
1286.07   Off-street parking and loading.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Restrictions on location, bulk and height of buildings and structures,
percentage of lot occupancy and setback building lines - see Ohio R.C. 713.07
et seq.
   Prohibited uses - see P. & Z.
1260.22
   Businesses and merchandise displays - see P. & Z.
1260.27
   General performance standards - see P. & Z.
1260.30
   Off-street parking and loading - see P. & Z.
Ch. 1292
   Signs permitted in I Districts - see P. & Z.
1294.05
§ 1286.01  PURPOSE.
   The purpose of I-1 Districts is to provide an environment exclusively for,
and conducive to, the development and protection of modern administrative
facilities and research institutions that are office-like in physical
appearance and service requirements.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1286.02  USES.
   Within an I-1 District, no building, structure or premises shall be used,
arranged to be used or designed to be used, except for one or more of the
following uses:
   (a)   Permitted uses.
      (1)   Administrative, executive, financial, accounting, clerical and
drafting offices;
      (2)   Institutions for human care, such as hospitals, clinics,
sanitariums, convalescent homes, nursing homes, child day care centers, homes
for the aged and philanthropic institutions;
      (3)   Accessory uses clearly incidental to the principal uses permitted
on the same premises; and
      (4)   Signs, as regulated by
Chapter 1294.
   (b)   Conditionally permitted uses.  The Planning Commission may issue
conditional zoning certificates for uses listed in this division, subject to
the general requirements of
Chapter 1266 and the following specific requirements.
      (1)   Sales offices, provided that there shall be no display of any
actual product for sale except in accordance with the following regulations. No
display shall be in an exterior show window and the total area devoted to
display, including both the objects displayed and the floor space set aside for
persons observing the displayed objects, shall not exceed 20% of the usable
floor area of the establishment using the display of an actual product for sale
as a sales procedure, provided that there shall be no outdoor storage of goods
or material regardless of whether or not they are for sale, and provided,
further, that there shall be no warehousing or indoor storage of goods or
material beyond that normally incidental to such an office.
      (2)   Experimental or testing laboratories, provided that no physical
effect of the experimental or testing activity can be detected beyond the
confines of the building in which the activity is located, and provided,
further, that no exterior structural element of the building in which the
activity is located shall appear to be other than that normally incidental to
an office use.
      (3)   Any other office, research or similar use which the Commission
finds to be consistent with the purpose of this chapter and of a character
which will not impair the use of adjacent properties.
      (4)   Governmentally owned and/or operated buildings and facilities
subject to §§
1266.10(a)(3), (a)(12) and (b).
      (5)   Public utility structures and rights-of-way, subject to §
1266.10(b)(6).
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1286.03  LOT AREA, WIDTH AND FRONTAGE.
   (a)   The minimum lot area is one-half acre.
   (b)   The minimum lot width at the building line is 100 feet.
   (c)   The minimum lot frontage is 80 feet.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1286.04  YARDS.
   (a)   The minimum front yard depth is 25 feet.
   (b)   The minimum rear yard depth is 25 feet.
   (c)   The minimum side yard width is 20 feet.
   (d)   The minimum side yard width and rear yard depth abutting a Residential
District shall not be less than the yard required in such Residential District.
The first ten feet abutting the side or rear property line shall be landscaped
and maintained. The remaining space shall be open and not used for any storage
other than the parking of vehicles.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1286.05  BUILDING HEIGHT.
   The maximum building height in I-1 Districts is 65 feet.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974; Ord. 13-O-2736, passed 7-16-2013)
§ 1286.06  SITE PLAN REVIEW.
   All industrial uses specified under §
1286.02 shall be permitted only after the review and approval of the site plans
therefor by the Planning Commission and upon a finding by the Commission that
this chapter and §
1260.32 will be complied with.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1286.07  OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING.
   Off-street parking and loading shall be as regulated by
Chapter 1292.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974)
CHAPTER 1288:  I-2 LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS
Section
1288.01   Purpose.
1288.02   Uses.
1288.03   Lot area, width and frontage.
1288.04   Yards.
1288.05   Building height.
1288.06   Site plan review.
1288.07   Off-street parking and loading.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Restrictions on location, bulk and height of buildings and structures,
percentage of lot occupancy and setback building lines - see Ohio R.C. 713.07
et seq.
   Prohibited uses - see P. & Z.
1260.22
   Businesses and merchandise displays - see P. & Z.
1260.27
   General performance standards - see P. & Z.
1260.30
   Off-street parking and loading - see P. & Z.
Ch. 1292
   Signs permitted in I Districts - see P. & Z.
1294.05
§ 1288.01  PURPOSE.
   The purpose of I-2 Districts is to provide for and accommodate industrial
uses in the fields of repair, storage, manufacturing, processing, wholesaling
and distribution, free from the encroachment of residential, retail and
institutional uses. The uses allowed are those which, because of their normally
unobjectionable characteristics, can be in relatively close proximity to
residential and commercial districts.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1288.02  USES.
   Within an I-2 District, no building, structure or premises shall be used,
arranged to be used or designed to be used, except for one or more of the
following uses.
   (a)   Permitted uses.
      (1)   Parking lots and garages;
      (2)   Plant greenhouses;
      (3)   Warehouses;
      (4)   Wholesale establishments;
      (5)   The following types of manufacturing, processing, cleaning,
servicing, testing or repair activities which will not be materially injurious
or offensive to the occupants of adjacent premises or the community at large by
reason of the emission or creation of noise, vibration, smoke, dust or other
particulate matter, toxic and noxious materials, odors, fire or explosive
hazards, glare, heat or electromagnetic disturbances:
         A.   Bakery goods, candy, cosmetics, pharmaceuticals, toiletries and
food products, except fish or meat products, sauerkraut and yeast and the
rendering or refining of fats or oils;
         B.   Products from the following previously prepared materials: bone,
canvas, cellophane, cloth, cork, feathers, fiber, fur, glass, hair, horn,
leather, plastics, precious or semiprecious metals or stones, metals, shells,
textiles, tobacco, wax, wood (where sawing and planing mills are employed
within a completely enclosed building) and yarns;
         C.   Pottery and figurines, using previously pulverized clay and kilns
fired only with gas or electricity;
         D.   Musical instruments, toys, novelties, rubber metal stamps and
other small rubber products;
         E.   Electrical and electric appliances, instruments and devices,
television sets, radios, phonographs and household appliances;
         F.   Electric and neon signs, billboards and other commercial
advertising structures; and
         G.   Laboratories and processing (experimental, film or testing),
provided that no operation shall be conducted or equipment used which would
create hazards or noxious or offensive conditions;
      (6)   The following uses, provided that storage is within an enclosed
building or an area enclosed on all sides by a solid masonry wall or a minimum
six-foot solid painted fence with openings of not more than 15%:
         A.   Building materials, sales yards and lumber yards, including mill
work, when within a completely enclosed building;
         B.   Contractor’s equipment storage yards or plants or storage and
rental of equipment commonly used by contractors;
         C.   Fuel, food and goods distribution stations, warehouses and
storage, but excluding coal and coke; underground storage of inflammable
liquids is permitted only if the same is located more than 300 feet from any R
District; and
         D.   Public storage garages and yards;
      (7)   The following uses may not be conducted closer than 100 feet from
any R District. Where the I-2 District abuts upon any R District, but is
separated from such District by a street, the width of the street may be
considered as part of the required setback:
         A.   Bag, carpet and rug cleaning, provided that necessary equipment
is installed and operated for the effective precipitation or recovery of dust;
         B.   Blacksmith, welding or other metal working shops, including
machine shop operations of the tool, die and gauge types;
         C.   Carpenter, cabinet, upholstering, sheet metal, plumbing, heating,
roofing, air conditioning, sign painting, painting and other similar
establishments;
         D.   Foundries for casting lightweight nonferrous metals but which do
not cause noxious fumes or odors;
         E.   Ice manufacturing and cold storage plants and creamery and
bottling plants;
         F.   Laundries and cleaning and dyeing plants;
         G.   Repair services for machinery and equipment, including repair
garages and specialty establishments such as motor, body and fender, radiator,
motor tune-up and muffler shops and tire repairing sales and service, including
vulcanizing;
         H.   Stone or monument works not employing power tools or, if
employing such tools, then within a completely enclosed building; and
         I.   Veterinarian hospitals or clinics;
      (8)   Accessory uses clearly incidental to the principal uses permitted
on the same premises; and
      (9)   Signs, as regulated by
Chapter 1294.
   (b)   Conditionally permitted uses.  The Planning Commission may issue
conditional zoning certificates for uses listed in this section, subject to the
general requirements of
Chapter 1266 and the following specific requirements.
      (1)   Governmentally owned and/or operated buildings and facilities are
subject to §§
1266.10(a)(3), (a)(12) and (b).
      (2)   Truck or transfer terminals are subject to §§
1266.10(a)(2), (a)(6), (a)(7), (a)(10), (a)(11) and (p).
      (3)   Oil, gas and brine wells and the drilling and operations necessary
for their extraction, storage and skimming are subject to §§
1266.10(a)(6) through (a)(10) and (m).
      (4)   Soil removal or extracting operations for sand, clay, stone,
gravel, coal and other natural resources are subject to §§
1266.10(a)(6) through (a)(10) and (l).
      (5)    Public utility structures and rights-of-way are subject to §
1266.10(b)(6).
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1288.03  LOT AREA, WIDTH AND FRONTAGE.
   (a)   The minimum lot area is one-half acre.
   (b)   The minimum lot width at the building line is 100 feet.
   (c)   The minimum lot frontage is 80 feet.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1288.04  YARDS.
   (a)   The minimum front yard depth is 50 feet.
   (b)   The minimum rear yard depth is 25 feet.
   (c)   The minimum side yard width is ten feet.
   (d)   The minimum side yard width and rear yard depth abutting a Residential
District shall be 100 feet. The area abutting the residential boundary, to a
depth of 20 feet, shall be landscaped and maintained so as to limit to a
minimum any visual effects on adjacent residential uses. The balance of the
yard area shall be used for open space or vehicular parking.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974; Ord. 87-O-954, passed 3-17-1987)
§ 1288.05  BUILDING HEIGHT.
   The maximum building height in I-2 Districts is 65 feet.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974; Ord. 13-O-2736, passed 7-16-2013)
§ 1288.06  SITE PLAN REVIEW.
   All industrial uses specified under §
1288.02 shall be permitted only after the review and approval of the site plans
therefor by the Planning Commission and upon a finding by the Commission that
this chapter and §
1260.32 will be complied with.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1288.07  OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING.
   Off-street parking and loading shall be as regulated by
Chapter 1292.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974)
CHAPTER 1290:  I-3 MANUFACTURING, STORAGE AND DISPOSAL DISTRICTS
Section
1290.01   Purpose.
1290.02   Uses.
1290.03   Lot area, width and frontage.
1290.04   Yards.
1290.05   Building height.
1290.06   Site plan review.
1290.07   Off-street parking and loading.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Restrictions on location, bulk and height of buildings and structures,
percentage of lot occupancy and setback building lines - see Ohio R.C. 713.07
et seq.
   Prohibited uses - see P. & Z.
1260.22
   Businesses and merchandise displays - see P. & Z.
1260.27
   General performance standards - see P. & Z.
1260.30
   Off-street parking and loading - see P. & Z.
Ch. 1292
   Signs permitted in I Districts - see P. & Z.
1294.05
§ 1290.01  PURPOSE.
   The purpose of I-3 Districts is to provide for industrial, storage and
disposal uses which may have external physical effects which will or might be
felt to some degree by surrounding areas.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1290.02  USES.
   Within an I-3 District, no building, structure or premises shall be used,
arranged to be used or designed to be used, except for one or more of the
following uses.
   (a)   Permitted uses.
      (1)   All uses permitted in I-2 Districts;
      (2)   Accessory uses clearly incidental to the principal uses permitted
on the same premises; and
      (3)   Signs, as regulated by
Chapter 1294.
   (b)   Conditionally permitted uses.  The Planning Commission may issue
conditional zoning certificates for uses listed in this section, subject to the
general requirements of
Chapter 1266 and the following specific requirements.
      (1)   Any manufacturing, processing, cleaning, servicing, testing or
repairing of materials, goods or products, provided that such operations will
not be materially injurious or offensive to the occupants of adjacent premises
or the community by reason of the emission or creation of noise, vibration,
electrical or other types of interference, smoke, dust or other particulate
matter, toxic and noxious materials, odors, fire or explosive hazards, glare or
heat, are subject to §§
1266.10(b)(1) through (b)(3).
      (2)   Governmentally owned and/or operated buildings and facilities are
subject to §§
1266.10(a)(3), (a)(12) and (b).
      (3)   Oil, gas and brine wells and the drilling and operations necessary
for their extraction, storage and skimming are subject to §§
1266.10(a)(6) through (a)(10) and (m).
      (4)   Soil removal and extracting operations for sand, clay, stone,
gravel, coal and other natural resources are subject to §§
1266.10(a)(6) through (a)(10) and (l).
      (5)   Junk yards and scrap yards are subject to §§
1266.10(o)(1) through (o)(6).
      (6)   Sanitary landfill sites are subject to §§
1266.10(a)(6) through (a)(10) and (n).
      (7)   Public utility structures and rights-of-way are subject to §
1266.10(b)(6).
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1290.03  LOT AREA, WIDTH AND FRONTAGE.
   (a)   The minimum lot area is one acre.
   (b)   The minimum lot width at the building line is 150 feet.
   (c)   The minimum lot frontage is 80 feet.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1290.04  YARDS.
   (a)   The minimum front yard depth is 50 feet.
   (b)   The minimum rear yard depth is 15 feet, plus one foot for every two
feet in the height of a building or structure over 30 feet.
   (c)   The minimum side yard width is 15 feet, plus one foot for every two
feet in the height of a building or structure over 30 feet.
   (d)   The minimum side yard width and rear yard depth abutting a Residential
District shall be 100 feet. At least a 25 foot wide strip in the 100-foot yard
shall be planted and maintained for screening or camouflaging purposes in
accordance with the following specifications:
      (1)   The 25 foot wide strip shall be planted with pine, Norway spruce or
other trees or plants of similar screening value.
      (2)   Such trees shall be planted on a staggered pattern with not more
than ten feet between each tree.
      (3)   Trees shall be of a species and size that will produce, within two
years, a dense screen barrier at least eight feet in height.
      (4)   The 25 foot wide strip shall be so located as to achieve the
greatest screening or camouflaging effect. The dense screen buffer shall be
maintained and any plant material which does not live shall be replaced within
one year. The side and rear yard area within the planting strip may be used for
off-street parking and loading spaces.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1290.05  BUILDING HEIGHT.
   The maximum building height in I-3 Districts is 85 feet.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974; Ord. 15-O-2835, passed 10-6-2015)
§ 1290.06  SITE PLAN REVIEW.
   All industrial uses specified under §
1290.02 shall be permitted only after the review and approval of the site plans
therefor by the Planning Commission and upon a finding by the Commission that
this chapter and §
1260.32 will be complied with.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1290.07  OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING.
   Off-street parking and loading shall be as regulated by
Chapter 1292.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974)
CHAPTER 1292:  OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING
Section
1292.01   Parking facilities required; proximity to use or building.
1292.02   Required number of parking spaces.
1292.03   Floor area.
1292.04   Area of parking spaces.
1292.05   Design of parking areas.
1292.06   Entrances and exits.
1292.07   Multiple use district regulations.
1292.08   Off-street parking facilities in front, side and rear yards.
1292.09   Location of parking spaces.
1292.10   Joint use of parking spaces.
1292.11   Parking lots in Residential Districts.
1292.12   Loading and unloading space requirements.
1292.13   Parking and loading requirements for uses not specified.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Police may remove ignition key from unattended vehicle - see TRAF.
404.01
   Parking near stopped fire apparatus - see TRAF.
432.27
   Lights on parked or stopped vehicles - see TRAF.
438.09
   Parking generally - see TRAF.
Ch. 452
   Willfully leaving vehicles on private or public property - see TRAF.
452.05
§ 1292.01  PARKING FACILITIES REQUIRED; PROXIMITY TO USE OR BUILDING.
   In all districts, in connection with every building or part thereof
hereafter created, sufficient parking facilities shall be provided off-street
to meet all parking needs. The nearest edge of such facilities shall be within
500 feet of the principal permitted use or building.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1292.02   REQUIRED NUMBER OF PARKING SPACES.
   The minimum number of off-street parking spaces required is as follows:
 
Use Number of Spaces
Auditoriums, stadiums and similar uses 1 for each 4 seats, based on the maximum
                                       seating capacity
                                       1 for each 2 employees, plus 1 for each
Automobile repair garages              500 sq. ft., or fraction thereof, of
                                       floor area
Business and professional offices,     1 for each 150 sq. ft., or fraction
banks and studios                      thereof, of floor area, plus 1 for each
                                       2 employees
                                       1 for each 3 seats in the principal
Churches and school auditoriums        auditorium, based on the maximum seating
                                       capacity
                                       1 for each 150 sq. ft., or fraction
Clubs and lodges                       thereof, of floor area, or 1 for each 3
                                       seating spaces in the assembly room,
                                       whichever is greater
Dwellings                              2 for each dwelling unit
Hospitals                              1 for each 2 beds, plus 1 for each 3
                                       employees
Hotels, motels and tourist homes       1 for each sleeping room
Housing for the aged                   1 for each 3 sleeping rooms
Indoor theaters                        1 for each 3 seats
Libraries and museums                  1 for each 500 sq. ft., or fraction
                                       thereof, of floor area
Lodging houses and boarding houses     1 for each sleeping room
Medical and dental offices and clinics 5 for each physician or dentist, plus 1
                                       for each 2 other employees
Restaurants                            1 for each 2 seats
Retail stores and personal service     1 for each 150 sq. ft., or fraction
shops, etc.                            thereof, of floor area
Roadside stand                         2
 
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1292.03  FLOOR AREA.
   As used in this chapter, “floor area,” in offices, merchandising and
service-type operations, means the area used for service to the public and
excludes areas used principally for nonpublic purposes, such as storage,
incidental repair, processing, show windows, rest rooms and dressing rooms. In
measurement for parking space, fractions of required floor area over one-half
shall require one parking space.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1292.04  AREA OF PARKING SPACES.
   Off-street accessory parking areas shall provide parking spaces, each of
which shall not be less than 200 square feet in area, exclusive of access
drives or aisles.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1292.05  DESIGN OF PARKING AREAS.
   Parking areas shall be of usable shape, improved with bituminous, concrete
or equivalent surfacing and so graded and drained as to dispose of all surface
water accumulation within the area. All lighting used to illuminate such
parking areas shall be so arranged as to direct the light away from adjoining
premises or streets, and no open light source, such as the stringing of light
bulbs, is permitted. Wheel guards, including bumper guards as may be necessary,
shall be provided in connection with any off-street parking area of five cars
or more and shall be constructed so as to confine the storm water surface
drainage to the premises, to contain the cars on sloping surfaces and to
prevent bumper overhang.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1292.06  ENTRANCES AND EXITS.
   Entrances and exits shall be located so as to minimize traffic congestion
and avoid undue interference with pedestrian access at street intersection
corners. Not more than two accessways shall abut on any one street. Such
accessways shall not be less than 30 feet in width at the sidewalk line and
shall have a minimum side radius of 25 feet. Residential uses may have
accessways of not less than eight feet.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974; Ord. 07-O-2412, passed 11-20-2007)
§ 1292.07  MULTIPLE USE DISTRICT REGULATIONS.
   The parking and loading regulations for all districts which permit multiple
uses shall be the same as the regulations for commercial and/or residential
uses, as they would otherwise apply individually. 
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1292.08  OFF-STREET PARKING FACILITIES IN FRONT, SIDE AND REAR YARDS.
   Off-street parking facilities shall not occupy any part of any required
front or side yard in A-O-C or R Districts. In all C Districts and in all I
Districts, open off-street parking facilities may be located in the required
front yard, provided that at least a 20-foot wide landscaped strip is located
between the parking area and the street right-of-way line. In all districts,
open off-street parking facilities may occupy the required rear yard, provided
that a five-foot landscaped strip separates parking from all property lines
abutting the rear yard.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1292.09  LOCATION OF PARKING SPACES.
   Parking spaces required for dwelling units shall be located on the lot,
parking spaces required for other uses shall be located on the lot or within
500 feet of the use, measured along lines of public access to the property, but
shall not be allowed in Residential Districts, except as provided in §
1292.11.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1292.10  JOINT USE OF PARKING SPACES.
   Parking spaces already provided to meet off-street parking requirements for
places of public assembly and commercial and industrial establishments lying
within 500 feet of a church, measured along lines of public access, that are
not normally used between 6:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on Sundays and that are made
available for other parking, may be used to meet not more than 75% of the off-
street parking requirements of a church, parking spaces already provided to
meet off-street parking requirements for commercial and industrial
establishments lying within 500 feet of a place of public assembly along lines
of public access, that are not normally in use between 6:00 p.m. and midnight
and that are made available for other parking, may be used to meet not more
than 50% of the total requirements of parking space.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1292.11  PARKING LOTS IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.
   The Planning Commission may issue a conditional zoning certificate for
parking lots in Residential Districts, provided that:
   (a)   The parking lot shall be accessory to, and for use in connection with,
one or more permitted or conditionally permitted uses in and adjoining
commercial or industrial districts;
   (b)   Such parking lot shall contain not less than 5,000 square feet, which
shall abut at least 50 feet, either directly or across an alley or street, on
the District in which the use for which the parking is provided is permitted or
conditionally permitted;
   (c)   Such parking lot shall be used solely for the parking of passenger
vehicles and no commercial repair work or service of any kind shall be
conducted on such parking lot;
   (d)   No sign of any kind, other than those designating entrances, exits and
conditions of use, shall be maintained on such parking lot;
   (e)   Entrances and exits shall be at least 20 feet from any adjacent
property located in any Residential District; and
   (f)   Such parking lot shall be efficiently screened on each side by a fence
of acceptable design, a wall or a compact hedge. Such fence, wall or hedge
shall be not less than four feet in height and no solid portion shall be more
than six feet in height. Such fence, wall or hedge shall be maintained in good
condition. The planting strip for hedges shall be not less than three feet in
width. At least one water outlet shall be provided not more than 50 feet from
the lot for maintenance of plant materials. The space between such fence, wall
or hedge and the side lot line of any adjoining premises in a Residential
District shall be landscaped with grass, hardy shrubs or evergreen ground cover
and maintained in good condition.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1292.12  LOADING AND UNLOADING SPACE REQUIREMENTS.
   Every building used for nonresidential purposes which customarily receives
or distributes goods by motor vehicle shall provide sufficient space on the
premises for all loading and service purposes on the basis of the following
minimum regulations.
   (a)   Every building having over 5,000 square feet of gross floor area shall
be provided with at least one truck loading and unloading space not less than
12 feet in width and 40 feet in length and having not less than a 14-foot
clearance. An additional truck space of these dimensions shall be provided for
every additional 20,000 square feet, or fraction thereof, of gross floor area
in the building.
   (b)   Access to truck loading and unloading space shall be provided directly
from a public street or alley or from any right-of-way that will not interfere
with public convenience and that will permit the orderly and safe movement of
such trucks.
   (c)   Such loading space shall be provided as an area additional to the off-
street parking spaces required by §
1292.02 and shall not be considered as supplying off-street parking space.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1292.13  PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS FOR USES NOT SPECIFIED.
   Where the off-street parking and loading requirements for a use are not
specified in this chapter, the parking and loading facilities for such use
shall be developed so as to be sufficient to meet all the parking and loading
needs of the proposed use. No parking, loading or servicing shall be done on
the right-of- way of any publicly dedicated thoroughfare.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974)
CHAPTER 1294:  SIGNS
Section
1294.01   Purpose.
1294.02   Definitions.
1294.03   Prohibited signs.
1294.04   Permanent signs permitted in Residential (R) and Agricultural-Open
Space- Conservation (A-O-C) Districts.
1294.05   Permanent signs permitted in Commercial (C) and Industrial (I)
Districts.
1294.06   Permanent signs permitted in any district.
1294.07   Temporary signs permitted in designated districts.
1294.08   Location and number of signs and general requirements.
1294.09   Construction.
1294.10   Illumination.
1294.11   Maintenance; removal.
1294.12   Nonconforming signs.
1294.13   Fees.
1294.14   Planned unit development plazas, malls and shopping centers.
1294.15   Variance process.
1294.16   Rule making and permitting process.
1294.17   Notice and removal of signs on private property.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Advertising on traffic control devices - see TRAF.
414.07
   Trees, awnings and signs overhanging streets - see GEN. OFF.
660.16
   Signs prohibiting soliciting - see B.R. & T.
852.08
   Street name signs - see P. & Z.
1250.15
   Outdoor advertising signs - see P. & Z.
1260.23
§ 1294.01  PURPOSE.
   Signs obstruct views, distract motorists, displace alternative uses for
land, and pose other problems that legitimately call for regulation. In
addition to causing distractions and obstructions that may contribute to
traffic and pedestrian accidents, signs are as much subject to control as
noise, odors, debris and like characteristics of a use that, if not controlled
and regulated, may become a nuisance to adjacent properties or the community in
general.
   (a)   The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the number, size,
illumination, movement, materials, location, height, and condition of all signs
for exterior observation for the following reasons:
      (1)   To preserve the noncommercial character of residential
neighborhoods, and to provide reasonable, yet appropriate, conditions for
identifying businesses and services rendered in commercial and industrial
districts;
      (2)   To reduce traffic and pedestrian hazards by restricting signs,
including signs with lights and/or motion, which are likely to exceed the
viewers' capacity to receive information or which increase the probability of
accidents created by distracting attention or obstructing vision;
      (3)   To promote expeditious and safe navigation and wayfinding for
pedestrian and vehicular traffic through legible and appropriate signs;
      (4)   To preserve order, attractiveness, and cleanliness, maintain open
spaces, avoid the appearance of clutter, and prevent nuisances and invitations
to vandalism;
      (5)   To require that signs be constructed and maintained in a
structurally sound and attractive condition;
      (6)   To maintain property values and ensure compatibility with
surrounding landscape and architecture including, but not limited to, areas of
historical significance;
      (7)   To encourage aesthetic quality in the design, location, and size of
all signs;
      (8)   To protect the public peace, general health, safety and welfare,
convenience, and comfort, and to protect and encourage a more attractive
business environment and the overall physical appearance of the community.
   (b)   This chapter must be interpreted in a manner consistent with the First
Amendment guarantee of free speech. If any provision of this chapter is found
by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such finding shall not
affect the validity of other provisions of this chapter which shall be given
effect without the invalid provision.
(Ord. 16-O-2895, passed 1-3-2017)
§ 1294.02  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
   (1)   “A-frame sign.”  See “sandwich board sign”.
   (2)   “Abandoned sign” means a sign that is deteriorated (as defined
herein), not authorized in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, or
is not adequately maintained, repaired, or removed within the specified time as
ordered by this chapter.
   (3)   “Address sign” means any street location identifier.
   (4)   “Banner (flag)” means a non-freestanding, non-rigid cloth, plastic,
paper, or canvas with a design, picture, or writing on it, or a streamer.
   (5)   “Blade sign.”  See “projecting sign”.
   (6)   “Building mounted sign: (wall sign)” means any sign attached to,
mounted, engraved, or erected against the outside wall of a building or
structure, with the exposed display surface of the sign in a plane parallel to
the building facade. Wall signs include painted murals, messages, graphics and
other designs painted along with any letters or numerals mounted directly on
buildings and any extensions thereon.
   (7)   “Changeable copy sign (manual)” means a sign or portion thereof with
characters, letters, or illustrations that can be changed or rearranged by
manual means without altering the face or surface of the sign.
   (8)   “Changeable copy sign (mechanical/electrical)” means a sign or portion
thereof with characters, letters, or illustrations that can be changed or
rearranged by mechanical, or electronic means without altering the face or
surface of the sign, but is not an electronic sign.
   (9)   “City/municipality” means the City of Columbiana, Ohio.
   (10)   “Class A temporary signs” means a sign constructed, in whole or
substantial part, of paper, cloth, canvas, plastic sheet, cardboard, wallboard,
plywood, or other like materials that is not protected from exposure to the
natural elements, but is made of weather-resistant materials that last for more
than 7 days but less than 60 days without significant loss through exposure to
the elements or wear and tear.
   (11)   “Class B temporary sign” means a sign that, in whole or substantial
part, is not made of weather-resistant material and not adequately protected
from the natural elements.
   (12)   “Commission” means the Planning Commission of the City of Columbiana.
   (13)   “Deteriorated” means showing signs of weathering, rust, corrosion,
exposed wiring, chipped paint or faces, cracked, broken, torn, or missing
faces, or loose materials, or other evidence of disrepair
   (14)   “Electronic sign” means any sign, or portion of a sign, that displays
an electronic image or video, which may or may not include text. This
definition includes television screens, plasma screens, digital screens, LED
screens, video boards, holographic displays, and other similar media.
   (15)   “Flag.”  See “banner”.
   (16)   “Free-standing sign (ground sign, monument sign)” means a sign
supported by or suspended from posts, pillars, columns, or other structures
which are not a building or portion thereof.
   (17)   “Frontage (lot)” means the linear measurement of the border of a lot
that directly abuts a public right-of-way.
   (18)   “Garage sale sign” means a sign advertising the sale of personal
property by individuals from residential property, which is characterized as a
“garage sale”, “yard sale”, “lawn sale” or any other such casual sale of
personal property.
   (19)   “Gas-inflatable sign/device” means any device which is capable of
being expanded by any gas and used on a temporary basis.  This definition
includes both hot and cold-air balloons tethered or otherwise anchored to the
ground.
   (20)   “Government sign” means a sign erected, owned and maintained by the
city, state or federal (United States of America) government.
   (21)   “Ground sign.”  See “free-standing sign”.
   (22)   “Height (sign structure)” is the maximum vertical distance between
the highest and lowest points of the sign structure. Sign height may not be
artificially increased by the use of mounding.
   (23)   “Human sign (or human billboard)” means a sign that is held or worn
by a person, including but not limited to a human directional, sign walkers/
wavers/twirlers, and “sandwich persons.” “Human sign” does not include text or
images that are displayed on a traditional article of clothing such as a
jacket, shirt, pants, or hat.
   (24)   “Illumination, external” means a constant (non-flashing) source of
light directed towards signs so that the beam falls upon the exterior surface
of the sign and so arranged that no direct rays of light project from such
artificial source into residences or streets.
   (25)   “Illumination, internal” means a source of illumination enclosed
entirely within the sign and not directly visible from outside the sign.
   (26)   “Lot (parcel, property, premises)” means a platted parcel or other
tract of land separately identified with a unique parcel identification in the
County Auditor's records.
   (27)   “Message area (sign face area)” means the entire area within a
continuous perimeter that surrounds, but is not limited to each word, graphic,
symbol, number, and illustration.
   (28)   “Monument sign.”  See “free-standing sign”.
   (29)   “Mural” means a hand-painted, hand-tiled, or other similarly created
or digitally printed image on the exterior wall of a building.
   (30)   “Nonconforming sign” means a pre-existing legal sign which does not
conform to the standards set forth in this chapter.
   (31)   “Parcel.”  See “lot”.
   (32)   “Permanent sign” means a sign for which a permit has been granted as
a permanent sign, and is a sign constructed of materials to be protected from
exposure to the natural elements for more than one year or is made of materials
that are weather-resistant for multiple years without significant deterioration
from exposure to the elements or wear and tear.
   (33)   “Pole sign.”  See “ground sign”.
   (34)   “Portable sign” means a sign constructed of metal, wood, nylon, or
other weather-resistant materials designed to withstand exposure from the
natural elements for more than 60 days without significant loss through
exposure to the elements or wear and tear, and for which a permanent sign
permit has not been obtained.
   (35)   “Premises.”  See “lot”.
   (36)   “Projecting sign (blade sign)” means a sign projecting from the face
of the building that is oriented so the sign face is perpendicular to the
building facade.
   (37)   “Property.”  See “lot”.
   (38)   “Refacing” means any alteration to the face of a sign involving the
replacement of materials or pans. Refacing does not refer to replacing the
entire sign structure or the removal of the sign.
   (39)   “Right-of-way line” is the line, as platted or otherwise appearing
upon the maps of the City of Columbiana, between a public street, road,
highway, alley or sidewalk and the adjacent private property (lot/parcel),
including, but not limited to, the paved or otherwise improved portion of such
public street, road, highway, alley or sidewalk.
   (40)   “Sandwich board sign (a-frame sign, sidewalk sign)” means a sign with
two hinged boards or faces which can be placed on the ground, or a rigid sign
that is worn on the front and back of a person, that is used on a temporary
basis.
   (41)   “Sidewalk sign.”  See “sandwich board sign”.
   (42)   “Sign” means text, illustrations, or shapes which are affixed to,
portrayed, or depicted directly or indirectly upon any surface for outdoor
public view. This definition includes all signs visible from any public right-
of-way or adjacent property.
   (43)   “Sign face area.”  See “message area”.
   (44)   “Sign structure” means the supporting unit of a sign face, including
but not limited to frames, braces and poles. If the sign structure has a
communicative element to it, the sign structure is included in the message
area.
   (45)   “State” means the State of Ohio.
   (46)   “Streamer” means any lightweight plastic, fabric or other material,
whether or not containing a message of any kind, usually suspended in series. A
streamer may have pennants and/or banners attached.
   (47)   “Temporary sign” means a Class A-temporary sign, a Class B-temporary
sign or a portable sign.
   (48)   “Variance (sign).”  A variance may be granted allowing deviations
from regulations established by this chapter for: height and width of the sign
area, height and width of the message area, setback, lighting, or time, place,
and manner restrictions, where practical difficulties unique to the property in
question prevent full compliance with such provisions.
   (49)   “Vehicle sign” means a sign painted on, placed in or upon or
otherwise attached to a motor vehicle, railroad car or a trailer attached
thereto which is lawfully traveling over or upon an alley, street, highway or
railroad track within the city, or lawfully parked within the city.
   (50)   “Wall sign.”  See “building mounted sign”.
   (51)   “Width (sign structure)” means the maximum horizontal or semi-
horizontal distance between the two points of a sign structure.
   (52)   “Window sign” means any signs, posters, symbols and other types of
identification, directly attached to the window of a building or erected on the
inside of the building and visible from any public right-of-way or adjacent
property.
   (53)   “Zoning officials” means the City Manager who is the Building Officer
and Zoning Inspector of the city and the Assistant Zoning Inspector of the city
appointed by the City Manager.
(Ord. 16-O-2895, passed 1-3-2017)
§ 1294.03  PROHIBITED SIGNS.
   (a)   Signs are prohibited in all districts unless specifically defined,
authorized and constructed in compliance with this chapter, the Codified
Ordinances of Columbiana, Ohio and any other applicable regulations, or a
variance granted pursuant to §
1294.15.
   (b)   All permanent signs require a permit in accordance with the provisions
of this chapter and such signs not having a permit are prohibited. Signs
authorized for temporary use by the provisions of this chapter do not require a
permit.
   (c)   Abandoned signs are prohibited in all districts.
   (d)   Unattended signs on public property, including, but not limited to,
parks and rights-of-way, shall be considered abandoned signs. These abandoned
signs may be disposed of or destroyed without notice or compensation. Such
disposal or destruction is not subject to appeal.
   (e)   Any sign which is not accordingly permitted by specific definition,
authorization and construction requirements is prohibited within the city.
(Ord. 16-O-2895, passed 1-3-2017)
§ 1294.04  PERMANENT SIGNS PERMITTED IN RESIDENTIAL (R) AND AGRICULTURAL-OPEN
SPACE-CONSERVATION (A-O-C) DISTRICTS.
   The purpose of the residential and agricultural-open space-conservation
districts-specific sign regulations is to preserve the noncommercial character
of such districts. As such, the regulation of the size, illumination,
materials, location and height of signs in such districts shall be different
than signs in commercially and industrially zoned districts. The following
permanent signs are permitted on property in all Residential (R) and
Agricultural-Open Space-Conservation (A-O-C) Districts.
   (a)   One unlighted free-standing or wall announcement sign for any church,
school and any religious, public, quasi-public or educational institution which
shall not be over 20 square feet in area.  Such sign shall be located not
closer than ten feet from any right-of-way line and shall not obstruct traffic
visibility.
   (b)   One unlighted free-standing or wall nameplate not more than 20 square
feet in area announcing the name and occupation of a home occupation use. Such
sign shall be located not closer than ten feet from any right-of-way line and
shall not obstruct traffic visibility.
   (c)   One unlighted free-standing or wall sign not more than 20 square feet
in area used in conjunction with a seasonal roadside stand to advertise
agricultural products produced on the premises.  Such sign shall be located not
closer than ten feet from any right-of-way line and shall not obstruct traffic
visibility. Such sign shall be covered at the conclusion of seasonal sales.
   (d)   One unlighted free-standing sign not more than 20 square feet in area,
identifying a subdivision or neighborhood at each entrance to such subdivision
or neighborhood.  Such sign shall not be located closer than ten feet from any
right-of-way and shall not obstruct traffic visibility.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974; Ord. 11-O-2664, passed 11-15-2011; Ord. 16-
O-2895, passed 1-3-2017)
§ 1294.05  PERMANENT SIGNS PERMITTED IN COMMERCIAL (C) AND INDUSTRIAL (I)
DISTRICTS.
   The following permanent signs are permitted on property in all Commercial
(C) and Industrial (I) Districts, provided that no sign, other than an
electronic message board sign which shall be restricted and regulated in
accordance with the provisions of division (e) below, shall be located closer
than 25 feet from any lot located in any R or A-O-C District.
   (a)   Such signs as may be appropriate to any church, school, religious,
public, quasi-public or educational institution building for the purpose of
displaying the name and activities therein. Such signs, limited to three in
number, may take the form of a building mounted sign, a free-standing sign or a
projecting sign in accordance with the provisions of divisions (b), (c) or (d)
below.
   (b)   One building mounted sign may be erected which advertises an
industrial activity, business or service conducted upon the premises and/or
advertises products, merchandise or commodities produced, stocked and/or sold
on the premises. Such sign shall be affixed flat against the wall of a building
and shall not project therefrom more than one foot. No such sign shall extend
beyond the width or height of the wall to which it is attached. The sign shall
not exceed 50 square feet or 10% of the area of the face of the building to
which the sign is affixed, whichever is the larger. The sign shall not exceed
100 square feet in any case.
   (c)   One free-standing sign which advertises an industrial activity,
business or service conducted upon the premises and/or advertises products,
merchandise or commodities produced, stocked and/or sold on the premises shall
be permitted, provided that such sign conforms to the following requirements:
      (1)   The allowable area of any sign may be one-half of the total front
footage of the lot up to a 150-foot frontage (75 square feet maximum);
      (2)   The maximum height of any sign at the setback line shall be 25
feet, but may be increased one foot in height for every five feet of setback
from the setback line. No sign shall exceed 35 feet in height;
      (3)   No portion of any sign shall be located closer than ten feet from
any right-of-way line;
      (4)   The area of a sign may be increased one square foot for every one
foot from the setback line. No sign shall exceed 100 square feet in area; and
      (5)   The additional height and area allowances made in divisions (c)(2)
and (c)(4) hereof apply only if the sign is placed in the center one-third of
the lot frontage. If a sign is placed outside the center one-third of the lot
frontage, the size of the sign shall be reduced by 50% of the permitted size.
   (d)   One projecting sign advertising an industrial activity, business or
service conducted upon the premises and/or advertising products, merchandise or
commodities produced, stocked and/or sold upon the premises is permitted, which
sign shall not extend into the public right-of-way used by vehicular traffic.
The sign shall not exceed 20 square feet in area and shall be constructed and
erected so that the lowest portion thereof is not less than eight feet above
the finished grade.
   (e)   Changeable copy sign.
      (1)   Any of the signs allowed in accordance with the provisions of
divisions (a), (b), (c), or (d) above may take the form of a changeable copy
sign which advertises an industrial activity, business or service conducted
upon the premises and/or advertises products, services, merchandise or
commodities produced, stocked and/or sold upon the premises and shall be
permitted so long as the sign conforms to all other sign regulations set forth
in this code.  Said changeable copy sign may also display other pertinent
information such as civic announcements, time/temperature, and/or patriotic and
like messages.
      (2)   The message, display or content of a changeable copy sign may be
manually changed or changed by means of remote electronically energized on-off
switching combinations of alphabetic or pictographic components arranged on a
display surface. Illumination may be integral to the components, such as
characterized by lamps or other light emitting devices, or it may be from an
external light source designed to reflect off the changeable component display.
(These electronically energized signs shall be known as electronic message
board signs.)
      (3)   The message area of an electronic message board sign may be
illuminated by incandescent lamps, a light emitting diode (LED) or magnetic
discs. Regardless of the light source, undue brightness is prohibited. For the
purpose of enforcing this provision “undue brightness” will be construed to
mean illumination of a white portion of the sign in excess of the intensity
levels specified as day: 5,000 NITS; night: 1,000 NITS. NITS is a standard of
LED display manufactures and means brightness per square meter.
      (4)   To ensure compliance with provision, the sign must have an
automatic phased proportional dimmer, which must be used to reduce the
nighttime brightness levels (compared to daytime levels). Further, prior to
issuance of a permit for an electronic message board sign, the applicant shall
provide written certification from the sign manufacturer that the light
intensity has been factory pre-set not to exceed the levels specified above,
and the intensity level is protected from end-user manipulation by pass word
protected software or other method as deemed appropriate by the Planning
Commission. All electronic message board signs shall have adjustment via
software photocell or traditional photocell hardware.
      (5)   Changeable copy sign displays shall be limited to static displays
or messages that appear or disappear from the display through dissolve, fade or
scroll modes or similar transitions and frame effects that have text or images
that appear to move or change in size, or the appearance of optical illusion of
movement, of any part of the sign structure, design or pictorial segment of the
sign, including movement of any illumination or the flashing, scintillating or
varying of light intensity. With regard to changeable copy sign displays, the
following terms shall be accordingly defined:
         A.   “Dissolve” means a mode of message transition on an electronic
message display accomplished by varying the light intensity or pattern, where
the first message gradually appears to dissipate and lose legibility
simultaneous with the gradual appearance and legibility of the second message.
         B.   “Fade” means a mode of message transition on an electronic
message display accomplished by varying the light intensity, where the first
message gradually reduces intensity to the point of not being legible and the
subsequent message gradually increases intensity to the point of legibility.
         C.   “Frame” means a complete, static display screen on the electronic
message display.
         D.   “Frame effect” means a visual effort on an electronic message
display applied to a single frame to attract the attention of viewers.
         E.   “Scroll” means a mode of message transition on an electronic
message display where the message appears to move vertically across the display
surface.
         F.   “Transition” means a visual effect used on an electronic message
display to change from one message to another.
         G.   “Travel” means a mode of message transition on an electronic
message display where the message appears to move horizontally across the
display surface.
      (6)   Electronic message board signs are prohibited within 200 feet of a
principle structure in a Residential Zoning District, if any part of the sign
would be visible from said structure. At the time of the filing of the permit
application, the applicant will have to demonstrate that this standard is met.
This may be accomplished either by showing that this standard is not applicable
or by submitting a landscape plan or a plan referencing other means of
screening that would buffer the sign face from the principle residence
structure.
   (f)   In addition, signs, limited to two in number, each of which shall not
exceed 20 square feet in area, may be permanently painted or lettered upon
windows or doors of the building.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974; Ord. 79-O-441, passed 4-3-1979; Ord. 91-O-
1245, passed 8-20-1991; Ord. 03-O-2021, passed 4-1-2003; Ord. 03-O-2067, passed
10-21-2003; Ord. 08-O-2489, passed 10-21-2008; Ord. 11-O-2664, passed 11-15-
2011; Ord. 16-O-2895, passed 1-3- 2017)
§ 1294.06  PERMANENT SIGNS PERMITTED IN ANY DISTRICT.
   The following permanent signs are permitted in any district, however any
such signs located in A-O-C or R Districts shall not be lighted.
   (a)   Unlighted street identification signs and address signs not to exceed
four square feet in area; traffic informational or control devices or signs
erected by the city, state or federal government; as well as any sign erected
and maintained by the city and any sign required to be posted by the federal
government, the state, the city or a court of competent jurisdiction on a
temporary or permanent basis.
   (b)   One building mounted memorial sign or tablet with the name of a
building and the date of erection.  Such signs or tablets shall have an area
not to exceed 20 square feet.
   (c)   Awnings and canopies are permitted for public convenience. No
advertising shall be placed on any awning or canopy, except that the name of
the owner and the business, industry or pursuit conducted within the premises
may be painted or otherwise permanently placed in a space not to exceed 80% of
the surface of the front or side portions thereof.
(Ord. 16-O-2895, passed 1-3-2017)
§ 1294.07  TEMPORARY SIGNS PERMITTED IN DESIGNATED DISTRICTS.
   (a)   The following unlighted temporary signs are permitted upon private
property in A-O-C and R Districts:
      (1)   Not more than two portable sign(s) are permitted to be placed upon
a lot, which sign(s) may remain there for 60 or more days, but not to exceed
180 days in total. Such portable sign(s) shall not exceed 12 square feet in
area, shall not be located closer than ten feet from any right-of-way line and
shall not obstruct traffic visibility.
      (2)   Not more than eight Class A-temporary sign(s) are permitted to be
placed upon a lot, which sign(s) may remain there for not more than 60 days.
Such Class A-temporary sign(s) shall not exceed 12 square feet in area, shall
not be located closer than ten feet from any right-of-way line and shall not
obstruct traffic visibility.
      (3)   Not more than two Class B-temporary sign(s) are permitted to be
placed upon a lot, which sign(s) may remain there for not more than seven days.
Such Class B-temporary sign(s) shall not exceed 12 square feet in area, shall
not be located closer than ten feet from any right-of-way line and shall not
obstruct traffic visibility.
   (b)   The following temporary signs are permitted upon private property in C
and I Districts:
      (1)   One portable sign is permitted to be placed upon a lot, which sign
may remain there for 60 or more days, but not to exceed 180 days in total. Such
portable sign shall not exceed 32 square feet in area, shall not be located
closer than ten feet from any right-of-way line and shall not obstruct traffic
visibility.
      (2)   Not more than eight Class A-temporary sign(s) are permitted to be
placed upon a lot, which sign(s) may remain there for not more than 60 days.
Such Class A-temporary sign(s) shall not exceed 32 square feet in area, shall
not be located closer than ten feet from any right-of-way line and shall not
obstruct traffic visibility.
      (3)   Not more than two Class B-temporary sign(s) are permitted to be
placed upon a lot, which sign(s) may remain there for not more than seven days.
Such Class B-temporary sign(s) shall not exceed 32 square feet in area, shall
not be located closer than ten feet from any right-of-way line and shall not
obstruct traffic visibility.
      (4)   One gas-inflatable sign/device is permitted to be placed upon a lot
on not more than two occasions in any one calendar year for not more than three
consecutive days on each such occasion. Such sign/device shall not exceed 20
feet in height, nor eight feet in width, when inflated, nor shall the same be
located closer than 30 feet from any right-of-way line and shall not obstruct
traffic visibility.
   (c)   A vehicle sign which is a sign painted on, placed in or otherwise
attached to a motor vehicle, railroad car or a trailer attached thereto which
is lawfully traveling over or upon an alley, street, road, highway or railroad
track within the city, or lawfully parked within the city, is permitted within
any district within the city, upon the condition that such sign shall not
obstruct traffic visibility.
(Ord. 16-O-2895, passed 1-3-2017)
§ 1294.08  LOCATION AND NUMBER OF SIGNS AND GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   In addition to the requirements of §§
1294.03 through
1294.07, the following locational criteria shall apply.
   (a)   Where signs are permitted to project over public property, they shall
not be supported from the public property in any way. Canopies may be supported
from any public property or right-of-way, provided that supporting materials
are designed and located to cause minimal disturbance to the function for which
the public property or right-of-way was intended.
   (b)   No sign attached to any building shall project above the highest part
of the wall to which it is attached.
   (c)   No sign shall be located on the roof of any building, however a sign
may be located on the roof of a commercial porch providing it does not exceed
the ridgeline height of the main roof of the building to which it is attached.
   (d)   No commercial business or industry shall have more than two signs on
any side of the building in which the business or industry is located. The
total number of signs allowed, including signs attached to the building and
free-standing signs, shall not exceed four for any one business or industry.
   (e)   There shall be not more than one free-standing sign or other sign
affixed to the ground on the premises, except as otherwise provided in §
1294.14.
   (f)   No sign shall be so erected as to obstruct any window, door, fire
escape, balcony, platform, stairway, ladder, vent or other means of ingress to
or egress from any building; nor shall any sign be erected so as to interfere
with any foot traffic or create a hazard to the safety, health or well-being of
the public as determined by the Zoning Inspector or the Assistant Zoning
Inspector.
   (g)   Signs shall be so erected as not to obstruct traffic sight lines or
traffic control lights at street intersections or signals at railroad grade
crossings.
   (h)   Signs visible from a street shall not resemble highway directional
signals.
   (i)   No awning or canopy shall be allowed to extend closer than one foot
from the outside edge of the street curb.
   (j)   All signs, awnings and canopies shall be constructed and erected so
that the lowest portion thereof is not less than eight feet above the level of
the sidewalk.
   (k)   The erector of every permanent sign shall place thereon an imprint or
metal tag showing the name of the erector, re-erector or hanger, so that the
same can be readily identified.
   (l)   The measurement of signs shall be regulated as follows:
      (1)   With regard to any existing or proposed sign, the Assistant Zoning
Inspector shall be authorized to determine each of the following:
         A.   The type of sign (including type of temporary sign) within the
definitions contained in §
1294.02;
         B.   Whether a sign structure has a communicative element to it (and
is therefore part of the message area);
         C.   The height, width, or other measurable characteristics of a sign
or component thereof; and
         D.   Whether a sign is abandoned or deteriorated as defined herein.
      (2)   For signs with internal illumination, the entire lighted surface
shall be considered the message area.
      (3)   For spherical sign structures or any portion thereof, the sphere
shall be dissected by an imaginary line through the center of the sphere and
the surface area of the half sphere shall be counted as the sign face. For
cubical sign structures or any portion thereof, the area of all display faces
(all faces that are not parallel to the ground) shall be included in
determining the area of the sign. The Zoning Inspector or the Assistant Zoning
Inspector shall have discretion to use a similar method of calculation for sign
structures that are not flat, but have non-cubical or non-spherical shapes.
      (4)   Where a sign has two or more display faces, the area of all faces
of the sign shall be included in determining the area of the sign unless two
display faces join back to back, are parallel to each other and not more than
24 inches apart, or form a V-angle of less than 45 degrees.
(Ord. 16-O-2895, passed 1-3-2017)
§ 1294.09  CONSTRUCTION.
   All signs, awnings and canopies shall be constructed in conformity with the
City Building Code and other applicable requirements of the Codified Ordinances
of Columbiana, Ohio.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974; Ord. 11-O-2664, passed 11-15-2011; Ord. 16-
O-2895, passed 1-2-2017)
§ 1294.10  ILLUMINATION.
   Except as otherwise provided in §
1294.05(e):
   (a)   Signs for which lighting or illumination is not prohibited may be
illuminated with indirect lighting, neon or other gaseous-type tubes,
incandescent lamps or luminous bulbs. The source of light shall not be visible
from the street and shall be shaded to prevent the light from beaming onto
adjacent properties or other rights-of-way. No flashing or revolving
illumination shall be employed.
   (b)   Any business sign illuminated with electric lights, including neon or
other gaseous-type tubes or incandescent lamps, erected within 100 feet of an
intersection where an illuminated device has been provided for the control of
traffic, shall not duplicate in the electric light of such sign any colors
appearing in the traffic control signal.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974; Ord. 03-O-2067, passed 10-21-2003; Ord. 08-
O-2489, passed 10-21-2008; Ord. 11-O-2664, passed 11-15-2011; Ord. 16-O-2895,
passed 1-3-2017)
§ 1294.11  MAINTENANCE; REMOVAL.
   The Zoning Inspector or the Assistant Zoning Inspector may order any
deteriorated sign to be painted or refurbished forthwith. All supports, guys,
braces and anchors for such signs shall be maintained in a safe condition. The
Zoning Inspector or the Assistant Zoning Inspector may order any such sign that
is not so maintained to be removed pursuant to the provisions of §
1294.17.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974; Ord. 11-O-2664, passed 11-15-2011; Ord. 16-
O-2895, passed 1-3-2017)
§ 1294.12  NONCONFORMING SIGNS.
   (a)   Any sign existing at the time of enactment of this section shall be
allowed to remain in its present form provided it is continuously maintained.
If a change of ownership takes place, such signs may be re-lettered. However,
physical changes in such signs, such as in the size and material of such signs,
are not permitted. Where physical changes are desired, the form of such signs
must be made to conform to this Zoning Code.
   (b)   Any sign now or hereafter existing which no longer advertises a bona
fide business conducted shall be taken down and removed by the owner, agent or
person having the beneficial use of the building or structure upon which such
sign may be found, within ten days after written notification thereof from the
Zoning Inspector or the Assistant Zoning Inspector. Upon failure to comply with
such notice within the time specified in the order, the Zoning Inspector or the
Assistant Zoning Inspector is hereby authorized to cause the removal of such
sign and any expense incident thereto shall be paid by the owner of the
property on which such sign is located.
   (c)   If the Zoning Inspector or the Assistant Zoning Inspector finds that
any sign or other advertising structure regulated under this chapter is unsafe
or insecure, or is a menace to the public, or has been constructed or erected
in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, notice shall be given in
writing by the Zoning Inspector or the Assistant Zoning Inspector to the owner
thereof. If the owner fails to remove or alter the structure so as to comply
with the standards set forth in this chapter within ten days after such notice,
such sign or other advertising structure may be removed or altered to comply
with this chapter at the expense of the owner of the property upon which it is
located. The Zoning Inspector or the Assistant Zoning Inspector may cause any
sign or other advertising structure which is an immediate peril to persons or
property to be removed summarily and without notice.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974; Ord. 79-O-441, passed 4-3-1979; Ord. 79-O-
442, passed 4-3-1979; Ord. 11-O-2664, passed 11-15-2011; Ord. 16-O-2895, passed
1-3-2017)
§ 1294.13  FEES.
   Sign fees are as enumerated in §
1262.05.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974; Ord. 11-O-2664, passed 11-15-2011; Ord. 16-
O-2895, passed 1-3-2017)
§ 1294.14  PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT PLAZAS, MALLS AND SHOPPING CENTERS.
   In addition to the building mounted signs permitted pursuant to §
1294.05 for each individual business located in the development;
   (a)   Permanent free standing signs, not to exceed three, near each arterial
street on which a planned unit development plaza, mall or shopping center
property has frontage are permitted, provided they are located within 25 feet
of an approved entrance, and no closer than ten feet to an arterial street
right-of-way line, and do not obstruct traffic visibility.
   (b)   Such signs located at the entrances shall have as the first words at
the top the words “entrance” or “entrance to” which shall not be included in
the calculation of permitted space.
   (c)   Such signs shall show the name of the development immediately under
the words “entrance” or “entrance to”.
   (d)   The permitted sign face area for the name of the development may be
one-half of the total front footage of the lot up to a 150 feet frontage (75
square feet maximum).
   (e)   Such signs may provide space for the names of individual business
located in the development, subject to the following:
      (1)   The total space for individual business names shall not exceed 10%
of the total space these businesses would otherwise be entitled to on
individual tree standing signs.
      (2)   If individual business names are included on these signs, no other
free standing sign is permitted on the property.
      (3)   If individual business names are included, no other information
shall appear on these signs.
   (f)   Permissible space calculations shall apply only to one face of a
double-faced sign, provided that both faces are identical.
   (g)   Individual business names may be separately illuminated and may be
sectionalized to permit removal and replacement of names, provided that the
construction is such that the entire sign appears to be one unit.
   (h)   Such signs shall conform to all regulations not conflicting with this
section.
(Ord. 79-O-441, passed 4-3-1979; Ord. 03-O-2067, passed 10-21-2003; Ord. 11-O-
2664, passed 11-15-2011; Ord. 16-O-2895, passed 1-3-2017)
§ 1294.15  VARIANCE PROCESS.
   (a)   Standards for approval of a sign variance: The following factors shall
be found by the Planning Commission of the city in determining practical
difficulty or hardship:
      (1)   That the variance will not impair any of the regulatory purposes
provided within this chapter;
      (2)   That special conditions and circumstances exist which are peculiar
to the land or structure involved and which are not applicable generally to
other lands or structures in the same zoning districts. Examples of such
special conditions or circumstances are: exceptional irregularity, narrowness,
shallowness, or steepness of the lot, or adjacency to nonconforming and
inharmonious uses, structures, or conditions;
      (3)   That the variance is the minimum necessary to resolve the practical
difficulties prompting the variance request;
      (4)   That the essential character of the neighborhood would not be
substantially altered;
      (5)   That adjoining properties will not suffer substantial detriment as
a result of the variance;
      (6)   That the variance would not adversely affect the delivery of
governmental services such as public safety services response, or water, sewer,
or trash pickup; and
      (7)   That the special conditions or circumstances on the property were
not caused by the current owner who is requesting the variance.
   (b)   Variances shall not be granted where the special conditions and
circumstances are the result of actions by the current owner of the property.
      (1)   Variance process: Authority to consider variance(s) from the terms
of this chapter is granted to the Planning Commission.
      (2)   Pre-application meeting: The potential applicant may schedule a
pre-application meeting with the Zoning Inspector or the Assistant Zoning
Inspector. The purpose of this meeting shall be to review the applicant's sign
plan and to explore options for the sign to conform to this chapter, without a
sign variance. The Zoning Inspector or the Assistant Zoning Inspector may
provide a written summary of the pre-application meeting and recommendations to
the potential applicant. A potential applicant who does not schedule a pre-
submittal meeting, or who does not follow said recommendations from such
meeting, shall not be barred from applying for a sign variance.
      (3)   Submittal requirements: An application for a sign variance shall be
filed on a form provided by the Zoning Inspector or the Assistant Zoning
Inspector, and shall be accompanied by the following requirements:
         A.   Name, address, and phone number of applicant(s) and property
owner;
         B.   Proof of ownership, legal interest or written authority;
         C.   Legal description of property or portion thereof;
         D.   Description of variance requested;
         E.   Narrative statements establishing and substantiating the
justification for the variance pursuant to division (a) of this section;
         F.   Elevations and other drawings at a reasonable scale to convey the
need for the variance;
         G.   Payment of the application fee; and
         H.   Any other documents deemed necessary by the Zoning Inspector or
the Assistant Zoning Inspector.
      (4)   Preliminary review by Zoning Officials: Upon receipt of an
application, the Zoning Inspector or the Assistant Zoning Inspector shall,
within five working days, review the application and determine whether it
provides all necessary and required information. If it is incomplete, the
Zoning Inspector or the Assistant Zoning Inspector shall advise the applicant
of the deficiencies and inform the applicant that no further action will be
taken on the application until all necessary and required information has been
provided. When the application is complete, it shall be placed, upon the
Planning Commission's agenda.
      (5)   Notice to property owners: The applicant shall provide a list of
the owners within 200 feet of the property for which the variance is requested
to the Zoning Officials. Written notice of the public hearing shall be provided
to all owners of property within 200 feet of the subject site, as measured from
the boundaries of the lot on which the proposed sign would be erected. Such
notice shall be sent, by the applicant by certified mail, to the owners at
least seven days before the date of the hearing.
      (6)   Sign variance public hearing and notice:  Within five working days
of determining that an application contains all the necessary and required
information, the application shall be placed upon the Planning Commission
agenda for its next public meeting occurring not less than ten days after
receipt of the completed application. The Planning Commission shall consider
the sign variance application at a public hearing.
      (7)   Planning Commission hearing and recommendation: The Planning
Commission shall review the application and recommend that the variance be
granted as requested; be granted as modified by the Planning Commission; or be
denied. The Planning Commission shall indicate the specific reasons(s) for its
recommendation, including specific findings for each standard listed in
division (a) of this section.
      (8)   Temporary sign while review pending: The applicant may erect a
temporary sign while the sign variance application is pending before the
Planning Commission. The temporary sign must conform to all other provisions of
this title.
      (9)   No modification: There shall be no modification of variances except
by further consideration of the Planning Commission.
      (10)   Expiration of the variance: If for any reason construction of a
sign has not commenced, the variance shall expire six months from the date on
which it was granted. Extension of variances, without modification, may be
applied for prior to the date of expiration. Extensions, up to an additional
six months, may be granted by the Planning Commission if it finds that the
requested extension is consistent with the purpose, policies, and intent of
this chapter. Requests for renewal of expired variances shall be considered to
be new variance applications.
(Ord. 16-O-2895, passed 1-3-20117)
§ 1294.16  RULE MAKING AND PERMITTING PROCESS.
   (a)   Rules and regulations.
      (1)   The Zoning Inspector is hereby authorized to make and adopt such
rules and regulations as may be necessary for the proper administration and
enforcement of the provisions of the sign regulations, provided that such rules
and regulations shall not be in conflict with the provisions, or intent of the
sign regulations. The Zoning Inspector shall file a certified copy of all rules
and regulations which he/she may adopt with the Clerk of Council. Such rules
and regulations shall have the same force and effect as the provisions of the
sign regulations.
      (2)   A copy of all rules and regulations adopted as provided herein
shall be maintained by the Zoning Inspector at his/her main office, and any
person having business therewith shall have access to the copy of all rules and
regulations.
   (b)   Application for permanent sign(s).  A permanent sign application shall
contain such information as the Zoning Inspector deems reasonably necessary for
a determination of compliance, or noncompliance with the sign regulations, and
to assist enforcement thereafter. The applicant shall sign the application and
each copy thereof, attesting to the truth and exactness of the information
supplied.
   (c)   Application procedure for permanent sign(s), appeal.
      (1)   Applications shall be filed in such form and in such manner as the
regulations require.
      (2)   Any applicant may appeal the failure or refusal to grant a
permanent sign permit, or to recommend it to be granted upon terms and
conditions acceptable to the applicant, to the Board of Zoning Appeals pursuant
to the provisions of
Chapter 1264.
(Ord. 16-O-2895, passed 1-3-2017)
§ 1294.17  NOTICE AND REMOVAL OF SIGNS ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   (a)   Signs placed or maintained on private property in violation of this
chapter are prohibited. The Zoning Inspector and the Assistant Zoning Inspector
are responsible for enforcing the provisions of this chapter. In addition to
criminal penalties provided in the Zoning Code, the Zoning Inspector or the
Assistant Zoning Inspector may pursue civil and administrative remedies,
including but not limited to injunctive action in a court of competent
jurisdiction.
   (b)   When a sign has been placed or maintained on private property in
violation of this chapter, the Zoning Inspector or the Assistant Zoning
Inspector may order that the prohibited sign be removed or brought into
compliance with this chapter by sending a notice of violation to the owner of
the property. A period of not more than ten calendar days from service of the
notice of violation shall be permitted to remove the sign or bring it into
compliance. The notice of violation shall be considered served upon placement
in regular U.S. mail or posting on the front entry door of the property.
   (c)   The property owner may appeal the notice of violation to the City
Planning Commission by filing a written notice of appeal with the Zoning
Inspector or the Assistant Zoning Inspector stating the grounds for the appeal.
The notice of appeal must be filed therewith before the expiration of the ten
calendar day period allowed for the property owner to remove the sign or bring
it into compliance. The City Planning Commission shall hear the appeal at its
next regular meeting occurring not less than ten calendar days from the date of
receipt of the notice of appeal. The City Planning Commission shall either
enter its findings and decision on the appeal during the hearing, or may take
the matter under advisement and issue a decision not more than ten calendar
days following the hearing.
   (d)   The decision of the Zoning Inspector or the Assistant Zoning Inspector
to file a criminal or civil complaint with a court of competent jurisdiction
shall not be subject to this administrative appeal process.
   (e)   Upon failure of the owner or agent of the owner to remove the sign or
bring it into compliance as directed in the notice of violation, any duly
authorized employee of the city shall be authorized to enter the property in
violation and remove the sign to abate the violation. The costs of abatement
shall be charged to the property owner. Unpaid costs shall be collected
pursuant to the city's authority to collect debts owed to the city and the
assessment thereof against the property.
(Ord. 16-O-2895, passed 1-3-2017)
CHAPTER 1296:  NONCONFORMING USES
Section
1296.01   Purpose.
1296.02   Conditions for continuation.
1296.03   Unsafe structures.
1296.04   Alterations.
1296.05   Extensions.
1296.06   Changes.
1296.07   Construction approved prior to Zoning Code.
1296.08   Restoration and use of damaged buildings.
1296.09   Deterioration and depreciation of buildings and structures.
1296.10   Abandonment of nonconforming uses.
1296.11   Displacement of conforming uses.
1296.12   Cessation of junk and wrecking yards.
1296.13   Certificates of nonconforming use.
1296.14   District boundary changes.
1296.15   Continuation of existing conditionally permitted uses.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Special exceptions - see P. & Z.
1260.06
   Variances - see P. & Z.
1260.07,
1264.09
   Construction in progress - see P. & Z.
1260.13
   Conditional zoning certificates - see P. & Z.
1262.02,
1262.03,
Ch. 1266
   Nonconforming signs - see P. & Z.
1294.12
§ 1296.01  PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the continuation of uses that
do not conform to existing zoning, but which were in operation prior to the
enactment of this Zoning Code (Ordinance 74-O-128, passed October 17, 1974) or
any amendment thereto.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1296.02  CONDITIONS FOR CONTINUATION.
   The lawful use of any building, structure or land existing at the time of
the enactment of this Zoning Code (Ordinance 74-O-128, passed October 17, 1974)
may be continued, although such use does not conform to this Zoning Code,
provided that the conditions set forth in this chapter are complied with.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1296.03  UNSAFE STRUCTURES.
   Nothing in this Zoning Code shall prevent the strengthening or restoring to
a safe condition of any portion of a building or structure declared unsafe by a
proper authority.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1296.04  ALTERATIONS.
   A nonconforming building or structure may be altered, improved or
reconstructed, but not enlarged or extended, provided that such work is not to
an extent exceeding in aggregate a cost of 50% of the replacement value of the
building or structure, unless the building or structure is changed to a
conforming use.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1296.05  EXTENSIONS.
   A nonconforming use shall not be extended, but the extension of a lawful use
to any portion of a nonconforming building or structure which existed prior to
the enactment of this Zoning Code (Ordinance 74-O-128, passed October 17, 1974)
shall not be deemed the extension of such nonconforming use.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1296.06  CHANGES.
   No nonconforming building, structure or use shall be changed to another
nonconforming use.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1296.07  CONSTRUCTION APPROVED PRIOR TO ZONING CODE.
   Nothing contained in this Zoning Code shall require any change in plans,
construction or the designated use of a building or structure for which a
building permit has been issued and the construction of which has been
diligently prosecuted within 90 days of the date of such permit. 
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1296.08  RESTORATION AND USE OF DAMAGED BUILDINGS.
   (a)   Nothing in this Zoning Code shall prevent the reconstructing,
repairing, rebuilding or continued use of any nonconforming commercial or
industrial building or structure damaged by fire, collapse, explosion or act of
God subsequent to the effective date of this Zoning Code (Ordinance 74-0-128,
passed October 17, 1974), when the expense of such work does not exceed 50% of
the replacement cost of the building or structure at the time such damage
occurred.
   (b)   Nothing in this Zoning Code shall prevent the complete reconstructing,
repairing or continued use of any nonconforming residential building or
structure damaged by fire, collapse, explosion or act of God subsequent to the
effective date of this Zoning Code.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974; Ord. 03-O-2081, passed 12-16-2003)
§ 1296.09  DETERIORATION AND DEPRECIATION OF BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES.
   Nothing in this Zoning Code shall prevent the reconstructing, repairing or
rebuilding of a nonconforming building, structure or part thereof existing on
the effective date of this Zoning Code (Ordinance 74-O-128, passed October 17,
1974), rendered necessary by wear and tear, deterioration or depreciation,
provided that the cost of such work does not exceed 25% of the replacement
value of such building or structure at the time such work is done, nor prevent
compliance with the provisions of the Building Code relative to the maintenance
of buildings or structures.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1296.10  ABANDONMENT OF NONCONFORMING USES.
   A nonconforming use of a building or premises which has been abandoned shall
not thereafter be returned to such nonconforming use. A nonconforming use shall
be considered abandoned when:
   (a)   The intent of the owner to discontinue the use is apparent;
   (b)   The characteristic equipment and the furnishings of the nonconforming
use have been removed from the premises and have not been replaced by similar
equipment within one year, unless other facts show an intention to resume the
nonconforming use;
   (c)   It has been replaced by a conforming use; and
   (d)   It has been changed to another use under a permit from the Planning
Commission.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1296.11  DISPLACEMENT OF CONFORMING USES.
   No nonconforming use shall be extended to displace a conforming use.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1296.12  CESSATION OF JUNK AND WRECKING YARDS.
   No junk or automobile wrecking yard not within an enclosed masonry building
shall be operated or maintained as a nonconforming use for more than six
months.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1296.13  CERTIFICATES OF NONCONFORMING USE.
   (a)   Upon the effective date of this Zoning Code (Ordinance 74-O-128,
passed October 17, 1974), the Zoning Inspector shall issue a certificate of
nonconforming use to all known owners of property, the use of which does not
conform to the provisions of the zoning district in which the property is
located.
   (b)   No use of land, buildings or structures shall be made other than that
specified on the certificate of nonconforming use, unless such use is in
conformity with the provisions of the zoning district in which the property is
located.
   (c)   A copy of each certificate of nonconforming use shall be filed in the
office of the Planning Commission. No permit or license shall be issued to any
property for which a certificate of nonconforming use has been issued until
such permit or license has been approved by the Commission. 
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1296.14  DISTRICT BOUNDARY CHANGES.
   Whenever the boundaries of a district are changed so as to transfer an area
from one district to another district of a different classification, §§
1296.02 through
1296.13 shall also apply to any nonconforming uses existing therein.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974)
§ 1296.15  CONTINUATION OF EXISTING CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED USES.
   All uses existing at the time of the enactment of this Zoning Code
(Ordinance 74-O-128, passed October 17, 1974), or an amendment thereto, and
conditionally permitted in their respective districts under this Zoning Code,
shall be permitted to continue as nonconforming uses.
(Ord. 74-O-128, passed 10-17-1974)
CHAPTER 1298:  WIRELESS COMMUNICATION ANTENNAS AND TOWERS
Section
1298.01   Definitions.
1298.02   Location.
1298.03   Procedure.
1298.04   Type of construction.
1298.05   Standards.
1298.06   Architectural review.
1298.07   Certification of registered engineer.
1298.08   Time limitation for beginning of construction.
1298.09   Reimbursement of expenses.
1298.10   Permit fees.
1298.11   Exemption for municipal-owned property.
1298.12   Civil action.
1298.13   Remedies cumulative.
1298.99   Penalty.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Contracts with administrative agencies - see Ohio R.C. 125.021
   County zoning of towers - see Ohio R.C. 303.211
   Township zoning of towers - see Ohio R.C. 519.211
   Telecommunications; alternative regulation - see Ohio R.C. Ch. 4927
   Definitions - see Ohio R.C. 4927.01, 5739.01
§ 1298.01  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   “Lattice” means a framework or structure of crossed metal strips typically
resting on three members constructed vertically to which antennas are affixed.
   “Monopole” means a single, slender and typically cylindrical, vertical
structure to which antennas or antenna support structures are affixed.
   “Substantial evidence” means more than a mere scintilla of evidence. It
means such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to
support a conclusion.
   “Telecommunication” means technology permitting the passage of information
from the sender to one or more receivers in a usable form by means of any
electromagnetic system.
   “Wireless communication antenna” means an antenna system designed to
transmit or receive communications as authorized by the Federal Communications
Commission (FCC) excluding amateur radio operators antennas.
   “Wireless communications tower” means a tower including but not limited to
self-supporting lattice or monopole which elevates the wireless communication
antenna and may include accessory transmission and receiving equipment.
   “Wireless telecommunications equipment building” means the structure in
which the electronic receiving and relay equipment for a wireless
telecommunications facility is housed.
   “Wireless telecommunications facility” means a facility consisting of the
equipment and structures involved in receiving telecommunications or radio
signals from a mobile radio communications source and transmitting those
signals to a central switching computer which connects the mobile unit with the
land-based telephone lines.
(Ord. 01-O-1915, passed 10-16-2001)
§ 1298.02  LOCATION.
   (a)   New towers.  New wireless communication towers may be located only in
non-residential zoning districts except for areas located inside easements for
existing high-voltage transmission towers provided a variance is granted for
such location by the Board of Zoning Appeals.
   (b)   Existing structures.  Wireless communication antenna may be located in
residential zoning districts so long as they are not associated with wireless
communication towers, but are part of an existing structure, except as provided
in division (a) hereof.
   (c)   Precedence of regulations.  The tower and/or antenna shall be subject
to the regulations set forth in this chapter and the regulations of the
particular Zoning District in which the antenna and/or tower is proposed to be
located. In the event of a conflict between the regulations contained in this
chapter and the regulations contained in the zoning district in which the tower
and/or antenna is proposed to be located or any other regulations contained in
the Columbiana Zoning Code, the regulations in this chapter shall take
precedence.
(Ord. 01-O-1915, passed 10-16-2001)
§ 1298.03  PROCEDURE.
   (a)   Pre-application consultation.  Applicants are encouraged to appear
before the Planning Commission for consultation and a pre-review of proposed
wireless communication antenna and tower sites. The applicant shall, at a
minimum, supply the Planning Commission with the following information prior to
the Commission conducting such consultation and pre-review.
      (1)   A location survey providing detailed information on existing towers
and antenna co-location in the municipality as detailed in §
1298.05(a) of this chapter.
      (2)   Proposed tower site location plan showing existing uses within a
one-mile radius of the proposed tower.
      (3)   Proposed tower and antenna type/design and height.
      (4)   A map of Columbiana and adjacent communities showing areas of
coverage of the applicant’s proposed and adjacent area antennas.
   (b)   Application procedure.  A wireless communication antenna and/or tower
shall not be constructed or erected except upon a permit issued by the Building
Inspector after approval as provided in this chapter. All permit applications
shall be submitted to the Planning Commission for its review and
recommendation. The applicant shall file a complete set of plans and
specifications and shall also place on deposit the applicable fees as required
by §
1298.10, and shall also place on deposit the amount necessary for the
municipality to obtain a certification from a registered engineer(s) pursuant
to §
1298.07 to insure that the proposal is in compliance with all federal, state
and local regulations. The plans and specifications as submitted by the
applicant shall include, at a minimum, the following:
      (1)   A site plan showing the location of the proposed tower and
associated buildings meeting the design standards of §
1298.05 of this chapter, topographical survey of the area, and a creation plan
showing existing uses within a one-mile radius of the proposed tower, and
photographs depicting the existing uses and structures on the same and adjacent
parcels of land;
      (2)   A list of competitors together with their addresses so that the
municipality may notify the competitors of the application in an effort to
encourage co-location;
      (3)   Existing towers location survey and antenna co-location information
as detailed in §§
1298.05(a) and (b) of this chapter;
      (4)   Architectural plans meeting the requirements of §
1298.06 of this chapter;
      (5)   Landscape plans meeting the requirements of §
1298.05(h) of this chapter; and
      (6)   Any other information the Planning Commission deems necessary for a
review of the application.
   (c)   Public hearing.  The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing
on the proposed tower and antenna. All applicable fees shall be paid by the
applicant prior to the scheduling of a public hearing. After reviewing the
application data and the information provided by its consultants, the
Commission may require that the plans be revised prior to the setting of a
public hearing. Notice of the time and place of the public hearing shall be
published at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing at least once in a
newspaper of general circulation, in the municipality, and mailed to owners, as
shown on the current records of the County Recorder, of properties which are
contiguous to the one upon which the tower is proposed to be located, and any
other properties the Planning Commission may deem to be affected by the
proposed tower and antenna. Failure of delivery or receipt of a public hearing
notice shall not invalidate the public hearing proceedings. The public hearing
may be recessed to a future date by the Commission if it determines that
insufficient or inaccurate information has been presented. Major changes or
unresolved issues which arise at or subsequent to the original public hearing
shall require, at the discretion of the Planning Commission, a subsequent
public hearing be held in accordance with the same procedures as required for
the original one. The foregoing requirement of public notice and hearing may be
waived by the Planning Commission for the construction of a new antenna on an
existing structure which application does not require the construction of a new
tower or associated facilities,
   (d)   Planning Commission action.  Within 75 days after the final public
hearing, the Commission shall issue its report and recommendation to Municipal
Council. This report and recommendation shall include the Commission’s
findings, recommendations, all areas of noncompliance, necessary variances, and
any other special conditions as the Commission deems necessary to carry out the
provisions contained in this chapter. Any decision to recommend to Council the
denial of a request to place, construct or modify a wireless communication
antenna and/or tower shall be in writing and be supported by substantial
evidence contained in a written record of the proceedings of the Planning
Commission.
   (e)   Council action: authority to proceed.  Within 60 days after receipt of
the report and recommendations of the Planning Commission, Municipal Council,
by a majority vote of the members elected to Council, shall approve, approve
with modifications, or disapprove the recommended action by the Planning
Commission. Any decision by Municipal Council to deny a permit to place,
construct, or modify a wireless communication antenna and/or tower shall be in
writing and supported by substantial evidence contained in a written record of
the proceedings of the Council. In the event Municipal Council approves the
installation of a tower and/or antenna, the Building Inspector is authorized to
issue a permit for the installation of the same.
(Ord. 01-O-1915, passed 10-16-2001)
§ 1298.04  TYPE OF CONSTRUCTION.
   Only the following types of wireless communication antenna and/or tower
installations may be permitted under this chapter.
   (a)   Existing structures.  Wireless communication antenna attached to a
permitted institutional, recreational, public utility, office, industrial or
commercial building or structure provided the antenna does not exceed ten feet
above the highest point of the structure and the transmission and receiving
equipment, where feasible, is stored inside the existing building or structure
or on the roof in an enclosure. If the wireless communication antenna is
located on the roof of a structure, it shall be located as far as possible away
from the edge of the building. The foregoing does not preclude the use of small
base stations and repeaters on the sides of buildings, utility poles or in
ground mounted pedestals.
   (b)   New structures.  Wireless communication monopole towers constructed up
to, but not including, 200 feet in height above the finished grade, unless a
lesser height is technically feasible to service the geographical service area
of the applicant and the transmission and receiving equipment is stored inside
a building constructed for the purpose. All applicants shall be required to
construct or locate a base tower structure foundation that is designed to be
buildable up to, but not including, 200 feet above the finished grade. Such
structure shall be designed to have sufficient structural capacity to allow for
at least three providers to be located on the structure when constructed to the
maximum allowable height. The wireless communication facility shall also be
designed to show that the applicant has enough space on its site plan for an
equipment building large enough to accommodate at least three users. If an
equipment building is initially constructed to accommodate only one user, space
shall be reserved on site for equipment building expansions to accommodate up
to at least three users. Underground equipment shelters are encouraged
especially in non-industrial districts and may be required by the Planning
Commission. The maximum size of aboveground equipment buildings is 300 square
feet for one provider and in no circumstances more than 750 square feet in
total. Wireless communication lattice towers may only be permitted if the
applicant can clearly demonstrate that the use of a monopole tower is not
technologically feasible.
(Ord. 01-O-1915, passed 10-16-2001)
§ 1298.05  STANDARDS.
   The Planning Commission shall consider and the applicant shall demonstrate
compliance with the following standards in determining whether to recommend
approval of development plans for a wireless communication antenna and/or
tower.
   (a)   Location survey.  There is no technically suitable space reasonably
available on an existing tower or structure within the geographic area to be
served. With the permit application, the applicant shall list the location of
every tower, building or structure that could support the proposed antenna so
as to allow it to serve its intended function. The applicant must demonstrate
that a technically suitable location is not reasonably available on an existing
tower, building or structure. If another communication tower is technically
suitable, the applicant must show that it has requested to co-locate on the
existing tower and the co-location request was rejected by the owner of the
tower. In all circumstances, owners of existing towers shall promptly respond
to requests for co-location, but in no event shall they respond in more than 30
days from the date of receipt of written request for co-location. If another
communication tower is technically suitable, the applicant must further show
that it has offered to allow the owner of that other tower to co-locate an
antenna on another tower within the municipality owned by the applicant on
reciprocal terms and the offer was not accepted. In all cases, the municipality
shall use its best efforts to encourage co-location.
   (b)   Co-location.  As a condition of issuing a permit to construct and
operate a tower in the municipality, the owner/operator of the tower is
required to allow co-location until the tower has reached full antenna
capacity, but in no event fewer than two additional antennas for two additional
providers. Agreement to this provision must be included in the lease by the
landowner, if different from the owner/operator of the tower. Written
documentation must be presented to the Planning Commission and Council
evidencing that the landowner of the property on which the tower is to be
located has agreed to the terms of the section as well as the requirements,
regulations and standards established in
Chapter 1298. As an additional condition of issuing the permit to construct and
operate the tower in the municipality, the owner/operator of the tower is
required to sign a statement that all disputes with future providers concerning
co-location and the terms and conditions of co-location shall be submitted to
commercial arbitration under a system selected by the parties, but if the
parties are unable to agree, then under the auspices of the Commercial
Arbitration Provisions of the American Arbitration Association.
   (c)   Setback - area requirements.  Poles, towers, equipment structures and
antenna placement shall meet the minimum yard setback requirements as set forth
in the Zoning Code for the Zoning District in which the antenna and/or tower is
proposed to be located and all lot area requirements for that Zoning District.
   (d)   Residential setback.  A proposed new tower in an industrial or
commercial district shall not be located within 300 feet from any residential
zoning district.
   (e)   Tower separation.  There shall be a separation of at least one mile
between new wireless communication towers.
   (f)   Fencing.  Screen fencing shall be provided for aesthetic and public
safety reasons. A fence at least six feet in height will be erected completely
around the communication tower and any related support facilities. Barbed wire
at the top of the fence is permitted. No trespassing signs shall be posted
around the wireless telecommunication facility with a telephone number of a
person to contact in the event of an emergency.
   (g)   Design requirements.  Towers and antennas shall be designed to
withstand sustained winds of at least 100 miles per hour with one-half inch of
icing.
   (h)   Landscaping.
      (1)   A landscaped buffer area, as approved by the Planning Commission,
shall be placed between the wireless communication facilities and the public
rights-of-way, Residential Zoning Districts, and any adjacent residential uses.
The landscape buffer shall include the following as determined by the Planning
Commission:
         A.   Evergreen trees at least seven to eight feet tall (no white
pines);
         B.   Three and one-half inch caliper shade trees;
         C.   Two inch caliper ornamental trees (e.g., Flowering Crabapple,
Dogwood, Goldenrain Trees, and the like);
         D.   Medium size deciduous shrubs 24 inches - 30 inches (e.g., Korean
or Miss Kim Lilac, Froebel Soiree, Northern Bayberry, and the like); and
         E.   Medium size evergreen shrubs 24 inches - 30 inches (e.g., Sea
Green Juniper, Brown’s Yew, Mugo Pines, and the like).
      (2)   The landscaping shall be continuously maintained and replaced with
like kind and size landscaping specimens in the event of the death or
destruction of the same. The landscaping called for in this section shall be
planted in accordance with the landscaping plans as the same are approved by
the Planning Commission.
   (i)   Outdoor storage.  Outdoor storage of any supplies, vehicles or
equipment related to the use of the facility is prohibited.
   (j)   Lighting.  Except as required by law, an antenna or a tower shall not
be illuminated and lighting fixtures or signs shall not be attached to the
antenna or tower. If lighting is required by FAA regulations, white strobe
lights shall not be permitted at night unless no other alternative is permitted
by the FAA. Lighting for security purposes shall be permitted at the wireless
telecommunication facility with a prior approval of the Planning Commission.
   (k)   Advertising.  No advertising shall be permitted on the wireless
telecommunication facility.
   (l)   Certification.  The applicant must provide written certification from
a registered engineer that the antenna and/or tower are to be constructed in
compliance with all applicable federal, state and local regulations pertaining
to the construction. Additionally, prior to receiving final inspection by the
Municipal Building Inspector and Municipal Engineer certifying that the
wireless communication facility complies with all current FCC regulations for
non-ionizing electromagnetic radiation (NIER).
   (m)   Bond.  The owner or operator shall be required as a condition of
issuance of a permit to post a cash or surety bond acceptable to the Law
Director of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) per vertical foot from
natural grade of the wireless communication tower which bond shall insure that
an abandoned, obsolete or destroyed wireless communication antenna or tower
shall be removed within six months of cessation of use and abandonment. Any co-
locator shall be required to additionally execute such bond, as principal, to
insure that the bond will be in place during the period of time that the
colocator occupies the tower.
   (n)   Discontinued use.  The owner or operator shall agree to remove a
nonfunctioning facility within six months of ceasing its use. The owner of the
antenna and/or tower shall annually file a declaration with the Building
Inspector as to the continuing operation of every facility installed subject to
this chapter. The owner/operator of the antenna and/or tower shall sign a
written consent consenting to annual inspection of the wireless communication
facility by the Municipal Engineer.
(Ord. 01-O-1915, passed 10-16-2001; Ord. 16-O-2865, passed 5-3-2016)
§ 1298.06  ARCHITECTURAL REVIEW.
   (a)   Application.
      (1)   The Planning Commission shall also perform an architectural review
of the proposed antenna and/or tower. In addition to any standard Planing
Commission submission requirements, the applicant shall provide the following
information:
         A.   The location of any electrical or signal transmitting wires or
cables to be used;
         B.   The specific antenna support structure device which is to be
used;
         C.   The proposed method of screening the antenna support structure to
make it as inconspicuous as possible and help it blend into the surrounding
area, where feasible;
         D.   Elevation drawings illustrating the placement, height, color, and
material of the antenna and its support structure;
         E.   Plot plan of the lot, premises, parcel of land and adjacent
parcels showing, among other things, the exact location of the proposed antenna
and its support structures, exact location and dimensions of all buildings on
the parcel and adjacent parcels and property lines; and
         F.   A site plan indicating the view, if any, of the tower and/or
antenna from all areas within a one-mile radius of the proposed structure based
upon existing conditions.
      (2)   If the information provided above does not clearly convey placement
alternatives on the site, the Planning Commission may require an independent
evaluation of signal access for a minimum of the three most feasible, alternate
locations on the site. The evaluation shall be prepared by a consultant
approved by Planning Commission and paid for by the applicant.
   (b)   Architectural review and findings.  Prior to recommending approval of
an installation, the Planning Commission shall find as follows:
      (1)   There is no other location on the site for the proposed antenna
support structure which would result in a less conspicuous or more
aesthetically pleasing installation while still providing reasonable signal
access;
      (2)   The antenna and its support structure is the smallest possible for
the frequency used and optimally located to allow reasonable signal access; and
      (3)   Apart from the tower or monopole structure, the facility
appurtenances shall be aesthetically and architecturally compatible with the
architecture of the surrounding environment.
      (4)   The tower and/or antenna is painted or otherwise colored using the
best technology available to blend with the surrounding environmental
characteristics and to make such tower and/or antenna the least obtrusive as
possible.
      (5)   A landscape plan reasonably designed to enhance the aesthetic
quality of the tower location and to adequately screen the site from the view
of drivers and pedestrians on adjacent right-of-way and adjacent properties.
(Ord. 01-O-1915, passed 10-16-2001)
§ 1298.07  CERTIFICATION OF REGISTERED ENGINEER.
   Prior to issuing its report and recommendation, the Planning Commission
shall require a review by an independent registered engineer engaged by the
municipality and paid for by the applicant pursuant to its reimbursement of
municipality expenses pursuant to §
1298.09. Among other things, the engineer shall review and approve the written
certification of the applicant’s engineer filed pursuant to §
1298.05(l); shall review and approve the applicant’s propagation studies
showing the necessity for and location of the tower; and shall review and
approve the structural integrity, electrical integrity and electrical safeness
of the wireless telecommunication facility in its projected uses so as to
assure the protection of the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of
Columbiana.
(Ord. 01-O-1915, passed 10-16-2001)
§ 1298.08  TIME LIMITATION FOR BEGINNING OF CONSTRUCTION.
   After issuance of a permit to construct a wireless communication facility,
the permittee shall begin construction within 180 days and shall complete
construction within 360 days or the permit and approval shall expire. As a
condition of the permit, the Planning Commission and Municipal Council shall
require the applicant and site owner to certify that if construction is not
commenced within 180 days or completed within 360 days that the site shall be
available for another wireless telecommunications facility.
(Ord. 01-O-1915, passed 10-16-2001)
§ 1298.09  REIMBURSEMENT OF EXPENSES.
   The applicant shall be responsible for all expenses incurred by the
municipality for any technical engineering services deemed necessary by the
Planning Commission, or Municipal Council to perform the reviews required by
this Chapter.
(Ord. 01-O-1915, passed 10-16-2001)
§ 1298.10  PERMIT FEES.
   The Building Inspector shall authorize the issuance of permits required by
this chapter and shall collect the fees therefor in accordance with the
following schedule:
 
Application for a new wireless communication tower and facility     $2,000.00
Application for a new wireless communication antenna                $500.00
Application for a new co-location wireless communication antenna on $500.00
existing tower or building
Annual inspection fee                                               $1,000.00
 
(Ord. 01-O-1915, passed 10-16-2001)
§ 1298.11  EXEMPTION FOR MUNICIPAL-OWNED PROPERTY.
   Wireless communication antennas and/or towers located on municipal-owned
property, by permission of the Municipal Council, shall be exempt from the
regulations set forth in this chapter and any other provisions of the Zoning
Code. Notwithstanding any of the foregoing provisions of this section, if a
wireless communication tower is to be located on municipal-owned property, the
tower in all cases shall be subject to a special exception public hearing by
the Planning Commission, notice of which hearing shall be given in the same
manner as provided in §
1298.03(c) of this chapter, and provided further that the application and
proposed type of construction and standards of the proposal tower shall comply
with the requirements as set forth in
Chapter 1298 of the Codified Ordinances.
(Ord. 01-O-1915, passed 10-16-2001)
§ 1298.12  CIVIL ACTION.
   Whenever any person fails, neglects or refuses to comply with any order of
the Building Inspector under the provisions of this
Chapter 1298, or when any building or other structure is used or occupied so as
to be in violation of or not in conformity with any provision of this chapter,
the Building Inspector may, in his or her discretion, institute an appropriate
action in law or in equity to restrain the execution and violation of this
chapter, to prevent the occupation or use of such building or other structure
and to prevent or terminate any violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 01-O-1915, passed 10-16-2001)
§ 1298.13  REMEDIES CUMULATIVE.
   The exercise of the rights and remedies granted in this chapter shall in no
way preclude or limit the municipality from exercising any other right or
remedy now or hereafter granted to it under the laws of Ohio or the ordinances
of the municipality.
(Ord. 01-O-1915, passed 10-16-2001)
§ 1298.99  PENALTY.
   Any person violating any provision of
Chapter 1298 shall be deemed, upon conviction of the first offense, guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree and shall be fined not more than five hundred
dollars ($500.00) or imprisoned not more than 60 days or both. Any person
convicted of a subsequent violation of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree and shall be fined not more
than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisoned not more than six months or
both. Such person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and
every day or portions thereof during which any violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter is committed, permitted or continued.
(Ord. 01-O-1915, passed 10-16-2001)
APPENDIX A:  ZONING DISTRICTS MAP
Editor's Note:  The Zoning Districts Map is on file at the City Clerk's office.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/0e290f4930aa9d300d35a8df8a0eb049dd62f83c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3696.jpg]
 
TABLE 1:  SUMMARY OF DISTRICT REGULATIONS
 
District         Major Permitted Use Major Conditional Uses
Type Description
A-O-C Agricultural-Open Space- Single-family dwelling   Commercial recreation
      Conservation             Agricultural
R-1   Low Density Residential  Single-family dwelling   Planned unit
                                                        developments
                                                        Multi-family dwellings
      Medium Density           Single-family dwelling   of townhouse or row
R-2   Residential              Two-family dwelling      house type
                                                        Planned unit
                                                        developments
                               Single-family dwelling   Planned unit
R-3   High Density Residential Two-family dwelling      developments
                               Multi-family dwelling
                               Convenience retail
C-1   Local Commercial         grocers and personal
                               services
C-2   Office and Limited       Office and non-drive-in
      Business                 retail
C-3   Central Business         Retail and office        Multi-family dwellings
      Intensive and            Drive-in type commercial
C-4   Automobile-Oriented      uses                     Car washes
      Commercial
C-5   Highway Commercial       Motels, gasoline         Truck stops
                               stations and restaurants
I-1   Industrial Research and  Administrative offices   Sales offices and
      Office                                            testing laboratories
I-2   Light Industrial         Warehousing              Light manufacturing
I-3   Manufacturing, Storage   Light manufacturing      Manufacturing, storage
      and Disposal                                      and disposal
 
 
     Lot Requirements                          Yard Requirements
Type Min. Area Width at Bldg. Min. Front Width Front Rear Side Max. Bldg. Hgt.
               Line
A-O-C 5 acres    300 ft. 60 ft.   100 ft.      50 ft.       25 ft.       35 ft.
      Without Central Water and                             10 ft.
      Sewer
      1 acre     150 ft. 60 ft.                             Min. 8 ft.
R-1   With Central Water and      45 ft.       45 ft.       tot. of 17   35 ft.
      Sewer                                                 ft. both
      11,250 sq. 75 ft.  60 ft.                             sides
      ft.
      Single-family                                         Min. 7 ft.
                                                            tot. of 15
      8,000 sq.  75 ft.  50 ft.                             ft. both
      ft.                                                   sides

R-2   Two-family                  10 ft. each  30 ft.                    35 ft.
      12,000 sq. 100 ft. 50 ft.   side
      ft.
      Multi-family (1)            10 ft. each
      18,000 sq. 100 ft. 50 ft.   side
      ft.
      Single-family                                         Min. 5 ft.
                                                            tot. of 12
      7,500 sq.  60 ft.  40 ft.                             ft. both
      ft.                         30 ft. plus  30 ft. plus  sides
                                  1 ft. for    1 ft. for
R-3   Two-family                  10 ft. each  each 2 ft.                75 ft.
      10,000 sq. 80 ft.  40 ft.   side       . of bldg. ht.
      ft.                         over 35 ft.  over 35 ft.
      Multi-family (2)            10 ft. each
      12,000 sq. 100 ft. 40 ft.   side
      ft.
C-1   None       None    None     Equal to     25 ft.       None, except 35 ft.
                                  adj. res.                 30 ft. when
C-2   None       None    None     district     25 ft.       adj. to res. 25 ft.
                                                            district
C-3   None       None    None     None         None         None         75 ft.
C-4   None       None    None     50 ft.       25 ft.       None, except 35 ft.
                                                            50 ft. when
C-5   None       None    None     50 ft.       25 ft.       adj. to res. 35 ft.
                                                            district
 
 
     Lot Requirements                          Yard Requirements
Type Min. Area Width at Bldg. Min. Front Width Front Rear Side Max. Bldg. Hgt.
               Line
I-1 ½ acre100 ft. 80 ft. 25 ft. 25 ft. (3) 20 ft. (3) 35 ft.
I-2 ½ acre100 ft. 80 ft. 50 ft. 25 ft. (3) 10 ft. (3) 35 ft.
I-3 1 acre 150 ft. 80 ft. 50 ft. 15 ft.     15 ft. (3) 65 ft.
(1)   For the first three units, plus 4,000 sq. ft. for each unit over
three.
(2)   For the first three units, plus 2,500 sq. ft. for each unit over
three.
(3)   Except when adjacent to a residential district.
 
PART FOURTEEN:  BUILDING AND HOUSING CODE
      TITLE TWO - Building Standards
         Chap.
1420.   International Residential Code.
         Chap.
1424.   Ohio Plumbing Code.
         Chap.
1426.   National Electric Code.
      TITLE FOUR - Building Administration
         Chap.
1440.   Building Department.
         Chap.
1442.   Administration, Enforcement and Penalty.
      TITLE SIX - Miscellaneous Building Regulations
         Chap.
1460.   Abandoned and Inoperative Service Stations.
         Chap.
1464.   Fire Limits.
         Chap.
1466.   Flood Damage Prevention.
         Chap.
1470.   Manufactured and Mobile Homes.
         Chap.
1472.   Metal Siding.
         Chap.
1474.   Moving of Buildings.
      TITLE EIGHT - Housing
         Chap.
1480.   General Provisions and Definitions.
         Chap.
1482.   Administration, Enforcement and Penalty.
         Chap.
1484.   Basic Sanitary Standards for Residential Occupancy.
         Chap.
1486.   Interior Structures.
         Chap.
1488.   Exterior Structures and Environment.
         Chap.
1490.   Density, Space and Occupancy Requirements.
         Chap.
1492.   Safety From Fire.
         Chap.
1494.   Multiple Dwellings, Rooming Houses and Dormitories.
TITLE TWO:  BUILDING STANDARDS
CHAPTER 1420:  INTERNATIONAL RESIDENTIAL CODE
Section
1420.01   2013 edition adopted.
1420.02   Application and enforcement.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   See section histories for similar state law
   Removal of unsafe structures - see Ohio R.C. 715.26(B), 715.261
   Power to enact further and additional regulations - see Ohio R.C. 3781.01
   Enforcement - see Ohio R.C. 3781.03, 3781.031, 3781.10(E), 3781.102, 3781.19
   Final jurisdiction - see Ohio R.C. 3781.04
   Application - see Ohio R.C. 3781.06, 3781.061, 3781.10(A), 3781.11(A)
   Dead bolt locks in apartment buildings - see Ohio R.C. 3781.103
   Smoke detection system for apartments and condominiums - see Ohio R.C.
3781.104
   Use of public buildings by handicapped persons - see Ohio R.C. 3781.111
   Submission of plans - see Ohio R.C. 3791.04
   Abandoned service stations - see Ohio R.C. 3791.11 et seq.
   Safety standards for refuse containers - see Ohio R.C. 3791.21
§ 1420.01  2013 EDITION ADOPTED.
   There is hereby adopted by the municipality the 2013 Edition of the
International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings.
(Ord. 09-O-2513, passed 2-17-2009; Ord. 14-O-2781, passed 9-16-2014)
§ 1420.02  APPLICATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
   Ohio Administrative Code 4101:8 - Residential Code of Ohio, as promulgated
by the Ohio Board of Building Standards, shall apply and be enforced within the
city by the Board Certified Official(s) of the Residential Building Department
established by the City (formerly Village) of Columbiana pursuant to the
provisions of Ordinance No. 1125 and 80-O-512.
(Ord. 14-O-2770, passed 6-17-14)
CHAPTER 1424:  OHIO PLUMBING CODE
Section
1424.01   2011 edition adopted.
§ 1424.01  2011 EDITION ADOPTED.
   There is hereby adopted by the municipality the 2011 Edition of the Ohio
Plumbing Code.
(Ord. 09-O-2513, passed 2-17-2009; Ord. 14-O-2781, passed 9-16-2014)
CHAPTER 1426:  NATIONAL ELECTRIC CODE
Section
1426.01   2011 edition adopted.
1426.02   Purpose.
1426.03   File and distribution copies.
1426.04   Conflicts of laws.
1426.99   Penalty; equitable remedies.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Adoption of technical codes by reference - see CHTR.
6.13
   Power to license electricians - see Ohio R.C. 715.27
   Electric fences - see GEN. OFF.
660.12
   Electricity generally - see S.U. & P.S.
Ch. 1048
   Electricity in subdivisions - see P. & Z.
1250.24
   Inspector in Charge of Electrical Installations - see B. & H.
1440.03
§ 1426.01  2011 EDITION ADOPTED.
   Pursuant to §
6.13 of the Charter, there is hereby adopted by and for the municipality the
National Electrical Code, being particularly the 2011 edition thereof, as
promulgated by the International Code Council, Inc., save and except such
portions thereof as may be hereinafter amended or deleted.
(Ord. 09-O-2513, passed 2-17-2009; Ord. 13-O-2731, passed 6-4-2013)
§ 1426.02  PURPOSE.
   The purpose of the National Electrical Code, as adopted in §
1426.01, is to provide specifications for safeguarding persons, buildings,
dwellings and their contents from hazards arising from the use of electricity
for light, heat, power, radio, signaling and other purposes.
§ 1426.03  FILE AND DISTRIBUTION COPIES.
   At least one copy of the National Electrical Code, as adopted in §
1426.01, is on file with the Clerk of Council for inspection by the public.  At
least one copy of such Code is also on file in the County Law Library.  In
addition, the Clerk of Council shall keep copies of such Code available for
distribution to the public, at cost.
§ 1426.04  CONFLICTS OF LAWS.
   (a)   In the event of a conflict between any of the provisions of the
National Electrical Code, as adopted in §
1426.01, and a provision of any local ordinance, resolution, rule or
regulation, the local provision shall control.
   (b)   In the event of a conflict between any of the provisions of such Code
and a provision of state law, the stricter standard shall control.
   (c)   In the event of a conflict between any of the provisions of such Code
and a provision of any other technical code adopted by reference by the
municipality, the stricter standard shall control.
   (d)   In the event of a conflict between a provision of the National
Electrical Code and a provision of the Zoning Code or the Comprehensive Plan of
the municipality, the provision of the Zoning Code or the Comprehensive Plan
shall prevail.
§ 1426.99  PENALTY; EQUITABLE REMEDIES.
   (EDITOR’S NOTE: See §
1442.99 for general Building Code Penalty if no specific penalty is provided.)
   The application of the penalty provided in §
1442.99 shall not be deemed to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited
conditions, or the application of any other equitable remedy.
TITLE FOUR:  BUILDING ADMINISTRATION
CHAPTER 1440:  BUILDING DEPARTMENT
Section
1440.01   Building Officer.
1440.02   Inspector in Charge of Buildings.
1440.03   Inspector in Charge of Electrical Installations.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Establishment of administrative departments - see CHTR.
8.01
   Required submission of plans of public buildings - see Ohio R.C. 3701.04
   Fees for plan approval - see Ohio R.C. 3791.07
   Building officials - see B. & H.
1442.01
   Enforcement of Building Code generally - see B. & H.
1442.01
   Right of entry - see B. & H.
1442.01
   Inspection fees - see B. & H.
1442.02
   Building Permit and Inspection Fund - see B. & H.
1442.03
§ 1440.01  BUILDING OFFICER.
   Titles Two through Six of this Building and Housing Code, including the
Residential Code of Ohio, as adopted in §
1420.01, and the National Electrical Code, as adopted in §
1426.01, shall be administered by the Manager, who is hereby designated as the
Building Officer and who shall serve as such officer without additional pay,
and by the Inspector in Charge of Buildings and the Inspector in Charge of
Electrical Installations, who shall be selected as designated in §§
1440.02 and
1440.03.  The Manager and the Inspectors shall be known as the building
officials.
§ 1440.02  INSPECTOR IN CHARGE OF BUILDINGS.
   The position of Inspector in Charge of Buildings is hereby established.  The
Inspector shall be appointed by the Manager.  The Inspector shall receive for
his or her services a sum which shall be an amount set by the Manager  The
Inspector shall serve at the pleasure of the Manager.
(Ord. 80-O-512, passed 7-15-1980)
§ 1440.03  INSPECTOR IN CHARGE OF ELECTRICAL INSTALLATIONS.
   The position of Inspector in Charge of Electrical Installations is hereby
established.  The Manager shall designate a person or agency to serve as the
Inspector in Charge of Electrical Installations and such Inspector shall serve
at the Manager’s pleasure.
(1974 Code, § 1301.04)
CHAPTER 1442:  ADMINISTRATION, ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTY
Section
1442.01   Enforcement generally; right of entry.
1442.02   Building permit fees.
1442.03   Building Permit and Inspections Fund.
1442.99   Penalty; equitable remedies.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Building Department - see B. & H.
Ch. 1440
   Building Officer - see B. & H.
1440.01
   Inspector in Charge of Buildings - see B. & H.
1440.02
   Inspector in Charge of Electrical Installations - see B. & H.
1440.03
   Administration, enforcement and penalty for Housing Code - see B. & H.
Ch. 1482
§ 1442.01  ENFORCEMENT GENERALLY; RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   The building officials shall enforce all laws relating to the construction,
alteration, removal and demolition of buildings and structures.  The Building
Officer, the Inspector in Charge of Buildings and the Inspector in Charge of
Electrical Installation, in the discharge of their respective official duties
and upon proper identification, shall have authority to enter any building,
structure or premises at any reasonable hour.
(Ord. 80-O-512, passed 7-15-1980)
§ 1442.02  BUILDING PERMIT FEES.
   (a)   The fee for a one-, two- or three-family residential dwelling building
permit for new construction, an addition or an accessory structure having a
gross total cost in excess of seven thousand dollars ($7,000.00), which fee
shall include the cost of inspections and the issuance of a zoning certificate
and occupancy permit, if required, shall be calculated by determining the total
gross cost of such new construction, addition or accessory structure, dividing
the same by one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), which quotient shall then be
multiplied by three dollars and seventy cents ($3.70), and the product thereof
shall be the fee to be charged.
   (b)   The fee for a one-, two- or three-family residential dwelling building
permit for new construction an addition or an accessory structure having a
gross total cost of seven thousand dollars ($7,000.00) or less, which fee shall
include the cost of inspections and the issuance of a zoning certificate and
occupancy permit if required, shall be twenty-five dollars ($25.00).
   (c)   The fee for a one-, two- or three-family residential dwelling building
permit for the remodeling, alteration, removal, equipping or repair of any such
residential dwelling, which fee shall include the cost of inspections and the
issuance of a zoning certificate and occupancy permit if required, shall be ten
dollars ($10.00) if the total cost of such remodeling, alteration, removal,
equipping or repair does not exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). If the
total cost of such remodeling, alteration, removal, equipping or repair exceeds
five hundred dollars ($500.00), such fee shall be ten dollars ($10.00), plus
one-eighth of 1% of the total cost of the same in excess of five hundred
dollars ($500.00).
(Ord. 01-O-1908, passed 9-4-2001)
§ 1442.03  BUILDING PERMIT AND INSPECTION FUND.
   All monies received for permits under this chapter shall be paid forthwith
to the Director of Finance who shall place all receipts in the General Fund in
an account entitled the Building Permit and Inspection Fund of the General
Fund. All expenses arising from the application and operation of this Building
and Housing code shall be paid from such Fund. At the end of each fiscal year,
all monies remaining in the Building Permit and Inspection Fund shall revert to
the General Fund to be appropriated as Council sees fit.
(Ord. 80-O-512, passed 7-15-1980; Ord. 01-O-1908, passed 9-4-2001)
§ 1442.99  GENERAL CODE PENALTY; EQUITABLE REMEDIES.
   (a)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of Titles Two through Six of
this Part Fourteen - Building and Housing Code, including the standards adopted
in Title Two by reference, or fails to comply therewith or with any of the
requirements thereof, or erects, constricts, adds to, alters, moves or
demolishes, or has erected, constructed, added to, altered, moved or
demolished, a building or structure or portion thereof, in violation of a
detailed statement or plan submitted and approved thereunder, or of a permit or
certificate issued thereunder, and whoever owns a building or structure, or
portion thereof, or premises, where anything in violation of any of such
provisions is placed or exists, and every architect, engineer, builder,
contractor, agent, person or corporation employed in connection therewith who
assisted in the commission of such a violation or noncompliance, shall, unless
a different penalty is expressly provided, be guilty of a misdemeanor of the
first degree and shall be fined not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00)
or imprisoned not more than six months, or both, for each offense.  A separate
offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a violation or
noncompliance occurs or continues.
   (b)   The imposition of the penalty prescribed in division (a) hereof shall
not preclude the Municipal Attorney from instituting an appropriate action or
proceeding to prevent an unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction,
addition, alteration, conversion, removal, demolition, maintenance or use, or
to restrain, correct or abate a violation, or to prevent the occupancy of a
building or structure or portion thereof, or of the premises, or to prevent an
illegal act, conduct, business or use in or about any premises.
TITLE SIX:  MISCELLANEOUS BUILDING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1460:  ABANDONED AND INOPERATIVE SERVICE STATIONS
Section
1460.01   Declaration of nuisance; abatement.
1460.02   Maintenance of inoperative stations.
1460.99   Penalty.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Self-service stations - see Ohio R.C. 3741.14, 3741.141
   Abandoned service stations - see Ohio R.C. 3791.11 et seq.
   Conditional zoning certificate for service stations - see P. & Z.
1266.10(j)
   Cessation of junk and wrecking yards - see P. & Z.
1296.12
   Ohio Fire Code - see F.P.
Ch. 1610
§ 1460.01  DECLARATION OF NUISANCE; ABATEMENT.
   (a)   An abandoned service station is hereby declared to be a nuisance
affecting or endangering surrounding property values and detrimental to public
health, safety, convenience, and the like, and shall be abated. An “abandoned
station” is defined as one which is not in operation for at least 90
consecutive days during every 150-day period. When the Building Officer finds a
station to be abandoned, he or she shall give notice to the owner to abate the
abandoned condition within 60 days by:
      (1)   Placing the station in operation;
      (2)   Adapting and using the building for another permitted use; or
      (3)   Razing the service station structure, removing pumps, signs,
underground tanks and restoring the land to conform to adjoining grades.
   (b)   This requirement does not apply if there is a national emergency which
would curtail the operation of motor vehicles, or if the Congress of the United
States declares a state of economic depression.
   (c)   If an owner fails to comply with the notice to abate the nuisance,
Council may take action to abate it.
(1974 Code, § 1331.01)
§ 1460.02  MAINTENANCE OF INOPERATIVE STATIONS.
   Abandoned or inoperative stations, which do not come within the definition
of an abandoned station, as defined in §
1460.01, must be maintained as follows:
   (a)   The owner must cut all grass and remove all rubbish and weeds; and
   (b)   Parking of motor vehicles is prohibited and a sign to such effect must
be placed in the station window.
(1974 Code, § 1331.02)
§ 1460.99  PENALTY.
   (EDITOR’S NOTE: See §
1442.99 for general Building Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.)
CHAPTER 1464:  FIRE LIMITS
Section
1464.01   Noncombustible materials required.
1464.02   Permit required from Fire Chief; inspection; violations.
1464.03   Limits established.
1464.99   Penalty.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Fire Department - see CHTR.
8.10,
8.11; ADM.
Ch. 264
   Power to regulate building erection - see Ohio R.C. 737.28
   Ohio Basic Building Code - see B. & H.
Ch. 1420
   Safety from fire - see B. & H.
Ch. 1492
   Ohio Fire Code - see F.P.
Ch. 1610
§ 1464.01  NONCOMBUSTIBLE MATERIALS REQUIRED.
   No house, commercial building or structure of any kind shall be erected,
constructed, altered, repaired or moved upon the premises within the
hereinafter described fire zone unless the walls of such structure are of
noncombustible material.
(Ord. 845, passed 12-4-1951)
§ 1464.02  PERMIT REQUIRED FROM FIRE CHIEF; INSPECTION; VIOLATIONS.
   No house, commercial building or structure of any kind shall be erected,
constructed, altered, repaired or moved upon the premises without a written
permit from the Fire Chief.  The Chief may require a plan of the proposed work,
together with a statement of the materials to be used.  The Chief shall inspect
all structures during construction to see that the provisions of this chapter
are complied with.  When the Chief believes that this chapter is being
violated, he or she may order the work stopped until the conditions in
violation have been remedied.  The permit required to be obtained from the Fire
Chief shall be in such form as he or she so decides.  No fee shall be charged
for this permit.
(Ord. 845, passed 12-4-1951)
§ 1464.03  LIMITS ESTABLISHED.
   The following described premises are hereby declared to be the fire limits
or fire zone:
      Beginning at a point which is the intersection of the centerline of North
Main Street with the centerline of Walnut Street; thence west along the
centerline of Walnut Street to the centerline of Vine Street; thence south
along the centerline of Vine Street to the Penn-Central Railroad; thence east
along the Penn-Central Railroad to Elm Street; thence north along the
centerline of Elm Street to the centerline of Walnut Street; thence in a
westwardly direction along the centerline of Walnut Street; thence west to the
centerline of North Main Street.
§ 1464.99  PENALTY.
   (EDITOR’S NOTE: See §
1442.99 for general Building Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.)
CHAPTER 1466:  FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
Section
1466.01   Statutory authorization City of Columbiana.
1466.02   Findings of fact.
1466.03   Statement of purpose.
1466.04   Methods of reducing flood losses.
1466.05   Lands to which these regulations apply.
1466.06   Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard.
1466.07   Abrogation and greater restrictions.
1466.08   Interpretation.
1466.09   Warning and disclaimer of liability.
1466.10   Severability.
1466.11   Definitions.
1466.12   Designation of Floodplain Administrator.
1466.13   Duties and responsibilities of Floodplain Administrator.
1466.14   Floodplain development permits.
1466.15   Application required.
1466.16   Review and approval of flooodplain development permit application.
1466.17   Inspections.
1466.18   Post-construction certifications required.
1466.19   Revoking a floodplain development permit.
1466.20   Exemption from filing a development permit.
1466.21   Map maintenance activities.
1466.22   Data use and flood map interpretation.
1466.23   Substantial damage determination.
1466.24   Use and development standards for flood hazard reduction.
1466.25   Appeals Board established.
1466.26   Powers and duties of Appeals Board.
1466.27   Appeals.
1466.28   Variances.
1466.29   Procedure at hearings.
1466.30   Appeal to the court.
1466.31   Compliance required.
1466.32   Notice of violation.
1466.99   Violations and penalties.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Flood control by soil conservation district supervisors - see Ohio R.C.
1515.08
   Flood insurance - see Ohio R.C. 3925.34(C)
   Water supply, sanitation, ditches - see Ohio R.C. 6101.01 et seq.
   Altering, polluting and diverting watercourses - see GEN. OFF.
660.04
   Flood areas in subdivisions - see P. & Z.
1248.17
§ 1466.01  STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION CITY OF COLUMBIANA.
   Article XVIII, Section 3, of the Ohio Constitution grants municipalities the
legal authority to adopt land use and control measures for promoting the
health, safety, and general welfare of its citizens. Therefore, the City
Council of the City of Columbiana, State of Ohio, does ordain as follows.
(Ord. 06-O-2285, passed 2-7-2006)
§ 1466.02  FINDINGS OF FACT.
   The City of Columbiana has special flood hazard areas that are subject to
periodic inundation which may result in loss of life and property, health and
safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary
public expenditures for protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base.
Additionally, structures that are inadequately elevated, floodproofed, or
otherwise protected from flood damage also contribute to the flood loss. In
order to minimize the threat of such damages and to achieve the purposes
hereinafter set forth, these regulations are adopted.
(Ord. 06-O-2285, passed 2-7-2006)
§ 1466.03  STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose of these regulations to promote the public health, safety
and general welfare, and to:
   (a)   Protect human life and health;
   (b)   Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;
   (c)   Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
   (d)   Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
   (e)   Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and
gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in
areas of special flood hazard;
   (f)   Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the proper use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to protect property and
minimize future flood blight areas;
   (g)   Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume
responsibility for their actions;
   (h)   Minimize the impact of development on adjacent properties within and
near flood prone areas;
   (i)   Ensure that the flood storage and conveyance functions of the
floodplain are maintained;
   (j)   Minimize the impact of development on the natural, beneficial values
of the floodplain;
   (k)   Prevent floodplain uses that are either hazardous or environmentally
incompatible; and
   (l)   Meet community participation requirements of the National Flood
Insurance Program.
(Ord. 06-O-2285, passed 2-7-2006)
§ 1466.04  METHODS OF REDUCING FLOOD LOSSES.
   In order to accomplish its purposes, these regulations include methods and
provisions for:
   (a)   Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety,
and property due to water hazards, or which result in damaging increases in
flood heights or velocities;
   (b)   Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which
serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
   (c)   Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels,
and natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel flood
waters;
   (d)   Controlling filling, grading, dredging, excavating, and other
development which may increase flood damage; and
   (e)   Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards in other
areas.
(Ord. 06-O-2285, passed 2-7-2006)
§ 1466.05  LANDS TO WHICH THESE REGULATIONS APPLY.
   These regulations shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within
the jurisdiction of the City of Columbiana as identified in §
1466.06, including any additional areas of special flood hazard annexed by the
City of Columbiana.
(Ord. 06-O-2285, passed 2-7-2006)
§ 1466.06  BASIS FOR ESTABLISHING THE AREAS OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD.
   For the purposes of these regulations, the following studies and/or maps are
adopted:
   (a)   Flood Insurance Study Columbiana County, Ohio and Incorporated Areas
dated April 5, 2006. Flood Insurance Rate Map Columbiana County, Ohio and
Incorporated Areas dated April 5, 2006.  Flood Insurance Study Mahoning County,
Ohio and Incorporated Areas effective November, 18, 2009.  Flood Insurance Rate
Map Mahoning County, Ohio and Incorporated Areas effective November 18, 2009.
   (b)   Other studies and/or maps which may be relied upon for establishment
of the flood protection elevation, delineation of the 100-year floodplain,
floodways or delineation of other areas of special flood hazard include:  any
hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analysis authored by a registered
professional engineer in the State of Ohio which has been approved by the City
of Columbiana as required by §
1466.24 (c) Subdivisions and Large Scale Developments.
   (c)   Any revisions to the aforementioned maps and/or studies are hereby
adopted by reference and declared to be a part of these regulations. Such maps
and/or studies are on file at the City Manager’s Office, 28 West Friend Street,
Columbiana, Ohio 44408.
(Ord. 06-O-2285, passed 2-7-2006; Ord. 09-O-2535, passed 8-18-2009)
§ 1466.07  ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.
   These regulations are not intended to repeal any existing ordinances
including subdivision regulations, zoning or building codes. In the event of a
conflict between these regulations and any other ordinance, the more
restrictive shall be followed. These regulations shall not impair any deed
restriction covenant or easement but the land subject to such interests shall
also be governed by the regulations.
(Ord. 06-O-2285, passed 2-7-2006)
§ 1466.08  INTERPRETATION.
   In the interpretation and application of these regulations, all provisions
shall be:
   (a)   Considered as minimum requirements;
   (b)   Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
   (c)   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
state statutes. Where a provision of these regulations may be in conflict with
a state or federal law, such state or federal law shall take precedence over
these regulations.
(Ord. 06-O-2285, passed 2-7-2006)
§ 1466.09  WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   The degree of flood protection required by these regulations is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering
considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood
heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. These regulations do not
imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted
within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damage. These regulations
shall not create liability on the part of the City of Columbiana, any officer
or employee thereof, or the Federal Emergency Management Agency, for any flood
damage that results from reliance on these regulations or any administrative
decision lawfully made thereunder.
(Ord. 06-O-2285, passed 2-7-2006)
§ 1466.10  SEVERABILITY.
   Should any section or provision of these regulations be declared by the
courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the
validity of the regulations as a whole, or any part thereof other than the part
so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid.
(Ord. 06-O-2285, passed 2-7-2006)
§ 1466.11  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   “Accessory structure” means a structure on the same lot with, and of a
nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the principal structure.
   “Appeal” means a request for review of the Floodplain Administrator’s
interpretation of any provision of these regulations or a request for a
variance.
   “Base flood” means the flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded
in any given year. The base flood may also be referred to as the 1% chance
annual flood or 100-year flood.
   “Base (100-year) flood elevation (BFE)” means the water surface elevation of
the base flood in relation to a specified datum, usually the National Geodetic
Vertical Datum of 1929 or the North American Vertical Datum of 1988, and
usually expressed in Feet Mean Sea Level (MSL). In Zone AO areas, the base
flood elevation is the natural grade elevation plus the depth number (from one
to three feet).
   “Basement” means any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below
ground level) on all sides.
   “Development” means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or
storage of equipment or materials.
   “Enclosure below the lowest floor”  See “Lowest floor.”
   “Executive Order 11988 (Floodplain Management)” was issued by President
Carter in 1977, this order requires that no federally assisted activities be
conducted in or have the potential to affect identified special flood hazard
areas, unless there is no practicable alternative.
   “Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA)” means the agency with the
overall responsibility for administering the National Flood Insurance Program.
   “Fill” means a deposit of earth material placed by artificial means.
   “Flood” or “Flooding” means a general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
      (1)   The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and/or
      (2)   The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from
any source.
   “Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM)” is usually the initial map, produced by
the Federal Emergency Management Agency, or U.S. Department of Housing and
Urban Development, for a community depicting approximate special flood hazard
areas.
   “Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM)” means an official map on which the Federal
Emergency Management Agency or the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban
Development has delineated the areas of special flood hazard.
   “Flood insurance risk zones” means zone designations on FHBMs and FIRMs that
indicate the magnitude of the flood hazard in specific areas of a community.
Following are the zone definitions:
      (1)   “Zone A” means special flood hazard areas inundated by the 100-year
flood; base flood elevations are not determined.
      (2)   “Zone A1-30" and “Zone AE” mean special flood hazard areas
inundated by the 100-year flood; base flood elevations are determined.
      (3)   “Zone AO” means special flood hazard areas inundated by the 100-
year flood; with flood depths of one to three feet (usually sheet flow on
sloping terrain); average depths are determined.
      (4)   “Zone AH” means special flood hazard areas inundated by the 100-
year flood; flood depths of one to three feet (usually areas of ponding); base
flood elevations are determined.
      (5)   “Zone A99" means special flood hazard areas inundated by the 100-
year flood to be protected from the 100-year flood by a federal flood
protection system under construction; no base flood elevations are determined.
      (6)   “Zone B” and “Zone X” (shaded) mean areas of 500-year flood; areas
subject to the 100-year flood with average depths of less than one foot or with
contributing drainage area less than one square mile; and areas protected by
levees from the base flood.
      (7)   “Zone C” and “Zone X” (unshaded) mean areas determined to be
outside the 500-year floodplain.
   “Flood Insurance Study (FIS)” means the official report in which the Federal
Emergency Management Agency or the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban
Development has provided flood profiles, floodway boundaries (sometimes shown
on Flood Boundary and Floodway Maps), and the water surface elevations of the
base flood.
   “Flood Protection Elevation or FPE” means the base flood elevation. In areas
where no base flood elevations exist from any authoritative source (Zone A
areas), the flood protection elevation can be historical flood elevations, or
base flood elevations determined and/or approved by the Floodplain
Administrator.
   “Floodway” means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the
adjacent land areas that have been reserved in order to pass the base flood
discharge. A floodway is typically determined through a hydraulic and
hydrologic engineering analysis such that the cumulative increase in the water
surface elevation of the base flood discharge is no more than a designated
height. In no case shall the designated height be more than one foot at any
point within the community. The floodway is an extremely hazardous area, and is
usually characterized by any of the following: moderate to high velocity flood
waters, high potential for debris and projectile impacts, and moderate to high
erosion forces.
   “Freeboard” means a factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood
level for the purposes of floodplain management. Freeboard tends to compensate
for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater
than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions,
such as wave action, obstructed bridge openings, debris and ice jams, and the
hydrologic effect of urbanization in a watershed.
   “Historic structure” means any structure that is:
      (1)   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listings on the National Register;
      (2)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to
qualify as a registered historic district; or
      (3)   Individually listed on the State of Ohio’s inventory of historic
places maintained by the Ohio Historic Preservation Office.
   “Hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analysis” means an analysis performed
by a professional engineer, registered in the State of Ohio, in accordance with
standard engineering practices as accepted by FEMA, used to determine flood
elevations and/or floodway boundaries.
   “Letter of Map Change (LOMC)” means an official FEMA determination, by
letter, to amend or revise effective Flood Insurance Rate Maps, Flood Boundary
and Floodway Maps, and Flood Insurance Studies. LOMC’s are broken down into the
following categories:
      (1)   “Letter of Map Amendment (LOMA)” means a revision based on
technical data showing that a property was incorrectly included in a designated
special flood hazard area. A LOMA amends the current effective Flood Insurance
Rate Map and establishes that a specific property is not located in a special
flood hazard area.
      (2)   “Letter of Map Revision (LOMR)” means a revision based on technical
data that, usually due to manmade changes, shows changes to flood zones, flood
elevations, floodplain and floodway delineations, and planimetric features. One
common type of LOMR, a LOMR-F, is a determination concerning whether a
structure or parcel has been elevated by fill above the base flood elevation
and is, therefore, excluded from the special flood hazard area.
      (3)   “Conditional Letter of Map Revision (CLOMR)” means a formal review
and comment by FEMA as to whether a proposed project complies with the minimum
National Flood Insurance Program floodplain management criteria. A CLOMR does
not amend or revise effective Flood Insurance Rate Maps, Flood Boundary and
Floodway Maps, or Flood Insurance Studies.
   “Lowest floor” means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement) of a structure. This definition excludes an “enclosure below the
lowest floor” which is an unfinished or flood resistant enclosure usable solely
for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a
basement area, provided that such enclosure is built in accordance with the
applicable design requirements specified in these regulations for enclosures
below the lowest floor.
   “Manufactured home” means a structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or
without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The
term “manufactured home” does not include a “recreational vehicle.” For the
purposes of these regulations, a manufactured home includes manufactured homes
and mobile homes as defined in Ohio R.C. Chapter 3733.
   “Manufactured home park” means as specified in the OAC 3701-27-01, a
manufactured home park means any tract of land upon which three or more
manufactured homes, used for habitation are parked, either free of charge or
for revenue purposes, and includes any roadway, building, structure, vehicle,
or enclosure used or intended for use as part of the facilities of the park. A
tract of land that is subdivided and the individual lots are not for rent or
rented, but are for sale or sold for the purpose of installation of
manufactured homes on the lots, is not a manufactured home park, even though
three or more manufactured homes are parked thereon, if the roadways are
dedicated to the local government authority.
   “National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP)” means a federal program enabling
property owners in participating communities to purchase insurance protection
against losses from flooding. This insurance is designed to provide an
insurance alternative to disaster assistance to meet the escalating costs of
repairing damage to buildings and their contents caused by floods.
Participation in the NFIP is based on an agreement between local communities
and the federal government that states if a community will adopt and enforce
floodplain management regulations to reduce future flood risks to all
development in special flood hazard areas, the federal government will make
flood insurance available within the community as a financial protection
against flood loss.
   “New construction” means structures for which the “start of construction”
commenced on or after the initial effective date of the City of Columbiana
Flood Insurance Rate Map, September 30, 1988, and includes any subsequent
improvements to such structures.
   “Person” includes any individual or group of individuals, corporation,
partnership, association, or any other entity, including state and local
governments and agencies. An agency is further defined in the Ohio R.C. 111.15
as any governmental entity of the state and includes, but is not limited to,
any board, department, division, commission, bureau, society, council,
institution, state college or university, community college district, technical
college district, or state community college. “Agency” does not include the
general assembly, the controlling board, the adjutant general’s department, or
any court.
   “Recreational vehicle” means a vehicle which is:
      (1)   Built on a single chassis;
      (2)   Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projection;
      (3)   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light
duty truck; and
      (4)   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
   “Registered professional architect” means a person registered to engage in
the practice of architecture under the provisions of Ohio R.C. 4703.01 to
4703.19.
   “Registered professional engineer” means a person registered as a
professional engineer under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4733.
   “Registered professional surveyor” means a person registered as a
professional surveyor under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4733.
   “Special flood hazard area” Also known as “areas of special flood hazard,”
means the land in the floodplain subject to a 1% or greater chance of flooding
in any given year. Special flood hazard areas are designated by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency on Flood Insurance Rate Maps, Flood Insurance
Studies, Flood Boundary and Floodway Maps and Flood Hazard Boundary Maps as
Zones A, AE, AH, AO, Al-30, and A99. Special flood hazard areas may also refer
to areas that are flood prone and designated from other federal state or local
sources of data including but not limited to historical flood information
reflecting high water marks, previous flood inundation areas, and flood prone
soils associated with a watercourse.
   “Start of construction” means the date the building permit was issued,
provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180 days
of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of
permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or
footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work
beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a
foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as
clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets
and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings,
piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include
the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or
sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a
substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building,
whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of a building.
   “Structure” means a walled and roofed building, manufactured home, or gas or
liquid storage tank that is principally above ground.
   “Substantial damage” means damage of any origin sustained by a structure
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition
would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.
   “Substantial improvement” means any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or
exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the “start of
construction” of the improvement. This term includes structures which have
incurred “substantial damage,” regardless of the actual repair work performed.
The term does not, however, include:
      (1)   Any improvement to a structure which is considered “new
construction;”
      (2)   Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications
which have been identified prior to the application for a development permit by
the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to
assure safe living conditions; or
      (3)   Any alteration of a “historic structure,” provided that the
alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a
“historic structure.”
   “Variance” means a grant of relief from the standards of these regulations
consistent with the variance conditions herein.
   “Violation” means the failure of a structure or other development to be
fully compliant with these regulations.
(Ord. 06-O-2285, passed 2-7-2006)
§ 1466.12  DESIGNATION OF FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.
   The City Manager of the City of Columbiana is hereby appointed to administer
and implement these regulations and is referred to herein as the Floodplain
Administrator.
(Ord. 06-O-2285, passed 2-7-2006)
§ 1466.13  DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.
   The duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator shall
include but are not limited to:
   (a)   Evaluate applications for permits to develop in special flood hazard
areas;
   (b)   Interpret floodplain boundaries and provide flood hazard and flood
protection elevation information;
   (c)   Issue permits to develop in special flood hazard areas when the
provisions of these regulations have been met, or refuse to issue the same in
the event of noncompliance;
   (d)   Inspect buildings and lands to determine whether any violations of
these regulations have been committed;
   (e)   Make and permanently keep all records for public inspection necessary
for the administration of these regulations including Flood Insurance Rate
Maps, Letters of Map Amendment and Revision, records of issuance and denial of
permits to develop in special flood hazard areas, determinations of whether
development is in or out of special flood hazard areas for the purpose of
issuing floodplain development permits, elevation certificates, variances, and
records of enforcement actions taken for violations of these regulations;
   (f)   Enforce the provisions of these regulations;
   (g)   Provide information, testimony, or other evidence as needed during
variance hearings;
   (h)   Coordinate map maintenance activities and FEMA follow-up; and
   (i)   Conduct substantial damage determinations to determine whether
existing structures, damaged from any source and in special flood hazard areas
identified by FEMA, must meet the development standards of these regulations.
(Ord. 06-O-2285, passed 2-7-2006)
§ 1466.14  FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMITS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to begin construction or other
development activity including but not limited to filling; grading;
construction; alteration, remodeling, or expanding any structure; or alteration
of any watercourse wholly within, partially within or in contact with any
identified special flood hazard area, as established in §
1466.06, until a floodplain development permit is obtained from the Floodplain
Administrator. Such floodplain development permit shall show that the proposed
development activity is in conformity with the provisions of these regulations.
No such permit shall be issued by the Floodplain Administrator until the
requirements of these regulations have been met.
(Ord. 06-O-2285, passed 2-7-2006)
§ 1466.15  APPLICATION REQUIRED.
   An application for a floodplain development permit shall be required for all
development activities located wholly within, partially within, or in contact
with an identified special flood hazard area. Such application shall be made by
the owner of the property or his or her authorized agent, herein referred to as
the applicant, prior to the actual commencement of such construction on a form
furnished for that purpose. Where it is unclear whether a development site is
in a special flood hazard area, the Floodplain Administrator may require an
application for a floodplain development permit to determine the development’s
location. Such applications shall include, but not be limited to:
   (a)   Site plans drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions,
and topography of the area in question; the location of existing or proposed
structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities, and the location
of the foregoing;
   (b)   Elevation of the existing, natural ground where structures are
proposed;
   (c)   Elevation of the lowest floor, including basement, of all proposed
structures;
   (d)   Such other material and information as may be requested by the
Floodplain Administrator to determine conformance with, and provide enforcement
of these regulations; and
   (e)   Technical analyses conducted by the appropriate design professional
registered in the State of Ohio and submitted with an application for a
floodplain development permit when applicable:
      (1)   Floodproofing certification for non-residential floodproofed
structure as required in §
1466.24(e);
      (2)   Certification that fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor of a
structure not meeting the design requirements of §
1466.24(d)(5) are designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces;
      (3)   Description of any watercourse alteration or relocation that the
flood carrying capacity of the watercourse will not be diminished, and
maintenance assurances as required in §
1466.24(i)(3);
      (4)   A hydrologic and hydraulic analysis demonstrating that the
cumulative effect of proposed development, when combined with all other
existing and anticipated development will not increase the water surface
elevation of the base flood by more than one foot in special flood hazard areas
where the Federal Emergency Management Agency has provided base flood
elevations but no floodway as required by §
1466.24(i)(2);
      (5)   A hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analysis showing impact of
any development on flood heights in an identified floodway as required by §
1466.24(i)(1); and
      (6)   Generation of base flood elevation(s) for subdivision and large
scale developments as required by §
1466.24(c).
(Ord. 06-O-2285, passed 2-7-2006)
§ 1466.16  REVIEW AND APPROVAL OF FLOOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMIT APPLICATION.
   (a)   Review.
      (1)   After receipt of a complete application, the Floodplain
Administrator shall review the application to ensure that the standards of
these regulations have been met. No floodplain development permit application
shall be reviewed until all information required in §
1466.15 has been received by the Floodplain Administrator.
      (2)   The Floodplain Administrator shall review all floodplain
development permit applications to assure that all necessary permits have been
received from those federal, state or local governmental agencies from which
prior approval is required. The applicant shall be responsible for obtaining
such permits as required including permits issued by the U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers under § 10 of the Rivers and Harbors Act, being 33 U.S.C. § 403 and §
404 of the Clean Water Act, being 33 U.S.C. § 1344 and the Ohio Environmental
Protection Agency under § 401 of the Clean Water Act, being 33 U.S.C. § 1341.
   (b)   Approval.  Within 30 days after the receipt of a complete application,
the Floodplain Administrator shall either approve or disapprove the
application. If an application is approved, a floodplain development permit
shall be issued. All floodplain development permits shall be conditional upon
the commencement of work within one year. A floodplain development permit shall
expire one year after issuance unless the permitted activity has been
substantially begun and is thereafter pursued to completion.
(Ord. 06-O-2285, passed 2-7-2006)
§ 1466.17  INSPECTIONS.
   The Floodplain Administrator shall make periodic inspections at appropriate
times throughout the period of construction in order to monitor compliance with
permit conditions.
(Ord. 06-O-2285, passed 2-7-2006)
§ 1466.18  POST-CONSTRUCTION CERTIFICATIONS REQUIRED.
   The following as-built certifications are required after a floodplain
development permit has been issued:
   (a)   For new or substantially improved residential structures, or
nonresidential structures that have been elevated, the applicant shall have a
Federal Emergency Management Agency Elevation Certificate completed by a
registered surveyor to record as-built elevation data. For elevated structures
in Zone A and Zone AO areas without a base flood elevation, the elevation
certificate may be completed by the property owner or owner’s representative;
   (b)   For all development activities subject to the standards of §
1466.21(a), a Letter of Map Revision.
(Ord. 06-O-2285, passed 2-7-2006)
§ 1466.19  REVOKING A FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.
   A floodplain development permit shall be revocable, if among other things,
the actual development activity does not conform to the terms of the
application and permit granted thereon. In the event of the revocation of a
permit, an appeal may be taken to the Appeals Board in accordance with §§
1466.25 through
1466.30 of these regulations.
(Ord. 06-O-2285, passed 2-7-2006)
§ 1466.20  EXEMPTION FROM FILING A DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.
   (a)   An application for a floodplain development permit shall not be
required for:
      (1)   Maintenance work such as roofing, painting, and basement sealing,
or for small nonstructural development activities (except for filling and
grading) valued at less than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00);
      (2)   Development activities in an existing or proposed manufactured home
park that are under the authority of the Ohio Department of Health and subject
to the flood damage reduction provisions of the OAC 3701;
      (3)   Major utility facilities permitted by the Ohio Power Siting Board
under Ohio R.C. 4906;
      (4)   Hazardous waste disposal facilities permitted by the Hazardous
Waste Siting Board under Ohio R.C. 3734; or
      (5)   Development activities undertaken by a federal agency and which are
subject to Federal Executive Order 11988 – Floodplain Management.
   (b)   Any proposed action exempt from filing for a floodplain development
permit is also exempt from the standards of these regulations.
(Ord. 06-O-2285, passed 2-7-2006)
§ 1466.21  MAP MAINTENANCE ACTIVITIES.
   To meet National Flood Insurance Program minimum requirements to have flood
data reviewed and approved by FEMA, and to ensure that the City of Columbiana
flood maps, studies and other data identified in §
1466.06 accurately represent flooding conditions so appropriate floodplain
management criteria are based on current data, the following map maintenance
activities are identified.
   (a)   Requirement to submit new technical data.
      (1)   For all development proposals that impact floodway delineations or
base flood elevations, the community shall ensure that technical data
reflecting such changes be submitted to FEMA within six months of the date such
information becomes available. These development proposals include:
         A.   Floodway encroachments that increase or decrease base flood
elevations or alter floodway boundaries;
         B.   Fill sites to be used for the placement of proposed structures
where the applicant desires to remove the site from the special flood hazard
area;
         C.   Alteration of watercourses that result in a relocation or
elimination of the special flood hazard area, including the placement of
culverts; and
         D.   Subdivision or large scale development proposals requiring the
establishment of base flood elevations in accordance with §
1466.26(c).
      (2)   It is the responsibility of the applicant to have technical data,
required in accordance with division (a), prepared in a format required for a
Conditional Letter of Map Revision or Letter of Map Revision and submitted to
FEMA. Submittal and processing fees for these map revisions shall be the
responsibility of the applicant.
      (3)   The Floodplain Administrator shall require a Conditional Letter of
Map Revision prior to the issuance of a floodplain development permit for:
         A.   Proposed floodway encroachments that increase the base elevation;
and
         B.   Proposed development which increases the base flood elevation by
more than one foot in areas where FEMA has provided base flood elevations but
no floodway.
      (4)   Floodplain development permits issued by the Floodplain
Administrator shall be conditioned upon the applicant obtaining a Letter of Map
Revision from FEMA for any development proposal subject to division (a)(1).
   (b)   Right to submit new technical data.  The Floodplain Administrator may
request changes to any of the information shown on an effective map that does
not impact floodplain or floodway delineations or base flood elevations, such
as labeling or planimetric details. Such a submission shall include appropriate
supporting documentation made in writing by the City Manager of the City of
Columbiana, and may be submitted at any time.
   (c)   Annexation/detachment.  Upon occurrence, the Floodplain Administrator
shall notify FEMA in writing whenever the boundaries of the City of Columbiana
have been modified by annexation or the community has assumed authority over an
area, or no longer has authority to adopt and enforce floodplain management
regulations for a particular area. In order that the City of Columbiana Flood
Insurance Rate Map accurately represent the City of Columbiana boundaries,
include within such notification a copy of a map of the City of Columbiana
suitable for reproduction, clearly showing the new corporate limits or the new
area for which the City of Columbiana has assumed or relinquished floodplain
management regulatory authority.
(Ord. 06-O-2285, passed 2-7-2006)
§ 1466.22  DATA USE AND FLOOD MAP INTERPRETATION.
   The following guidelines shall apply to the use and interpretation of maps
and other data showing areas of special flood hazard.
   (a)   In areas where FEMA has not identified special flood hazard areas, or
in FEMA identified special flood hazard areas where base flood elevation and
floodway data have not been identified, the Floodplain Administrator shall
review and reasonably utilize any other flood hazard data available from a
federal, state, or other source.
   (b)   Base flood elevations and floodway boundaries produced on FEMA flood
maps and studies shall take precedence over base flood elevations and floodway
boundaries by any other source that reflect a reduced floodway width and/or
lower base flood elevations. Other sources of data, showing increased base
flood elevations and/or larger floodway areas than are shown on FEMA flood maps
and studies, shall be reasonably used by the Floodplain Administrator.
   (c)   When Preliminary Flood Insurance Rate Maps and/or Flood Insurance
Study have been provided by FEMA:
      (1)   Upon the issuance of a Letter of Final Determination by the FEMA,
the preliminary flood hazard data shall be used and replace all previously
existing flood hazard data provided from FEMA for the purposes of administering
these regulations; and
      (2)   Prior to the issuance of a Letter of Final Determination by FEMA,
the use of preliminary flood hazard data shall only be required where no base
flood elevations and/or floodway areas exist or where the preliminary base
flood elevations or floodway area exceed the base flood elevations and/or
floodway widths in existing flood hazard data provided from FEMA. Such
preliminary data may be subject to change and/or appeal to FEMA.
   (d)   The Floodplain Administrator shall make interpretations, where needed,
as to the exact location of the flood boundaries and areas of special flood
hazard. A person contesting the determination of the location of the boundary
shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as
provided in §§
1466.25 through
1466.30.
   (e)   Where a map boundary showing an area of special flood hazard and field
elevations disagree, the base flood elevations or flood protection elevations
(as found on an elevation profile, floodway data table, established high water
marks, and the like) shall prevail.
(Ord. 06-O-2285, passed 2-7-2006)
§ 1466.23  SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE DETERMINATION.
   (a)   Damages to structures may result from a variety of causes including
flood, tornado, wind, heavy snow, fire, and the like. After such a damage
event, the Floodplain Administrator shall:
      (1)   Determine whether damaged structures are located in special flood
hazard areas;
      (2)   Conduct substantial damage determinations for damaged structures
located in special flood hazard areas; and
      (3)   Make reasonable attempt to notify owners of substantially damaged
structures of the need to obtain a floodplain development permit prior to
repair, rehabilitation, or reconstruction.
   (b)   Additionally, the Floodplain Administrator may implement other
measures to assist with the substantial damage determination and subsequent
repair process. These measures include issuing press releases, public service
announcements, and other public information materials related to the floodplain
development permits and repair of damaged structures; coordinating with other
federal, state, and local agencies to assist with substantial damage
determinations; providing owners of damaged structures materials and other
information related to the proper repair of damaged structures in special flood
hazard areas; and assist owners of substantially damaged structures with
increased cost of compliance insurance claims.
(Ord. 06-O-2285, passed 2-7-2006)
§ 1466.24  USE AND DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION.
   The following use and development standards apply to development wholly
within, partially within, or in contact with any special flood hazard area as
established in §§
1466.06 or
1466.22(a):
   (a)   Use regulations.
      (1)   Permitted uses.  All uses not otherwise prohibited in this section
or any other applicable land use regulation adopted by City of Columbiana are
allowed provided they meet the provisions of these regulations.
      (2)   Prohibited uses.
         A.   Private water supply systems in all special flood hazard areas
identified by FEMA, permitted under Ohio R.C. 3701.
         B.   Infectious waste treatment facilities in all special flood hazard
areas, permitted under Ohio R.C. 3734.
   (b)   Water and wastewater systems.  The following standards apply to all
water supply, sanitary sewerage and waste disposal systems not otherwise
regulated by the Ohio Revised Code:
      (1)   All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems;
      (2)   New and replacement sanitary sewerage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and
discharge from the systems into flood waters; and
      (3)   On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment
to or contamination from them during flooding.
   (c)   Subdivisions and large developments.
      (1)   All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to
minimize flood damage and are subject to all applicable standards in these
regulations.
      (2)   All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and
constructed to minimize flood damage.
      (3)   All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to
reduce exposure to flood damage.
      (4)   In all areas of special flood hazard where base flood elevation
data are not available, the applicant shall provide a hydrologic and hydraulic
engineering analysis that generates base flood elevations for all subdivision
proposals and other proposed developments containing at least 50 lots or five
acres, whichever is less.
      (5)   The applicant shall meet the requirement to submit technical data
to FEMA in §
1466.21(a)(1)A. when a hydrologic and hydraulic analysis is completed that
generates base flood elevations as required by division (c)(4) above.
   (d)   Residential structures.
      (1)   New construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to
prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure resulting
from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy.
Where a structure, including its foundation members, is elevated on fill to or
above the base flood elevation, the requirements for anchoring (division(d)(1))
and construction materials resistant to flood damage (division (d)(2)) are
satisfied.
      (2)   New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed
with methods and materials resistant to flood damage.
      (3)   New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed
with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment
and other service facilities that are designed and/or elevated so as to prevent
water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of
flooding.
      (4)   New construction and substantial improvement of any residential
structure, including manufactured homes, shall have the lowest floor, including
basement, elevated to or above the flood protection elevation. In Zone A areas
with no elevations specified, the structure shall have the lowest floor,
including basement, elevated at least two feet above the highest adjacent
natural grade.
      (5)   New construction and substantial improvements, including
manufactured homes, that do not have basements and that are elevated to the
flood protection elevation using pilings, columns, posts, or solid foundation
perimeter walls with openings sufficient to allow unimpeded movement of flood
waters may have an enclosure below the lowest floor provided the enclosure
meets the following standards:
         A.   Be used only for the parking of vehicles, building access, or
storage; and
         B.   Be designed and certified by a registered professional engineer
or architect to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior
walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters; or
         C.   Have a minimum of two openings on different walls having a total
net area not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area,
and the bottom of all such openings being no higher than one foot above grade.
The openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other coverings or
devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
      (6)   Manufactured homes shall be affixed to a permanent foundation and
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure
resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of
buoyancy. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of
over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors.
      (7)   Repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a
determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the
structure’s continued designation as a historic structure and is the minimum
necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure, shall
be exempt from the development standards of division (d).
   (e)   Nonresidential structures.
      (1)   New construction and substantial improvement of any commercial,
industrial or other nonresidential structure shall meet the requirements of
division (d)(1) – (3) and (5) – (7).
      (2)   New construction and substantial improvement of any commercial,
industrial or other non-residential structure shall either have the lowest
floor, including basement, elevated to or above the level of the flood
protection elevation; or, together with attendant utility and sanitary
facilities, shall meet all of the following standards:
         A.   Be dry floodproofed so that the structure is watertight with
walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water to the level of the
flood protection elevation;
         B.   Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and
         C.   Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect,
through the use of a Federal Emergency Management Agency Floodproofing
Certificate, that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with
division (e)(1) and (2).
      (3)   In Zone A areas with no elevations specified, the structure shall
have the lowest floor including basement, elevated at least two feet above the
highest adjacent natural grade.
   (f)   Accessory structures.  Relief to the elevation or dry floodproofing
standards may be granted for accessory structures containing no more than 600
square feet. Such structures must meet the following standards:
      (1)   They shall not be used for human habitation;
      (2)   They shall be constructed of flood resistant materials;
      (3)   They shall be constructed and placed on the lot to offer the
minimum resistance to the flow of flood waters;
      (4)   They shall be firmly anchored to prevent flotation;
      (5)   Service facilities such as electrical and heating equipment shall
be elevated or floodproofed to or above the level of the flood protection
elevation; and
      (6)   They shall meet the opening requirements of division (d)(5)C.
   (g)   Recreational vehicles.  Recreational vehicles must meet at least one
of the following standards:
      (1)   They shall not be located on sites in special flood hazard areas
for more than 180 days;
      (2)   They must be fully licensed and ready for highway use, or
      (3)   They must meet all standards of division (d).
   (h)   Above ground gas or liquid storage tanks.  All above ground gas or
liquid storage tanks shall be anchored to prevent flotation or lateral movement
resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads.
   (i)   Assurance of flood carrying capacity.  Pursuant to the purpose and
methods of reducing flood damage stated in these regulations, the following
additional standards are adopted to assure that the reduction of the flood
carrying capacity of watercourses is minimized:
      (1)   Development in floodways.
         A.   In floodway areas, development shall cause no increase in flood
levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. Prior to issuance of
a floodplain development permit, the applicant must submit a hydrologic and
hydraulic analysis, conducted by a registered professional engineer,
demonstrating that the proposed development would not result in any increase in
the base flood elevation; or
         B.   Development in floodway areas causing increases in the base flood
elevation may be permitted provided all of the following are completed by the
applicant:
            1.   Meet the requirements to submit technical data in §
1466.21(a);
            2.   An evaluation of alternatives which would not result in
increased base flood elevations and an explanation why these alternatives are
not feasible;
            3.   Certification that no structures are located in areas which
would be impacted by the increased base flood elevation;
            4.   Documentation of individual legal notices to all impacted
property owners within and outside the community, explaining the impact of the
proposed action on their property; and
            5.   Concurrence of the City Manager of the City of Columbiana and
the Chief Executive Officer of any other communities impacted by the proposed
actions.
      (2)   Development in riverine areas with base flood elevations but no
floodways.
         A.   In riverine special flood hazard areas identified by FEMA where
base flood elevation data are provided but no floodways have been designated,
the cumulative effect of any proposed development, when combined with all other
existing and anticipated development, shall not increase the base flood
elevation more than one foot at any point. Prior to issuance of a floodplain
development permit, the applicant must submit a hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis, conducted by a registered professional engineer, demonstrating that
this standard has been met; or
         B.   Development in riverine special flood hazard areas identified by
FEMA where base flood elevation data are provided but no floodways have been
designated causing more than one foot increase in the base flood elevation may
be permitted provided all of the following are completed by the applicant:
            1.   An evaluation of alternatives which would result in an
increase of one foot or less of the base flood elevation and an explanation why
these alternatives are not feasible;
            2.   Section
1466.24(i)B.1. and 3. through 5.
      (3)   Alterations of a watercourse.  For the purpose of these
regulations, a watercourse is altered when any change occurs within its banks.
The extent of the banks shall be established by a field determination of the
“bankfull stage.” The field determination of “bankfull stage” shall be based on
methods presented in Chapter 7 of the USDA Forest Service General Technical
Repori RM-245, Stream Channel Reference Sites: An Illustrated Guide to Field
Technique or other applicable publication available from a federal, state, or
other authoritative source. For all proposed developments that alter a
watercourse, the following standards apply:
         A.   The bankfull flood carrying capacity of the altered or relocated
portion of the watercourse shall not be diminished. Prior to the issuance of a
floodplain development permit, the applicant must submit a description of the
extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of the
proposed development, and certification by a registered professional engineer
that the bankfull flood carrying capacity of the watercourse will not be
diminished.
         B.   Adjacent communities, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, and the
Ohio Department of Natural Resources, Division of Water, must be notified prior
to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse. Evidence of such notification
must be submitted to the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
         C.   The applicant shall be responsible for providing the necessary
maintenance for the altered or relocated portion of the watercourse so that the
flood carrying capacity will not be diminished. The Floodplain Administrator
may require the permit holder to enter into an agreement with the City of
Columbiana specifying the maintenance responsibilities. If an agreement is
required, it shall be made a condition of the floodplain development permit.
         D.   The applicant shall meet the requirements to submit technical
data in §
1466.21(a)(1)C. when an alteration of a watercourse results in the relocation
or elimination of the special flood hazard area, including the placement of
culverts.
(Ord. 06-O-2285, passed 2-7-2006)
§ 1466.25  APPEALS BOARD ESTABLISHED.
   (a)   The City Council of the City of Columbiana shall appoint an Appeals
Board consisting of five members. The members shall serve three year terms
after which time they shall be reappointed or replaced by the City Council of
the City of Columbiana. Each member shall serve until his or her successor is
appointed.
   (b)   A Chairperson shall be elected by the members of the Appeals Board.
Meetings of the Appeals Board shall be held as needed and shall be held at the
call of the Chairperson, or in his or her absence, the Acting Chairperson. All
meetings of the Appeals Board shall be open to the public except that the Board
may deliberate in executive sessions as part of quasi-judicial hearings in
accordance with law. The Appeals Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings
showing the vote of each member upon each question and shall keep records of
all official actions. Records of the Appeals Board shall be kept and filed in
the City Manager’s office.
(Ord. 06-O-2285, passed 2-7-2006)
§ 1466.26  POWERS AND DUTIES OF APPEALS BOARD.
   (a)   The Appeals Board shall hear and decide appeals where it is alleged
there is an error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by
the Floodplain Administrator in the administration or enforcement of these
regulations.
   (b)   Authorize variances in accordance with §
1466.28 of these regulations.
(Ord. 06-O-2285, passed 2-7-2006)
§ 1466.27  APPEALS.
   (a)   Any person affected by any notice and order, or other official action
of the Floodplain Administrator may request and shall be granted a hearing on
the matter before the Appeals Board provided that such person shall file,
within 30 days of the date of such notice and order, or other official action,
a brief statement of the grounds for such hearing or for the mitigation of any
item appearing on any order of the Floodplain Administrator’s decision. Such
appeal shall be in writing, signed by the applicant, and be filed with the
Floodplain Administrator. Upon receipt of the appeal, the Floodplain
Administrator shall transmit the notice and all pertinent information on which
the Floodplain Administrator’s decision was made to the Appeals Board.
   (b)   Upon receipt of the notice of appeal, the Appeals Board shall fix a
reasonable time for the appeal, give notice in writing to parties in interest,
and decide the appeal within a reasonable time after it is submitted.
(Ord. 06-O-2285, passed 2-7-2006)
§ 1466.28  VARIANCES.
   Any person believing that the use and development standards of these
regulations would result in unnecessary hardship may file an application for a
variance. The Appeals Board shall have the power to authorize, in specific
cases, such variances from the standards of these regulations, not inconsistent
with federal regulations, as will not be contrary to the public interest where,
owning to special conditions of the lot or parcel, a literal enforcement of the
provisions of these regulations would result in unnecessary hardship.
   (a)   Application for a variance.
      (1)   Any owner, or agent thereof, of property for which a variance is
sought shall make an application for a variance by filing it with the
Floodplain Administrator, who upon receipt of the variance shall transmit it to
the Appeals Board.
      (2)   Such application at a minimum shall contain the following
information: name, address, and telephone number of the applicant; legal
description of the property; parcel map; description of the existing use;
description of the proposed use; location of the floodplain; description of the
variance sought; and reason for the variance request.
      (3)   All applications for a variance shall be accompanied by a variance
application fee set in the schedule of fees adopted by the City of Columbiana.
   (b)   Notice of hearing.  When a notice of appeal has been filed in proper
form with the Board of Appeals, the Secretary shall immediately place the
request for appeal upon the calendar for hearing and shall cause notices
stating the time, place and object of the hearing to be served personally or by
certified mail, addressed to the parties making the request for appeal and the
owners of all property lying within, contiguous to, and directly across the
street from, any part of the property for which a deviation is requested, at
least 15 days prior to the date of the scheduled hearing. The Appeals Board
shall schedule and hold a public hearing within 30 days after the receipt of an
application for a variance from the Floodplain Administrator. Prior to the
hearing, a notice of such hearing shall be given in one or more newspapers of
general circulation in the community at least 15 days before the date of the
hearing.
   (c)   Public hearing.
      (1)   At such hearing the applicant shall present such statements and
evidence as the Appeals Board requires. In considering such variance
applications, the Appeals Board shall consider and make findings of fact on all
evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of
these regulations and the following factors:
         A.   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
         B.   The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion
damage;
         C.   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
         D.   The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility
to the community;
         E.   The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use
which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
         F.   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
         G.   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development;
         H.   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan
and floodplain management program for that area;
         I.   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles;
         J.   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and
sediment transport of the flood waters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site;
         K.   The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, and streets and
bridges;
      (2)   Variances shall only be issued upon:
         A.   A showing of good and sufficient cause;
         B.   A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship due to the physical characteristics of the property.
Increased cost or inconvenience of meeting the requirements of these
regulations does not constitute an exceptional hardship to the applicant;
         C.   A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights beyond that which is allowed in these regulations;
additional threats to public safety; extraordinary public expense, nuisances,
fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws;
         D.   A determination that the structure or other development is
protected by methods to minimize flood damages; or
         E.   A determination that the variance is the minimum necessary,
considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
      (3)   Upon consideration of the above factors and the purposes of these
regulations, the Appeals Board may attach such conditions to the granting of
variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of these regulations.
   (d)   Other conditions for variances.
      (1)   Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
      (2)   Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in
size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed
below the base flood level, providing items in division(c)(1)A. to K. have been
fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond one-half acre, the technical
justification required for issuing the variance increases.
      (3)   Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest floor
elevation below the base flood elevation and the cost of flood insurance will
be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor
elevation.
(Ord. 06-O-2285, passed 2-7-2006)
§ 1466.29  PROCEDURE AT HEARINGS.
   (a)   All testimony shall be given under oath.
   (b)   A complete record of the proceedings shall be kept, except
confidential deliberations of the Board, but including all documents presented
and a verbatim record of the testimony of all witnesses.
   (c)   The applicant shall proceed first to present evidence and testimony in
support of the appeal or variance.
   (d)   The Administrator may present evidence or testimony in opposition to
the appeal or variance.
   (e)   All witnesses shall be subject to cross-examination by the adverse
party or their counsel.
   (f)   Evidence that is not admitted may be proffered and shall become part
of the record for appeal.
   (g)   The Board shall issue subpoenas upon written request for the
attendance of witnesses. A reasonable deposit to cover the cost of issuance and
service shall be collected in advance.
   (h)   The Board shall prepare conclusions of fact supporting its decision.
The decision may be announced at the conclusion of the hearing and thereafter
issued in writing or the decision may be issued in writing within a reasonable
time after the hearing.
(Ord. 06-O-2285, passed 2-7-2006)
§ 1466.30  APPEAL TO THE COURT.
   Those aggrieved by the decision of the Appeals Board may appeal such
decision to the Columbiana County Court of Common Pleas, as provided in Ohio
R.C. Chapter 2506.
(Ord. 06-O-2285, passed 2-7-2006)
§ 1466.31  COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.
   (a)   No structure or land shall hereafter be located, erected, constructed,
reconstructed, repaired, extended, converted, enlarged or altered without full
compliance with the terms of these regulations and all other applicable
regulations which apply to uses within the jurisdiction of these regulations,
unless specifically exempted from filing for a development permit as stated in
§
1466.20.
   (b)   Failure to obtain a floodplain development permit shall be a violation
of these regulations and shall be punishable in accordance with §
1466.99.
   (c)   Floodplain development permits issued on the basis of plans and
applications approved by the Floodplain Administrator authorize only the use,
and arrangement, set forth in such approved plans and applications or
amendments thereto. Use, arrangement, or construction contrary to that
authorized shall be deemed a violation of these regulations and punishable in
accordance with §
1466.99.
(Ord. 06-O-2285, passed 2-7-2006)
§ 1466.32  NOTICE OF VIOLATION.
   Whenever the Floodplain Administrator determines that there has been a
violation of any provision of these regulations, he or she shall give notice of
such violation to the person responsible therefor and order compliance with
these regulations as hereinafter provided. Such notice and order shall:
   (a)   Be put in writing on an appropriate form;
   (b)   Include a list of violations, referring to the section or sections of
these regulations that have been violated, and order remedial action which, if
taken, will effect compliance with the provisions of these regulations;
   (c)   Specify a reasonable time for performance;
   (d)   Advise the owner, operator, or occupant of the right to appeal;
   (e)   Be served on the owner, occupant, or agent in person. However, this
notice and order shall be deemed to be properly served upon the owner,
occupant, or agent if a copy thereof is sent by registered or certified mail to
the person’s last known mailing address, residence, or place of business, and/
or a copy is posted in a conspicuous place in or on the dwelling affected.
(Ord. 06-O-2285, passed 2-7-2006)
§ 1466.99  VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.
   Violation of the provisions of these regulations or failure to comply with
any of its requirements shall be deemed to be a strict liability offense, and
shall constitute a fourth degree misdemeanor. Any person who violates these
regulations or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall upon
conviction thereof be fined or imprisoned as provided by the laws of the City
of Columbiana. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate
offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City of Columbiana from
taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any
violation. The City of Columbiana shall prosecute any violation of these
regulations in accordance with the penalties stated herein.
(Ord. 06-O-2285, passed 2-7-2006)
CHAPTER 1470:  MANUFACTURED AND MOBILE HOMES
Section
1470.01   Definitions.
1470.02   Location or installation prohibited.
1470.03   Approval of existing sites.
1470.04   Removal and relocation at existing sites.
1470.05   Replacement at existing sites.
1470.06   Use as temporary residences.
1470.07   Removal upon notice of violation.
1470.08   Mobile home and/or manufactured home park zones.
1470.09   Compatibility with Planning and Zoning Code.
1470.10   Recreational vehicles excluded.
1470.99   Penalty.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Power to regulate building erection - see Ohio R.C. 715.26, 737.37
   Power to license house movers - see Ohio R.C. 715.27
   Trailer park regulated by State Public Health Council - see Ohio R.C.
3733.02
   Trailer park license required from Board of Health - see Ohio R.C. 3733.03
   Occupying while in motion - see TRAF.
440.08
   Moving of buildings - see B. & H.
Ch. 1474
§ 1470.01  DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this chapter:
   (a)   “Mobile home” means a moveable dwelling constructed in one or more
units to be occupied on land, having a minimum width of ten feet and a minimum
area of 400 square feet, and containing living facilities for year round
occupancy by one family, including permanent provision for eating, sleeping,
heating, cooking and sanitation.
   (b)   “Manufactured home” means any nonself-propelled vehicle, transportable
in one or more sections, which vehicle, in the traveling mode, is eight body
feet or more in width or forty body feet or more in length, or which, when
erected on site, is 320 or more square feet, and which is used as a dwelling
with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required
utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical
systems contained therein. Calculations used to determine the number of square
feet in a structure are based on the structure’s exterior dimensions measured
at the largest horizontal projections when erected on site. These dimensions
include all expandable rooms, cabinets and other projections containing
interior space, but do not include bay windows.
(Ord. 84-O-803, passed 1-2-1985)
§ 1470.02  LOCATION OR INSTALLATION PROHIBITED.
   The location or installation of a mobile home or manufactured home for
purposes of habitation or occupancy in any manner or form whatsoever in the
municipality is hereby prohibited, except as otherwise provided in this
chapter.
(Ord. 84-O-803, passed 1-2-1985)
§ 1470.03  APPROVAL OF EXISTING SITES.
   Mobile homes or manufactured homes presently located or installed and
occupied or inhabited in the municipality are hereby confirmed and approved in
their present locations and in their present situations as to ownership and
occupancy.
(Ord. 84-O-803, passed 1-2-1985)
§ 1470.04  REMOVAL AND RELOCATION AT EXISTING SITES.
   Mobile homes or manufactured homes mentioned in §
1470.03 may be removed from their present sites for not more than 90 days
without being in violation of this chapter. If such mobile home or manufactured
home is removed for more than 90 days, this chapter shall be binding upon the
persons and the premises involved, and the relocation or reinstallation of such
mobile home or manufactured home shall be prohibited.
(Ord. 84-O-803, passed 1-2-1985)
§ 1470.05  REPLACEMENT AT EXISTING SITES.
   Notwithstanding §
1470.02, an improved replacement of an existing mobile home or manufactured
home may be made by the owner of the same at the existing site within 30 days
after the removal of the existing mobile home or manufactured home, with the
prior approval of the Planning Commission. The Commission shall forthwith hear
any such owner’s request for such approval, and at such hearing the Commission
shall advise such owner, in writing, concerning the manner in which such owner
shall cause such improved replacement to comply with relevant portions of the
Zoning Code as well as with appropriate health and safety standards.
(Ord. 84-O-803, passed 1-2-1985)
§ 1470.06  USE AS TEMPORARY RESIDENCES.
   If a municipal residence is destroyed or substantially damaged by fire,
flood or some other similar cause, the owner of such residence may place a
mobile home or manufactured home upon his or her property for use as a
temporary dwelling pending the reconstruction of his or her residence. Such
mobile home or manufactured home shall be removed from such property within six
months of the date upon which such owner’s residence was destroyed or
substantially damaged, unless the Planning Commission deems it appropriate,
following a hearing upon such owner’s application for an extension of such six-
month time limitation, to grant an extension of such limitation to a date
certain. Any such application shall be filed with the Manager within such six
months, and the hearing upon such application shall be held at the next
regularly scheduled Commission meeting following the filing of such
application.
(Ord. 84-O-803, passed 1-2-1985)
§ 1470.07  REMOVAL UPON NOTICE OF VIOLATION.
   If a mobile home or manufactured home is in violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter, the owner of such mobile home or manufactured home
shall be given notice thereof, in writing, from the Manager. Such owner shall
be given two weeks from the date of the delivery of such notice to remove such
mobile home or manufactured home.
(Ord. 84-O-803, passed 1-2-1985)
§ 1470.08  MOBILE HOME AND/OR MANUFACTURED HOME PARK ZONES.
   The Planning Commission is hereby authorized, if it so desires, to establish
a new zone within the municipality to be known as a Mobile Home and/or
Manufactured Home Park Zone. In such Zone, when established and under
conditions and restrictions set up by the Commission, mobile home and/or
manufactured home parks may be established.
(Ord. 84-O-803, passed 1-2-1985)
§ 1470.09  COMPATIBILITY WITH PLANNING AND ZONING CODE.
   This chapter shall be considered in pari materia with and not in derogation
of Part Twelve - the Planning and Zoning Code, excluding the administrative,
enforcement and appeals provisions contained therein.
(Ord. 84-O-803, passed 1-2-1985)
§ 1470.10  RECREATIONAL VEHICLES EXCLUDED.
   Recreational vehicles, as defined in Ohio R.C. 4501.01(Q)(1), (2) and (3),
are expressly excluded from the purview of this chapter.
(Ord. 84-O-803, passed 1-2-1985)
§ 1470.99  PENALTY.
   (EDITOR’S NOTE: See §
1442.99 for general Building Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.)
CHAPTER 1472:  METAL SIDING
Section
1472.01   Grounding.
1472.02   Permit fee.
1472.99   Penalty.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Ohio Basic Building Code - see B. & H.
Ch. 1420
   National Electrical Code - see B. & H.
Ch. 1426
§ 1472.01  GROUNDING.
   Where aluminum and other metal siding is used on the exterior of a building
or other structure, the siding must be securely grounded in the following
manner.
   (a)   Apply one inch wide bare conductors of the same alloy and the same
gauge or greater, then the veneer panels. Bond all conductors together.
   (b)   Fasten the ground wire to a lower conductor, then securely fasten to
the common grounding system of the structure. If none is available, the ground
wire shall be fastened to an approved ground rod of not less than five-eighths
inch diameter and eight feet long extending eight inches above ground and may
need to be through the siding. Underwriters’ Laboratories, Inc. approved
fittings are required. Use number 8 aluminum ground wire or larger. Where
ground rods are used, there shall be a ground rod on the opposite sides of the
building. As panels are applied to the wall, fasten overlapping conductors with
a one and one-fourth inch aluminum or bimetal sheet metal screw at all points.
   (c)   Use a sufficient number of conductors in all vertical and horizontal
panel areas to provide adequate bonding. Grounding must be inspected before
siding is applied.
(Ord. 73-O-41, passed 8-7-1973)
§ 1472.02  PERMIT FEE.
   The fee for a permit to apply aluminum or other metal siding shall be that
provided under §
1442.02.
(Ord. 73-O-41, passed 8-7-1973)
§ 1472.99  PENALTY.
   (EDITOR’S NOTE: See §
1442.99 for general Building Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.)
CHAPTER 1474:  MOVING OF BUILDINGS
Section
1474.01   Permit required; bond.
1474.02   Issuance of permit; conditions.
1474.03   Warning lights on buildings in public ways.
1474.99   Penalty.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Power to license house movers - see Ohio R.C. 715.27
   Street obstructions and special uses - see TRAF.
Ch. 412
   Barricades and warning lights - see GEN. OFF.
660.09
   Removal and relocation of mobile homes - see B. & H.
1470.04
§ 1474.01  PERMIT REQUIRED; BOND.
   No person shall move any building upon any public street or public ground
without first having obtained a permit therefor from the Manager, or in his or
her absence, the Secretary to the Manager. No such permit shall be granted
until the party applying therefor has given a bond in the sum of ten thousand
dollars ($10,000.00) with good and sufficient securities to be approved by the
Manager, or in his or her absence, the Secretary to the Manager, conditioned
that such party will pay any and all damages which may happen to any tree,
pavement, street or sidewalk or to any public building or structure and all
damages resulting to any person whatsoever, which may be caused by the
carelessness or negligence of the workers while engaged in the moving of any
building in the public ways of the municipality and conditioned also that such
party so licensed will save and indemnify and keep harmless the municipality
against all liabilities, judgments, costs and expenses which may in any way
accrue against the municipality in consequence of the granting of such permit,
and will in all things strictly comply with the conditions of the permit.
(Ord. passed 3-11-1901)
§ 1474.02  ISSUANCE OF PERMIT; CONDITIONS.
   Upon the execution of the bond required by §
1474.01 to the acceptance of the Manager, or in his or her absence, the
Secretary to the Manager, a permit shall be granted to the applicant. The
permit shall contain specifically, all the conditions thereof, prescribing the
route to be taken, the building proposed to be moved, the site to which the
same is to be moved and the period of time within which the moving shall be
accomplished. No person shall violate any of the conditions of his or her
permit.
(Ord. passed 3-11-1901)
§ 1474.03  WARNING LIGHTS ON BUILDINGS IN PUBLIC WAYS.
   A permittee under this chapter, while engaged in the moving of any building
in the public ways and while occupying and using the public ways for this
purpose, shall cause a red or amber light to be placed in a conspicuous place
in the front and rear of such building or obstruction from sunset until sunrise
each night during which such building remains in any of such public ways.
(Ord. passed 3-11-1901)
§ 1474.99  PENALTY.
   (EDITOR’S NOTE: See §
1442.99 for general Building Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.)
TITLE EIGHT:  HOUSING
CHAPTER 1480:  GENERAL PROVISIONS AND DEFINITIONS
Section
1480.01   Short title.
1480.02   Purpose.
1480.03   Scope.
1480.04   Definitions.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Removal of unsafe structures - see Ohio R.C. 715.26(B)
   Streets for multi-family developments - see P. & Z.
1248.06
   Minimum living area per unit - see P. & Z.
1260.09
   Number of dwellings per lot - see P. & Z.
1260.14
   Lodging and boarding houses - see P. & Z.
1266.10(f)
   Multi-family housing - see P. & Z.
1266.10(g)
§ 1480.01  SHORT TITLE.
   This Title Eight of Part Fourteen of these Codified Ordinances shall be
known as the “Housing Code of the Municipality of Columbiana” and will
hereinafter be referred to as the “Housing Code” or “this Code.”
(Ord. 1674, passed 5-6-1969)
§ 1480.02  PURPOSE.
   Within the scope of this Housing Code the purpose of this Code is to
establish minimum standards of hygiene and sanitation governing the condition,
maintenance and space occupancy of dwellings to establish minimum standards
governing supplied utilities and facilities as well as basic equipment and
structural and physical things and conditions essential to make dwellings safe,
sanitary and fit for occupants and others living in the proximity of such
detrimental environment; to fix certain responsibilities and duties upon the
owners, operators and occupants of dwellings; to authorize the inspection of
dwellings and establish enforcement procedures; to authorize the vacation or
condemnation of dwellings or other structures found to be unsafe or unfit for
human habitation; and to fix the penalties for violation of the standards
established in this Housing Code.
(Ord. 1674, passed 5-6-1969)
§ 1480.03  SCOPE.
   (a)   The provisions of this Housing Code shall supplement all other
provisions of ordinances or regulations of the municipality relating to the
construction, use and maintenance of residential buildings and shall apply to
all such buildings or parts thereof.
   (b)   Existing residential buildings may continue to be occupied for
residential purposes, if:
      (1)   The building complies with the provisions of this Housing Code
except for some variance that has been specifically granted by Council or by
any board or commission properly authorized by Council; or
      (2)   The use and occupancy of the building is not in violation of the
requirements of any ordinance of the municipality, statutes of the state or
regulation of the Ohio Department of Health or County Health District,
including any rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto.
(Ord. 1674, passed 5-6-1969)
§ 1480.04  DEFINITIONS.
   The terms, phrases and words, and their derivatives, used in this Housing
Code, shall have the meaning given herein. Terms, phrases and words not
specifically defined in this chapter shall have the ordinarily accepted
meanings given in a standard dictionary and implied by the context in this
Code.
   “Acceptable or accepted,” when not further qualified and applied to a
material, device or mode of construction, means acceptable to the Housing
Inspector pursuant to this Code, or acceptable to any other authority
designated by law or this Code to give acceptance in the matter in question.
   “Accessory structure” means a detached structure located on or partially on
any premises and which is not used or not intended to be used for living or
sleeping by human occupants.
   “Approved” means in accordance with this Housing Code, as determined by the
Housing Inspector or any other authority designated by law or this Code to give
such approval.
   “Area”
      (1)   “Floor area” means the total area of all stories or floors finished
as living accommodations, measured to the outside of exterior walls or the
center of party walls.
      (2)   “Area of a building” means the floor area taken at mean grade
level.
      (3)   “Room area” means the floor area of a room measured inside from
rough to rough.
   “Basement” means a space with a floor level two feet or more below the
adjoining ground, but having less than half its clear height below the average
grade of the adjoining ground.
   “Board of Health” means the Board of Health of the Columbiana County Health
District.
   “Building Official” means the official, or his or her authorized
representative, designated by the municipality to administer the Building Code.
(See §
1440.01).
   “Cellar” means the part of a building having half or more than half of its
clear height below the average grade of the adjoining ground. Compare:
“Basement.”
   “Council” means the legislative authority of the municipality.
   “Dormitory” means a room in a dwelling used as a sleeping room or for
sleeping purposes by four or more unrelated persons.
   “Double house” means a two-family dwelling in which the living units are
side by side, each unit having open spaces on at least three sides.
   “Dwelling” means any enclosed space which is wholly or partly used or
intended to be used for living or sleeping by human occupants, provided that
temporary housing, as defined hereinafter, shall not be regarded as a dwelling.
   “Dwelling unit” means any room or group of rooms located within a dwelling
and forming a single habitable unit with facilities which are used or intended
to be used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating of meals.
   “Enforcement Officer” means the official designated herein, or his or her
authorized representative, who is charged with the responsibility of
administering this Code.
   “Exterior property areas” means the open spaces on the premises under the
control of owner or operators of such premises.
   “Extermination” means the control and elimination of insects, rodents or
other pests by cleaning out their places of refuge or havens; by removing or
making inaccessible materials that may serve as their food; by poisoning,
spraying, fumigating, trapping or any other recognized and legal pest
elimination method.
   “Family” means at least one adult and usually one or more persons legally
related to such adult and living in the same dwelling unit.
   “Flat” means a two-family dwelling, or any floor of same, two stories in
height, with each floor containing a complete dwelling unit.
   “Floor space.” See “Floor area.”
   “Flush water closet” means a toilet bowl flushed with water under pressure,
with a water-sealed trap above the floor level. Such toilet bowl shall have a
smooth, easily cleaned surface.
   “Garbage” means the animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the handling,
processing, preparation, cooking, serving and nonconsumption of food.
   “Gross floor area” means the total area of all habitable space in a building
or structure.
   “Guest” means any person who shares a dwelling unit in a nonpermanent status
for not more than 30 days.
   “Habitable room” means a room or enclosed floor space used or intended to be
used for living, sleeping, cooking or eating purposes, excluding bathrooms,
water closet compartments, laundries, furnace rooms, pantries, kitchenettes and
utility rooms of less than 50 square feet, foyers or communicating corridors,
stairways, closets and storage spaces and workshops, hobby and recreation areas
in unsealed or uninsulated parts of a structure below ground level or in an
attic.
   “Health Commissioner” means the Health Commissioner of the Columbiana County
Health District or his or her authorized representative.
   “Hotel” means a building or part thereof operated as a public inn and
containing ten or more rooms for hire to guests, usually transient.
   “Housing Inspector” means the official, or his or her authorized
representative, designated by the municipality to enforce this Housing Code.
   “Infestation” means the presence within or around a dwelling of any insects,
rodents, vermin or other pests.
   “Junk” means any worn out, cast off or discarded article or material which
is ready for destruction or has been collected or stored for salvage or
conversion to use.
   “Kitchen” means a room equipped with facilities for the storage, preparation
and cooking of food and the washing and storage of dishes and utensils and
having a floor area of not less than 60 square feet.
   “Kitchenette” means a room with most of the facilities of a kitchen and
intended to be used as a kitchen but having less than 60 square feet in floor
area.
   “Living unit” means a dwelling or portion thereof providing separate living,
cooking, eating, sleeping and sanitary facilities for one family.
   “Motel” means a building similar to a hotel but having particularly
convenient parking areas for automobiles.
   “Multiple dwelling” means a building containing more than two dwelling units
and/or rooming units.
   “Non” is a preferred prefix to be used with “combustible” and “flammable,”
rather than the prefix “in,” which has confusing meanings.
   “Occupancy permit” means a permit, sometimes called a certificate of
occupancy, issued by the Building Official or Housing Inspector and to be
posted on the premises as an indication that the building may be occupied for
its intended use.
   “Occupant” means any person, over one year of age, living, sleeping,
cooking, eating in or having actual possession of a dwelling unit or rooming
unit.
   “Operator” means any person who has charge, care, control or management of a
building or part thereof in which dwelling units or rooming units are let.
   “Owner” means any person who, alone or jointly or severally with others,
has:
      (1)   Legal title to any building or dwelling unit, with or without
accompanying actual possession thereof; or
      (2)   Charge, care or control of any dwelling or dwelling unit, as owner
or agent of the owner, or as executor, administrator, trustee or guardian of
the estate of the owner. Any such person thus representing the actual owner
shall be bound to comply with the provisions of this Housing Code and of the
rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto, to the same extent as if he or
she were the owner.
   “Permissible occupancy” means the maximum number of persons permitted to
reside in a dwelling unit or rooming unit.
   “Person” means any individual, firm, corporation, association or
partnership.
   “Plumbing” means all of the following supplied facilities and equipment: gas
pipes, gas-burning equipment, water pipes, garbage-disposal units, waste pipes,
water closets, sinks, installed dishwashers, lavatories, bathtubs, shower
baths, installed clothes washing machines, catch basins, drains, vents and any
similar fixtures, together with all connections to water, sewer or gas lines.
   “Premises” means a lot, plot or parcel of land, including the buildings or
structures thereon.
   “Privacy” means a condition or arrangement which affords a person or persons
the ability to carry out an activity without interruption or interference,
either by sight or sound, by unwanted persons.
   “Refuse” means all putrescible and nonputrescible solids, except body
wastes, including garbage, rubbish, ashes and dead animals.
   “Rooming house” means any dwelling or part thereof containing one or more
rooming units, and/or one or more dormitory rooms.
   “Rooming unit” means any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable
unit used or intended to be used for living and sleeping, but not for cooking
purposes.
   “Rubbish” means all nonputrescible solid wastes, excluding ashes, consisting
of:
      (1)   Combustible wastes such as paper, cardboard, plastic containers,
lawn and shrubbery clippings and wood; or
      (2)   Noncombustible wastes such as tin cans, glass and crockery.
   “Safety” means the condition of being free from danger and hazards which may
cause accidents or disease.
   “Supplied” means paid for, furnished by, provided by or under the control
of, the owner or operator.
   “Temporary housing” means any tent, trailer, mobile home or other structure
used for human shelter which is designed to be transportable and which is not
attached to the ground, to another structure or to any utility system on the
same premises for more than 30 consecutive days.
(Ord. 1674, passed 5-6-1969)
CHAPTER 1482:  ADMINISTRATION, ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTY
Section
1482.01   Certificates of authorized occupancy.
1482.02   Records.
1482.03   Notice of violation.
1482.04   Contents of notice.
1482.05   Service of notice.
1482.06   Reinspection; second notice; legal action.
1482.07   Demolition.
1482.08   Order to vacate; placarding.
1482.09   Hearing.
1482.10   Authority of Council.
1482.11   Rules and regulations of Council.
1482.12   Minutes and records.
1482.13   Annual report to Manager and Council.
1482.14   Inspection plans.
1482.15   Authority to inspect.
1482.16   Hours of inspection.
1482.17   Inspection by appointment.
1482.18   Inspector’s findings confidential.
1482.19   Interference with Inspector.
1482.20   Emergencies.
1482.99   General Code penalty; equitable remedies.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Removal of unsafe structures - see Ohio R.C. 715.26(B)
   Streets for multi-family developments - see P. & Z.
1248.06
   Minimum living area per unit - see P. & Z.
1260.09
   Number of dwellings per lot - see P. & Z.
1260.14
   Lodging and boarding houses - see P. & Z.
1266.10(f)
   Multi-family housing - see P. & Z.
1266.10(g)
§ 1482.01  CERTIFICATES OF AUTHORIZED OCCUPANCY.
   (a)   Certificate required.  No owner, agent or person in charge of any
dwelling structure used, designed or intended to house more than one bona fide
family shall occupy, rent or lease such premises, or any part thereof, unless
such owner or agent possesses and has posted a valid certificate of authorized
occupancy issued by the Housing Inspector in the name of the owner and for that
specifically identified dwelling structure.
   (b)   Application.  An application for a certificate of authorized
occupancy, required by the provisions of this Code, shall be made at the office
of the Housing Inspector on forms supplied by such office. Upon receipt of such
application, the Housing Inspector may require an affidavit as to the accuracy
of the information submitted or he or she may cause a general inspection of the
premises to be made in order to verify compliance with this Code.
   (c)   Contents of certificate.  Upon satisfying himself or herself as to the
satisfactory compliance with this Code, the Housing Inspector shall issue a
certificate of authorized occupancy for such premises, containing the following
information:
      (1)   The street address or other identification of the premises;
      (2)   The name and address of the owner, or agent, if the owner is not an
occupant;
      (3)   The authorized use and maximum occupancy of the premises; and
      (4)   The date and period or life of the certificate.
   (d)   Posting of certificate.  Excepting two and three-family dwellings, the
owner, agent or person in charge of a dwelling structure requiring a
certificate of authorized occupancy shall cause such certificate to be posted
conspicuously at all times near the main entrance of such structure. Such
certificate shall be provided with a transparent protective covering and shall
be securely affixed to the building.
   (e)   Effective period of certificates for smaller dwellings; fees.  A
certificate of authorized occupancy for a dwelling that houses two or three
families shall be valid until there is a change in ownership or until there is
a change or alteration in the use or occupancy. The fee to accompany the
application for such a certificate shall be one dollar ($1.00) for a two-family
dwelling and two dollars ($2.00) for a three-family dwelling.
   (f)   Effective period of certificates for larger dwellings; fees.  A
certificate of authorized occupancy for a multiple dwelling, rooming house,
dormitory, hotel, motel or tourist home shall be valid for not more than one
year through the last day of February next, unless there is a change in
ownership, use or occupancy before then. The fee to accompany the application
for such a certificate shall be two dollars and fifty cents ($2.50) for each
dwelling unit, hotel or motel room, or for each room available for letting in a
rooming house, dormitory, tourist home or similar dwelling structure. For a new
or remodeled building available for occupancy after August 31, the fee may be
reduced 50%. The maximum yearly fee for any one building shall be one hundred
dollars ($100.00) and the initial fee for a new dwelling structure to be
occupied after August 31 shall not exceed fifty dollars ($50.00). A certificate
of authorized occupancy shall be renewed for successive periods of not to
exceed one year.
   (g)   Use of occupancy changes.  No change shall be made in the nature or
extent of use or occupancy of a dwelling structure without such change having
been approved by the Housing Inspector, the Planning Commission and the
Building Official.
   (h)   Changes in ownership.  In the event there is a change in the ownership
of any premise requiring a certificate of authorized occupancy, that
certificate in the name of the former owner shall have been filed in the office
of the Housing Inspector, as required by §
1494.02, containing the dated signature of the new owner. If the new owner
makes application for a certificate of authorized occupancy within ten days of
the recorded date of the change in ownership, the fee will be one dollar
($1.00) and the expiration date will be the same as the previous certificate
which it replaces. If the application for the new certificate is not made
within such ten-day period, the new owner becomes liable for noncompliance
under this Code and the fee schedule shall be the same as for an original
application, plus any other penalties that may apply.
   (i)   Certificate dependent on completion date of dwellings.  When a
dwelling structure that requires a certificate of authorized occupancy will be
completed or remodeled and available for occupancy on or before March 1 of any
year, the owner shall apply for such certificate as soon as practicable, but in
no event shall occupancy be permitted in any part of the structure until the
certificate of authorized  occupancy has been issued. Failure of the owner or
agent to so apply for a certificate will subject him or her to the legal action
and penalty prescribed herein.
   (j)   Revocation of certificates.  The Housing Inspector may revoke a
certificate of authorized occupancy if any false statement has been made by the
applicant in connection with the issuance of such certificate or for
noncompliance of a structure with the requirements of this Code or if the owner
or agent refuses to comply with any provision or requirement of this Code.
(Ord. 1674, passed 5-6-1969)
§ 1482.02  RECORDS.
   Every owner or person in charge of a multiple dwelling, rooming house or
dormitory shall have records kept of all requests for repairs and complaints by
tenants that are related to the provisions of this Housing Code or the Building
Code and a corresponding record of all corrections made in response to such
requests and complaints. Such records shall be made available to the Housing
Inspector for inspection upon demand. Such records shall be admissible in any
administrative or judicial proceeding pursuant to the provisions of this Code
as prima-facie evidence of the violation or correction of a violation of this
Code or of the applicable rules and regulations made pursuant thereto.
(Ord. 1674, passed 5-6-1969)
§ 1482.03  NOTICE OF VIOLATION.
   Whenever, upon inspection of any dwelling structures or premises required by
§
1482.06, the Housing Inspector finds conditions or practices existing which are
in violation of the provisions of this Code or of applicable rules and
regulations made pursuant thereto, he or she shall serve the owner or agent
with notice of such violation in the manner hereinafter provided.
(Ord. 1674, passed 5-6-1969)
§ 1482.04  CONTENTS OF NOTICE.
   Except for an emergency as provided in §
1482.20, whenever the Housing Inspector determines that any dwelling structure
or the premises surrounding the same fails to meet the requirements set forth
in this Housing Code in rules and regulations pursuant thereto, he or she shall
issue a written notice setting forth the alleged failures and advise the owner
or agent that such failure must be corrected. Such notice shall be delivered in
person or by U.S. Mail. This notice shall:
   (a)   Be in writing;
   (b)   Set forth the alleged violations;
   (c)   Describe the dwelling structure and/or premises where the violations
are alleged to exist or to have been committed;
   (d)   Provide a reasonable time, not to exceed 60 days, for the correction
of any alleged violations;
   (e)   Be served upon the owner or agent. (See §
1482.05); and
   (f)   Explain the owner’s right to seek modification of withdrawal of the
notice by petition to the Housing Inspector requesting a hearing as provided in
§
1482.09.
(Ord. 1674, passed 5-6-1969)
§ 1482.05  SERVICE OF NOTICE.
   If the owner or agent cannot be found, after a diligent search within
Columbiana County, then notice may be sent by registered mail to the last known
address of the owner or agent and a copy of such notice shall be posted in a
conspicuous place on the structure or premises. Such mailing and posting shall
be deemed legal service of notice.
(Ord. 1674, passed 5-6-1969)
§ 1482.06  REINSPECTION; SECOND NOTICE; LEGAL ACTION.
   At the end of the period of time allowed for the correction of the alleged
violation, or earlier if requested by the owner or agent, the Housing Inspector
shall reinspect the structure and premises. If the alleged violations have been
corrected, the owner or agent shall be so notified and there shall be no
penalty. If the owner or agent has neglected to correct the alleged violation
or refuses to comply with the notice, the Housing Inspector may issue a second
notice to such owner or agent ordering the structure, premises or part thereof
to be vacated or he or she may advise the Municipal Attorney of the
circumstances and request him or her to institute an appropriate action at law
or in equity to compel compliance or such other action as may be deemed
necessary. Such notice shall be delivered, mailed or posted in the manner
provided in §§
1482.04 and
1482.05.
(Ord. 1674, passed 5-6-1969)
§ 1482.07  DEMOLITION.
   Whenever the Housing Inspector determines that any structure is beyond
rehabilitation and constitutes a public nuisance in that it is injurious to the
public health, safety or welfare and should be demolished, he or she shall
notify the owner or agent to demolish the structure and restore the grounds to
a satisfactory condition. A reasonable time, not to exceed 60 days, shall be
given for the execution of the work. If such demolition and clean-up has not
been accomplished by the given time, the Housing Inspector may request the
Municipal Attorney to institute proper legal action to abate the nuisance. All
expense or costs of demolition shall be borne by the owner of the premises.
(Ord. 1674, passed 5-6-1969)
§ 1482.08  ORDER TO VACATE; PLACARDING.
   Wherever the Housing Inspector orders a structure or premises or part
thereof to be vacated, he or she shall have placards posted at each entrance
ordering such vacation. No person shall deface or remove such placards without
written permission of the Housing Inspector and after the violations of this
Code have been properly corrected. No person shall enter any structure or
premises so placarded except with permission of the owner or Housing Inspector
for the purpose of making the required repairs or demolition.
(Ord. 1674, passed 5-6-1969)
§ 1482.09  HEARING.
   Any person, affected and aggrieved by any notice issued by the Housing
Inspector under any provision of this Code of the rules and regulations adopted
pursuant thereto, may file a written request and shall be granted a hearing on
the matter by Council, until such time as Council establishes a Board of
Building Appeals at which time the hearing shall be by such Board. Such a
request for a hearing shall be filed with the Housing Inspector within ten days
of the date the notice was served and shall contain a brief statement of the
grounds or basis for each request for a hearing. Council shall set a time and
date for the hearing within ten days after receipt of such request. The
petitioner shall have the right to appear in person or to be represented by an
attorney, architect, engineer or any other person. Council shall require a
report of the Housing Inspector.
(Ord. 1674, passed 5-6-1969)
§ 1482.10  AUTHORITY OF COUNCIL.
   Council, until such time as Council establishes a Board of Building Appeals,
shall have the power to review decisions of the Housing Inspector with the same
authority it has to review decisions of the Building Official. It may affirm or
reverse, in whole or in part, or modify, any decision of the Housing Inspector,
or vary the application of any provision of this Housing Code when, in its
opinion, enforcement thereof would do manifest injustice and would be contrary
to the spirit and purpose of this Housing Code or the public interest. Council
shall have the power to adopt, from time to time, such rules and regulations as
it deems necessary to carry into effect the provisions of this Housing Code,
provided that such rules and regulations do not conflict with any provision of
any other codes or ordinances of the municipality.
(Ord. 1674, passed 5-6-1969)
§ 1482.11  RULES AND REGULATIONS OF COUNCIL.
   Rules and regulations adopted by Council, until such time as Council
establishes a Board of Building Appeals, shall be on file in the office of the
Housing Inspector for public examination and a copy shall be posted on the main
bulletin board in the Municipal Building for at least five days prior to the
final adoption. Written comment or criticism of any part of such rules and
regulations may be filed in the office of the Housing Inspector, together with
submission of evidence, data or proof to substantiate claims. Such rules and
regulations shall have the same force and effect as all other provisions of
this Code and shall continue in effect until amended or revoked by action of
Council.
(Ord. 1674, passed 5-6-1969)
§ 1482.12  MINUTES AND RECORDS.
   Hearings of Council shall be open to the public. Council shall keep minutes
of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon every question, and
shall maintain complete records of testimony, data and official actions as
public records.
(Ord. 1674, passed 5-6-1969)
§ 1482.13  ANNUAL REPORT TO MANAGER AND COUNCIL.
   The Housing Inspector shall make an annual report to the Manager and Council
of the activities of his or her department and the procedures used to enforce
this Code. Such report shall be written and presented at the end of each
calendar year.
(Ord. 1674, passed 5-6-1969)
§ 1482.14  INSPECTION PLANS.
   The Housing Inspector is hereby authorized and directed to develop and adopt
plans for the immediate and periodic inspection of dwelling units and
structures subject to the provisions of this Code. Such plans shall be
publicized in a newspaper of general circulation in the municipality and notice
shall be sent to occupants of dwellings, informing them at least five days in
advance of the proposed visit of inspection, except for emergency inspections
as hereinafter provided.
(Ord. 1674, passed 5-6-1969)
§ 1482.15  AUTHORITY TO INSPECT.
   The Housing Inspector, upon presentation of proper identification and
credentials, is hereby authorized and directed to make inspections pursuant to
one or more plans for inspection established as required in §
1482.14, or in response to a complaint that an alleged violation exists or has
been committed, or when the Housing Inspector has valid reason to believe that
a violation does exist or has been committed.
(Ord. 1674, passed 5-6-1969)
§ 1482.16  HOURS OF INSPECTION.
   The Housing Inspector is hereby authorized to enter and inspect between the
hours of 9:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. all dwelling structures and premises subject
to the provisions of this Code for the purpose of checking compliance
therewith.
(Ord. 1674, passed 5-6-1969)
§ 1482.17  INSPECTION BY APPOINTMENT.
   The owner, agent or occupant of a dwelling subject to this Code and the
Housing Inspector may agree to an inspection by appointment at a time other
than the hours provided in §
1482.16.
(Ord. 1674, passed 5-6-1969)
§ 1482.18  INSPECTOR’S FINDINGS CONFIDENTIAL.
   The Housing Inspector shall keep confidential all evidence not related to
the purpose of this Code and any rules and regulations pursuant thereto, which
he or she may discover in the course of the inspection. Such evidence shall be
considered privileged and shall not be admissible in any judicial proceeding
without the consent of the owner or occupant.
(Ord. 1674, passed 5-6-1969)
§ 1482.19  INTERFERENCE WITH INSPECTOR.
   If any owner, agent or occupant of a dwelling structure subject to the
provisions of this Code refuses, impedes, inhibits, interferes with, restricts
or obstructs entry and free access to every part of the structure or premises
where inspection authorized by this Code is sought, the Housing Inspector may
refer the matter to the Municipal Attorney for proper legal action.
(Ord. 1674, passed 5-6-1969)
§ 1482.20  EMERGENCIES.
   Whenever, in the opinion of the Housing Inspector, an emergency exists which
requires immediate action to protect the public health, he or she may, without
notice or hearing, issue an order reciting the existence of such an emergency
and requiring that such action be taken as he or she deems necessary.
Notwithstanding the other provisions of this Housing Code, such order shall be
effective immediately. Any person to whom such an order is directed shall
comply therewith immediately, but upon petition to the Housing Inspector shall
be afforded a hearing as soon as possible. After such hearing, depending upon
the reconsidered findings, the Housing Inspector shall continue such order in
effect or modify or revoke it.
(Ord. 1674, passed 5-6-1969)
§ 1482.99  GENERAL CODE PENALTY; EQUITABLE REMEDIES.
   Any owner, agent or occupant of a dwelling structure subject to the
provisions of this Code who has received the second notice of a Housing Code
violation, and anyone who violates any provision of this Code or any rule or
regulation promulgated thereunder or fails to comply therewith or with any
written notice or order issued thereunder, and anyone who refuses to permit
entry by the Housing Inspector at a reasonable hour or hinders inspection,
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree and shall be fined not
more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisoned not more than six
months, or both, for each offense.  A separate offense shall be deemed
committed each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.  No such
penalty shall be applicable while a reconsideration, hearing or appeal is
pending in a court of competent jurisdiction. The imposition of penalties
prescribed herein shall not preclude the Municipal Attorney from instituting an
appropriate action or proceedings at law or in equity to correct or abate the
violation under the provisions of this Code.
CHAPTER 1484:  BASIC SANITARY STANDARDS FOR RESIDENTIAL OCCUPANCY
Section
1484.01   Compliance required.
1484.02   Kitchen facilities.
1484.03   Bathroom facilities.
1484.04   Water lines.
1484.05   Potable water supply.
1484.06   Maintenance of plumbing.
1484.07   Rubbish storage and disposal.
1484.08   Garbage storage and disposal.
1484.09   Bathroom floors and walls.
1484.10   Cleanliness in dwelling interiors.
1484.11   Infestation and extermination.
1484.12   Responsibility of owners for extermination.
1484.13   Responsibility of occupants for extermination.
1484.14   Responsibility for extermination of rodents.
1484.15   Responsibility of occupants for cleanliness.
1484.99   Penalty.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Power to regulate sanitary condition of buildings - see Ohio R.C. 715.26(A),
715.29
   Power to collect and dispose of garbage and rubbish - see Ohio R.C. 715.43,
717.01
   Compulsory water connections - see Ohio R.C. 729.06, 743.23
   Power to regulate plumbing, drains, water closets and privies - see Ohio
R.C. 3707.01
   Littering and deposit of garbage, rubbish, junk - see GEN. OFF.
660.03
   Maintenance of facilities, equipment and utilities - see B. & H.
1486.24
   Responsibility of owners and occupants for extermination - see B. & H.
1488.05
   Bathroom facilities in multiple dwellings - see B. & H.
1494.04
§ 1484.01  COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.
   No person shall occupy as an owner or occupant, or let to another for
occupancy, any dwelling or dwelling unit for the purpose of living, sleeping,
cooking or eating therein, which dwelling or dwelling unit does not comply with
the requirements of this Code.
(Ord. 1674, passed 5-6-1969)
§ 1484.02  KITCHEN FACILITIES.
   Every dwelling unit shall contain a kitchen or kitchenette containing a sink
which is not less than 15 by 18 inches in usable area and at least six inches
deep, properly supplied with potable water and drained to an approved sanitary
sewer system, as well as approved cooking, refrigeration and storage
facilities.
(Ord. 1674, passed 5-6-1969)
§ 1484.03  BATHROOM FACILITIES.
   Every dwelling unit shall contain a room or rooms within its walls which
affords privacy to a person within such room or rooms, and the room shall be
equipped with a flush water closet and shall contain a lavatory, while a
bathtub or shower stall may be in a separate room with all fixtures connected
to an approved water and sewer system. When such fixtures are housed in
separate rooms, it is preferable that the rooms be located in close proximity.
(Ord. 1674, passed 5-6-1969)
§ 1484.04  WATER LINES.
   Every kitchen sink, lavatory, bathtub, shower and laundry tray shall be
properly connected with hot and cold water lines. The hot water lines shall be
connected to a hot water heating facility of adequate size and which provides
at all times a water temperature of not less than 120°F.
(Ord. 1674, passed 5-6-1969)
§ 1484.05  POTABLE WATER SUPPLY.
   Every dwelling unit shall be supplied with potable water which provides
adequate quantity and pressure at the hot and cold outlets of the required
fixtures.
(Ord. 1674, passed 5-6-1969)
§ 1484.06  MAINTENANCE OF PLUMBING.
   All plumbing shall be properly installed and maintained in good working
condition, free from defects, leaks or obstructions.
(Ord. 1674, passed 5-6-1969)
§ 1484.07  RUBBISH STORAGE AND DISPOSAL.
   Every dwelling unit shall be supplied with adequate rubbish storage
facilities of a type and location that are clean and sanitary, acceptable to
the Housing Inspector. Rubbish shall also be disposed in a manner acceptable to
the Housing Inspector.
(Ord. 1674, passed 5-6-1969)
§ 1484.08  GARBAGE STORAGE AND DISPOSAL.
   Every dwelling unit shall have adequate garbage disposal facilities. If a
storage container is used, pending collection, it shall be rodent-proof,
insect-proof and watertight. Both the storage and disposal of garbage and other
organic waste shall be of a type and in a manner acceptable to the Housing
Inspector.
(Ord. 1674, passed 5-6-1969)
§ 1484.09  BATHROOM FLOORS AND WALLS.
   Every bathroom, lavatory and water-closet compartment shall have floors and
walls constructed and maintained so as to be reasonably impervious to water and
easily kept in a clean and sanitary condition.
(Ord. 1674, passed 5-6-1969)
§ 1484.10  CLEANLINESS IN DWELLING INTERIORS.
   The interior of every dwelling shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary
condition, free from any accumulation of rubbish or garbage.
(Ord. 1674, passed 5-6-1969)
§ 1484.11  INFESTATION AND EXTERMINATION.
   Buildings used for human habitation shall be kept free from insect, vermin
and rodent infestation. Where insects, vermin and rodents are found, they shall
be promptly exterminated by acceptable processes which will not be injurious to
human health. After extermination, proper precautions shall be taken to prevent
re-infestation.
(Ord. 1674, passed 5-6-1969)
§ 1484.12  RESPONSIBILITY OF OWNERS FOR EXTERMINATION.
   Every owner of a dwelling structure shall be responsible for the
extermination of insects, rodents, vermin or other pests whenever the
infestation exists in two or more dwelling units or in shared or public parts
of the structure.
(Ord. 1674, passed 5-6-1969)
§ 1484.13  RESPONSIBILITY OF OCCUPANTS FOR EXTERMINATION.
   The occupant of a dwelling unit shall be responsible for such extermination
within the unit occupied by him or her whenever his or her dwelling unit is the
only unit in the building that is infested.
(Ord. 1674, passed 5-6-1969)
§ 1484.14  RESPONSIBILITY FOR EXTERMINATION OF RODENTS.
   Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions, whenever infestation of rodents is
caused by failure of the owner to maintain any dwelling unit or dwelling
structure in a rodent-proof condition, extermination of such rodents shall be
the responsibility of the owner.
(Ord. 1674, passed 5-6-1969)
§ 1484.15  RESPONSIBILITY OF OCCUPANTS FOR CLEANLINESS.
   Every occupant of a dwelling unit shall keep in a clean and sanitary
condition that part of the dwelling and premises which he or she occupies and
controls.
(Ord. 1674, passed 5-6-1969)
§ 1484.99  PENALTY.
   (EDITOR’S NOTE:  See §
1482.99 for general Housing Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.)
CHAPTER 1486:  INTERIOR STRUCTURES
Section
1486.01   Means of egress for dwelling structures.
1486.02   Means of egress for units above first floor.
1486.03   Means of egress for units in multiple dwellings.
1486.04   Specifications for means of egress.
1486.05   Hand rails and balusters on stairways and porches.
1486.06   Storage of poisonous substances.
1486.07   Dampness in multi-family dwellings.
1486.08   Condition of structural members.
1486.09   Screens.
1486.10   Glass area of windows and skylights.
1486.11   Ventilation in habitable rooms.
1486.12   Light and ventilation in bathrooms.
1486.13   Light in laundry and furnace rooms.
1486.14   Light in public hallways and stairways.
1486.15   Condition of interior walls, ceilings and floors.
1486.16   Bathroom floors and walls.
1486.17   Electric service for dwelling units.
1486.18   Outlets and fixtures for habitable rooms.
1486.19   Floor or wall-type outlets for habitable rooms.
1486.20   Location of switches.
1486.21   Heating facilities.
1486.22   Unvented space heaters.
1486.23   Access to bathrooms and bedrooms.
1486.24   Maintenance of facilities, equipment and utilities.
1486.99   Penalty.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Power to furnish light, power and heat - see Ohio R.C. 715.06, 717.01
   Power to regulate building sanitation - see Ohio R.C. 715.26
   Compulsory water connections - see Ohio R.C. 729.06, 743.23
   Unvented gas heaters - see GEN. OFF.
660.01
   Kitchen and bathroom facilities; water lines; plumbing - see B. & H.
1484.02 et seq.
   Condition of windows, doors and hatchways - see B. & H.
1488.09
   Means of egress in multiple dwellings - see B. & H.
1494.08
§ 1486.01  MEANS OF EGRESS FOR DWELLING STRUCTURES.
   Every dwelling structure shall have a safe, unobstructed means of egress to
a safe and open outdoor space at ground level. At least one window or other
exterior opening in each habitable room shall be so arranged as to permit its
use as a means of escape in any emergency.
(Ord. 1674, passed 5-6-1969)
§ 1486.02  MEANS OF EGRESS FOR UNITS ABOVE FIRST FLOOR.
   Every dwelling unit above the first floor of a two or three-family dwelling
shall have two means of egress, located as far apart as possible. One means of
egress shall be by enclosed stairs leading directly to a ground-floor porch,
stoop or steps to grade. The second means of egress may be similar to and in
addition to the above described stairway, or another stairway leading onto a
porch or railed deck not more than nine feet above grade. The two exits shall
be at least 20 feet apart as measured around the periphery of the dwelling
structure. A required means of egress shall not be through any other dwelling
unit.
(Ord. 1674, passed 5-6-1969)
§ 1486.03  MEANS OF EGRESS FOR UNITS IN MULTIPLE DWELLINGS.
   Every dwelling unit in a multiple dwelling structure shall have immediate
access to two or more approved means of egress leading to safe and open space
at ground level.
(Ord. 1674, passed 5-6-1969)
§ 1486.04  SPECIFICATIONS FOR MEANS OF EGRESS.
   All means of egress shall have a minimum headroom of six feet six inches.
Doors must be provided with a lock that can be readily opened from the inside
without using a key. The risers and treads shall be uniform in any run of
stairs.
(Ord. 1674, passed 5-6-1969)
§ 1486.05  HAND RAILS AND BALUSTERS ON STAIRWAYS AND PORCHES.
   Structurally sound hand rails shall be provided on any steps containing
three or more risers. If steps are not enclosed, hand rails and balusters
spaced not more than eight inches apart shall be provided. Porches and/or
balconies located more than three feet higher than the adjacent area shall have
structurally sound protective hand rails, 30 to 36 inches high, and, if
unenclosed, shall have balusters spaced not less than eight inches apart.
(Ord. 1674, passed 5-6-1969)
§ 1486.06  STORAGE OF POISONOUS SUBSTANCES.
   Each dwelling shall have a suitable facility for the safe storage of drugs
and household articles that are poisonous.
(Ord. 1674, passed 5-6-1969)
§ 1486.07  DAMPNESS IN MULTI-FAMILY DWELLINGS.
   In every dwelling of multi-family structures, the cellars, basements and
crawl spaces shall be maintained reasonably free from dampness or other
conditions conducive to decay or deterioration of the structure. The floors and
walls of a habitable room in a basement shall be impervious to leakage and
effectively insulated against dampness. No habitable room is permitted in a
cellar.
(Ord. 1674, passed 5-6-1969)
§ 1486.08  CONDITION OF STRUCTURAL MEMBERS.
   The supporting structural members of every dwelling and multi-family
structure shall be maintained structurally sound, showing no evidence of
deterioration which would render them incapable of carrying the loads as
required by the Building Code.
(Ord. 1674, passed 5-6-1969)
§ 1486.09  SCREENS.
   From June 1 to October 15 of each year, every door opening directly from any
dwelling or multi-family structure to the outdoors, and every window, skylight
or other outside opening used for ventilation purposes, shall be supplied with
a screen having not less than 16 meshes per inch. Every swinging screen door
shall have a self-closing device in good working condition. No screens will be
required for dwelling units above the fifth floor.
(Ord. 1674, passed 5-6-1969)
§ 1486.10  GLASS AREA OF WINDOWS AND SKYLIGHTS.
   Every habitable room shall have at least one window or skylight facing
directly to the outdoors. The required glass area in a habitable room shall be
not less than ten square feet or 10% of the floor area, whichever is greater.
Whenever the only window in a room is a skylight, the total skylight area shall
be at least 15% of the area of the room.
(Ord. 1674, passed 5-6-1969)
§ 1486.11  VENTILATION IN HABITABLE ROOMS.
   At least one window or skylight in every habitable room shall be easily
openable or there shall be some other approved device that will provide
adequate ventilation. Unless there is such approved mechanical ventilation in a
habitable room, the openable window area shall be not less than 40% of the
minimum required area of a window or skylight.
(Ord. 1674, passed 5-6-1969)
§ 1486.12  LIGHT AND VENTILATION IN BATHROOMS.
   Every bathroom and water-closet compartment shall have the natural light and
ventilation required for a habitable room or mechanical ventilation capable of
providing eight air changes per hour and artificial light of not less than five
foot-candles at the floor.
(Ord. 1674, passed 5-6-1969)
§ 1486.13  LIGHT IN LAUNDRY AND FURNACE ROOMS.
   Laundry and furnace rooms and all similar nonhabitable work spaces located
in a dwelling structure shall each have at least one supplied electric light
fixture and a convenient control switch to provide illumination at the floor of
not less than three foot-candles.
(Ord. 1674, passed 5-6-1969)
§ 1486.14  LIGHT IN PUBLIC HALLWAYS AND STAIRWAYS.
   Public hallways and inside stairways in multiple dwelling structures shall
be adequately lighted at all times high natural or electric light with an
illumination of at least six foot candles at the floor or tread level. Public
hallways and stairways in one, two or three-family dwellings may be supplied
with conveniently located light switches controlling an adequate lighting
system which may be turned on when needed, instead of continual lighting.
(Ord. 1674, passed 5-6-1969)
§ 1486.15  CONDITION OF INTERIOR WALLS, CEILINGS AND FLOORS.
   All interior walls, ceilings and floors of dwelling structures shall be
maintained in good repair, free from holes, large cracks and any loose or
deteriorated material.
(Ord. 1674, passed 5-6-1969)
§ 1486.16  BATHROOM FLOORS AND WALLS.
   Floors and walls in every bathroom or water-closet compartment of a dwelling
structure shall be maintained in a sanitary and water-resistant condition.
(Ord. 1674, passed 5-6-1969)
§ 1486.17  ELECTRIC SERVICE FOR DWELLING UNITS.
   Where electric service is available, every dwelling unit and all public and
common areas shall be supplied with electric service outlets and fixtures which
shall be properly installed, maintained in good and safe working condition and
connected to a source of electric power in a manner prescribed by ordinances,
rules and regulations of the municipality.
(Ord. 1674, passed 5-6-1969)
§ 1486.18  OUTLETS AND FIXTURES FOR HABITABLE ROOMS.
   Every habitable room shall have an electric service outlet and/or fixtures
capable of providing at least three watts per square foot of floor area.
(Ord. 1674, passed 5-6-1969)
§ 1486.19  FLOOR OR WALL-TYPE OUTLETS FOR HABITABLE ROOMS.
   Every habitable room shall have at least one floor or wall-type electrical
convenience outlet for each 60 square feet or fraction thereof of floor area.
In no case shall there be less than two such outlets.
(Ord. 1674, passed 5-6-1969)
§ 1486.20  LOCATION OF SWITCHES.
   Convenient switches or equivalent devices for turning on an electric light
in a room or passageway shall be located so as to permit the area ahead to be
illuminated.
(Ord. 1674, passed 5-6-1969)
§ 1486.21  HEATING FACILITIES.
   Every dwelling shall have heating facilities which are properly installed,
maintained in safe and good working condition and capable of safely and
adequately heating all habitable rooms, bathrooms and water-closet compartments
to a temperature of at least 68°F at a distance of 18 inches above floor level
during periods when outside temperature is 0°F.
(Ord. 1674, passed 5-6-1969)
§ 1486.22  UNVENTED SPACE HEATERS.
   No owner or occupant of a dwelling unit shall install, operate or use an
unvented space heater in a habitable room, bathroom water-closet compartment,
laundry or recreation room or hall space when such space heater employs a
flame.
(Ord. 1674, passed 5-6-1969)
§ 1486.23  ACCESS TO BATHROOMS AND BEDROOMS.
   No dwelling unit containing two or more sleeping rooms shall have such room
arrangements that access to a bathroom or water-closet compartment intended for
use by occupants of more than one sleeping room can be had only by going
through another sleeping room or the kitchen, nor shall room arrangement be
such that access to a sleeping room can be had only by going through another
sleeping room, bathroom or water-closet compartment.
(Ord. 1674, passed 5-6-1969)
§ 1486.24  MAINTENANCE OF FACILITIES, EQUIPMENT AND UTILITIES.
   Every supplied facility, piece of equipment or utility which is required
under this Housing Code or the Building Code shall be constructed, installed or
operated so that it will function safely and effectively and shall be
maintained in a satisfactory working condition.
(Ord. 1674, passed 5-6-1969)
§ 1486.99  PENALTY.
   (EDITOR’S NOTE:  See §
1482.99 for general Housing Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.)
CHAPTER 1488:  EXTERIOR STRUCTURES AND ENVIRONMENT
Section
1488.01   Maintenance of exterior areas generally.
1488.02   Accumulation of stagnant water.
1488.03   Weeds and plant growth.
1488.04   Health hazards.
1488.05   Responsibility of owners and occupants for extermination.
1488.06   Condition of accessory structures and wood surfaces.
1488.07   Condition of foundations, walls, roofs, apertures.
1488.08   Load carrying capacity of exterior structures.
1488.09   Condition of windows, doors and basement hatchways.
1488.10   Rodent shields on basement and cellar windows.
1488.11   Maintenance of doors and windows; broken panes.
1488.12   Interference with service, facilities, equipment and utilities.
1488.13   Fences.
1488.14   Construction, installation and maintenance of facilities, equipment
and utilities.
1488.15   Roof gutters and downspouts.
1488.16   Replacement and rebuilding of deteriorated structures.
1488.17   Prima-facie evidence of satisfactory maintenance.
1488.18   Maintenance of debasing, incongruous or hazardous conditions.
1488.19   Identification of dwelling structures and units.
1488.99   Penalty.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Power to regulate building sanitation - see Ohio R.C. 715.26
   Power to regulate fences - see Ohio R.C. 715.27
   Power to abate nuisances - see Ohio R.C. 715.44
   Compulsory sewer connections - see Ohio R.C. 729.06
   Destruction of weeds - see Ohio R.C. 971.33 et seq.; GEN. OFF.
660.17
   Fences - see GEN. OFF.
660.12; P. & Z.
1260.26
   Maintenance of facilities, equipment and utilities - see B. & H.
1486.24
§ 1488.01  MAINTENANCE OF EXTERIOR AREAS GENERALLY.
   All exterior property areas shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary
condition free from any accumulation of rubbish, garbage, junk or refuse.
(Ord. 1674, passed 5-6-1969)
§ 1488.02  ACCUMULATION OF STAGNANT WATER.
   All premises shall be graded and maintained so as to prevent the
accumulation of stagnant water.
(Ord. 1674, passed 5-6-1969)
§ 1488.03  WEEDS AND PLANT GROWTH.
   All exterior property areas shall be kept free from weeds or plant growth
which are obnoxious or detrimental to the public health.
(Ord. 1674, passed 5-6-1969)
§ 1488.04  HEALTH HAZARDS.
   Exterior property areas and accessory structures shall be free from health,
fire and accident hazards and from vermin, insect and rodent harborage and
conditions which might create a nuisance.
(Ord. 1674, passed 5-6-1969)
§ 1488.05  RESPONSIBILITY OF OWNERS AND OCCUPANTS FOR EXTERMINATION.
   Every owner of a dwelling or multi-family structure shall be responsible for
the extermination of insects, rodents, vermin or other pests in all exterior
areas of the premises, except that the occupant of a single-family dwelling
shall be responsible for such extermination. Whenever infestation exists in the
shared or public parts of the premises of other than a single-family dwelling,
extermination shall be the responsibility of the owner.
(Ord. 1674, passed 5-6-1969)
§ 1488.06  CONDITION OF ACCESSORY STRUCTURES AND WOOD SURFACES.
   All accessory structures, including detached garages, shall be maintained
structurally sound and in good repair. All wood surfaces, except decay-
resistant woods, shall be protected from the weather by paint or other
protective treatment.
(Ord. 1674, passed 5-6-1969)
§ 1488.07  CONDITION OF FOUNDATIONS, WALLS, ROOFS, APERTURES.
   Every foundation, exterior wall, roof, door, window, skylight and other
exterior surface shall be reasonably weathertight, watertight and damp-free and
shall be kept in sound condition and good repair. All exterior wood surfaces,
other than decay-resistant woods, shall be protected from the elements and
decay by paint or other protective covering or treatment, using nontoxic
materials where readily accessible to children.
(Ord. 1674, passed 5-6-1969)
§ 1488.08  LOAD CARRYING CAPACITY OF EXTERIOR STRUCTURES.
   Every foundation, exterior wall, roof, outside stair, porch and every
appurtenance thereto, shall be safe to use and capable of supporting the loads
that may be normally placed thereon.
(Ord. 1674, passed 5-6-1969)
§ 1488.09  CONDITION OF WINDOWS, DOORS AND BASEMENT HATCHWAYS.
   Every window, exterior door, basement hatchway and similar devices shall be
kept rodent  proof, reasonably watertight and weathertight, and in good working
condition and repair.
(Ord. 1674, passed 5-6-1969)
§ 1488.10  RODENT SHIELDS ON BASEMENT AND CELLAR WINDOWS.
   Every exterior basement or cellar window which is openable shall be
protected with corrosion resistant metal shields to keep out rodents. Such
shields shall have openings of not more than one-half inch. Other material or
means affording equivalent protection against the entry of rodents may be
provided.
(Ord. 1674, passed 5-6-1969)
§ 1488.11  MAINTENANCE OF DOORS AND WINDOWS; BROKEN PANES.
   Every occupant of a dwelling unit shall maintain all exterior doors and
windows in a workmanlike and attractive manner. Broken glass panes in windows
or glass panels in doors shall be promptly replaced with glass or material of
similar quality.
(Ord. 1674, passed 5-6-1969)
§ 1488.12  INTERFERENCE WITH SERVICE, FACILITIES, EQUIPMENT AND UTILITIES.
   No owner, operator or occupant of a dwelling shall cause any service,
facility, equipment or utility, which is required by this Code, to be removed,
shut off or discontinued from any occupied dwelling unit that has been let or
occupied by him or her, except for such temporary interruption as may be
necessary while actual repairs or alterations are in process or during
emergencies when temporary discontinuance of service is approved by the
appropriate authority.
(Ord. 1674, passed 5-6-1969)
§ 1488.13  FENCES.
   All fences provided and/or caused to be erected by an owner, agent or
occupant shall be constructed of manufactured metal fencing material, wood,
masonry or other inert material.  The permissible height and other
characteristics of all fences shall conform to the appropriate ordinances and
regulations of the municipality. Whenever any required means of egress from the
dwelling opens into the fenced area, there shall be an openable exit to
adjacent premises or a public way. Such fences shall be maintained in good
condition, uniform in height, and all metal or wood shall be protected against
deterioration by the use of proper paint or other preservative.
(Ord. 1674, passed 5-6-1969)
§ 1488.14  CONSTRUCTION, INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE OF FACILITIES, EQUIPMENT
AND UTILITIES.
   Every chimney, flue, vent or smoke pipe and every other facility, piece of
equipment or utility which is present in the dwelling or which is required
under this Housing Code or the Building Code, shall be constructed, installed
and maintained in conformity with such requirements.
(Ord. 1674, passed 5-6-1969)
§ 1488.15  ROOF GUTTERS AND DOWNSPOUTS.
   All required roof gutters and downspouts shall be maintained in good repair.
Downspouts shall be connected to a storm sewer, unless specific permission is
granted to do otherwise, such as to use splash blocks or to connect to a dry
well.
(Ord. 1674, passed 5-6-1969)
§ 1488.16  REPLACEMENT AND REBUILDING OF DETERIORATED STRUCTURES.
   All buckled, rotted or decayed walls, sidings, door and window frames,
porches, steps, railings and trim, or missing parts of the same, shall be
replaced and rebuilt in good condition and shall be a reasonable match of the
original design. All such rebuilt parts shall be given a protective treatment
of matching paint, varnish or other preservative.
(Ord. 1674, passed 5-6-1969)
§ 1488.17  PRIMA-FACIE EVIDENCE OF SATISFACTORY MAINTENANCE.
   Presentation of evidence that all exterior surfaces have been properly
prepared and painted within five years prior to the date of inspection shall be
considered as prima-facie evidence that the exterior surface is being
maintained satisfactorily.
(Ord. 1674, passed 5-6-1969)
§ 1488.18  MAINTENANCE OF DEBASING, INCONGRUOUS OR HAZARDOUS CONDITIONS.
   No owner or occupant of a dwelling structure or premises shall maintain or
permit to be at or on the exterior property areas of such premises any
condition which deteriorates or debases the appearance of the neighborhood,
adversely alters the appearance and general character of the neighborhood,
creates a fire, safety or health hazard or becomes a public nuisance, including
but not limited to, the following:
   (a)   Broken, uneven or improperly maintained sidewalks, walks and
driveways;
   (b)   Nonusable appliances, automobiles, furniture and other junk;
   (c)   Signs or displays that are unsightly, grotesque or offensive to the
senses.
(Ord. 1674, passed 5-6-1969)
§ 1488.19  IDENTIFICATION OF DWELLING STRUCTURES AND UNITS.
   Each dwelling structure shall be easily identified from the street by
permanent numerals.  Dwelling units in a multi-family structure shall be
identified by numbers and/or letters.
(Ord. 1674, passed 5-6-1969)
§ 1488.99  PENALTY.
   (EDITOR’S NOTE:  See §
1482.99 for general Housing Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.)
CHAPTER 1490:  DENSITY, SPACE AND OCCUPANCY REQUIREMENTS
Section
1490.01   Occupancy density for dwelling units.
1490.02   Maximum number of persons in dwelling units.
1490.03   Ceiling height.
1490.04   Minimum floor area for sleeping rooms.
1490.05   Computation of habitable floor space.
1490.06   Habitable floor area of third floors.
1490.07   Hallway, stairway and closet space.
1490.08   Other uses in dwelling structures.
1490.99   Penalty.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Power to regulate elevators, stairways and fire escapes - see Ohio R.C.
715.26
   Minimum living area per unit - see P. & Z.
1260.09
   Number of dwellings per lot - see P. & Z.
1260.14
   Condition of interior walls, ceilings and floors - see B. & H.
1486.15
   Area requirements for rooming houses and dormitories - see B. & H.
1494.05,
1494.06
   Closet space - see B. & H.
1494.07
§ 1490.01  OCCUPANCY DENSITY FOR DWELLING UNITS.
   The maximum density of occupancy of any dwelling unit by persons shall not
exceed the following:
   (a)   For the first two occupants, there shall be at least 250 square feet
of habitable room floor space and at least 100 square feet of additional
habitable room floor space for every additional occupant; or
   (b)   The total number of persons shall not exceed twice the number of
acceptable sleeping rooms, except that this limitation will not apply to
children 12 years age or younger where the space requirements of §
1490.04 are satisfied.
(Ord. 1674, passed 5-6-1969)
§ 1490.02  MAXIMUM NUMBER OF PERSONS IN DWELLING UNITS.
   Not more than an acceptable number of members in a family, including guests
and/or domestic employees, shall occupy a dwelling unit. Roomers will not be
permitted unless a certificate of authorized occupancy for a rooming house has
been granted by the Housing Inspector. Not more than three adults of the same
sex, but not necessarily related, may occupy a dwelling unit as a family,
except to include a domestic employee.
(Ord. 1674, passed 5-6-1969)
§ 1490.03  CEILING HEIGHT.
   Each habitable room shall have a ceiling height of at least seven feet in
more than two-thirds of its floor area. With a sloping ceiling, that area where
the ceiling height is less than five feet shall not be considered as part of
the computed floor area.
(Ord. 1674, passed 5-6-1969)
§ 1490.04  MINIMUM FLOOR AREA FOR SLEEPING ROOMS.
   In every dwelling unit of two or more rooms, each room occupied for sleeping
purposes shall contain at least 90 square feet of floor area for the first
occupant and at least 60 square feet of additional floor space for each
additional occupant, except that no extra area will be required for babies less
than one year old.
(Ord. 1674, passed 5-6-1969)
§ 1490.05  COMPUTATION OF HABITABLE FLOOR SPACE.
   No portion of any room which is less than seven feet wide or 70 square feet
in floor area shall be included in determining the habitable floor space.
(Ord. 1674, passed 5-6-1969)
§ 1490.06  HABITABLE FLOOR AREA OF THIRD FLOORS.
   The usable or acceptable habitable area of the third floor of a one, two or
three-family dwelling structure shall be computed in accordance with the
following rules, requirements and limitations.
   (a)   Where there are two separate approved stairways from the third floor
to the ground, only 75% of the habitable floor area of the third floor may be
used to compute compliance area for a family occupying the third floor, or may
be included in the habitable floor area for a family occupying the second and
third floors, or for a family occupying the whole house.
   (b)   Where there is only one approved stairway to the third floor, only 50%
of the habitable floor area of the third floor may be used to compute
compliance area for a family occupying the whole dwelling or for a family
occupying a second floor flat having two means of egress as required in §
1486.02.  A separate family shall not occupy such a third floor.
   (c)   No portion of the habitable floor area on the third floor shall be
used to compute compliance with the requirements for a minimum habitable floor
area for a family occupying the first floor of a two-family dwelling, sometimes
called a two-family flat.
   (d)   No portion of the floor area on the third floor that is used for
storage purposes shall be included in determining the habitable floor area.
   (e)   No portion of any room on the third floor which does not meet the
requirements of this Code for habitable rooms shall be included in determining
the habitable floor area of such third floor.
   (f)   The permissible portion of the habitable area of a third floor may not
be shared by more than one family for compliance with the requirements for
minimum habitable floor area.
(Ord. 1674, passed 5-6-1969)
§ 1490.07  HALLWAY, STAIRWAY AND CLOSET SPACE.
   Every dwelling unit shall have additional areas provided for the necessary
utility room or laundry hallways, stairways or other interconnecting spaces or
closets and that area occupied by partitions. For closet space, there shall be
at least four square feet of floor-to-ceiling height for the personal effects
of each permissible occupant. If there is a deficiency in the required closet
space, that deficient area shall be subtracted from the computed habitable room
area to be used in determining permissible occupancy.
(Ord. 1674, passed 5-6-1969)
§ 1490.08  OTHER USES IN DWELLING STRUCTURES.
   No other use shall be maintained in a dwelling structure unless such is so
located and arranged that:
   (a)   It does not constitute a hazard to the residential occupants of the
building;
   (b)   It is provided with approved separate means of egress;
   (c)   There exist or are provided approved toilet accommodations separate
from those provided for the residential occupants of the building, and
   (d)   The owner-occupant of such use has a valid certificate of authorized
occupancy.
(Ord. 1674, passed 5-6-1969)
§ 1490.99  PENALTY.
   (EDITOR’S NOTE:  See §
1482.99 for general Housing Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.)
CHAPTER 1492:  SAFETY FROM FIRE
Section
1492.01   Compliance required.
1492.02   Fire-resistance rating of enclosures for means of egress.
1492.03   Fire protection features for changes in use of occupancy.
1492.04   Modification of fire protection features to suit conditions.
1492.05   Fire-resistance rating for walls, partitions, doors.
1492.99   Penalty.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Power to regulate elevators, stairways and fire escapes - see Ohio R.C.
715.26
   Power to regulate against fires - see Ohio R.C. 737.21, 737.37
   Fire limits - see B. & H.
Ch. 1464
   Means of egress for dwelling structures and units - see B. & H.
1486.01 et seq.
   Means of egress for multiple dwellings - see B. & H.
1494.08
   Ohio Fire Code - see F.P.
Ch. 1610
§ 1492.01  COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.
   No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or let to another for occupancy any
dwelling unit or structure or rooming or lodging unit or structure which does
not comply with the applicable provisions of the Fire Prevention Code, the
Building Code, any other regulation or ordinance of the municipality and this
Housing Code.
(Ord. 1674, passed 5-6-1969)
§ 1492.02  FIRE-RESISTANCE RATING OF ENCLOSURES FOR MEANS OF EGRESS.
   In a multiple dwelling, every public hallway, corridor, stairway, exit or
other means of egress shall be protected with enclosures having a fire-
resistance rating of not less than three-quarters of an hour, except that doors
and windows in such passageways above the basement or cellar may have a fire-
resistance rating of not less than one-half hour.
(Ord. 1674, passed 5-6-1969)
§ 1492.03  FIRE PROTECTION FEATURES FOR CHANGES IN USE OF OCCUPANCY.
   Whenever the use or occupancy of a building or structure, or part thereof,
has been changed from the use or occupancy for which the building or structure
was originally designed or intended, the Building Official or Housing Inspector
shall determine and establish the required fire protection features.
(Ord. 1674, passed 5-6-1969)
§ 1492.04  MODIFICATION OF FIRE PROTECTION FEATURES TO SUIT CONDITIONS.
   The Fire Chief, in collaboration with the Building Official and/or the
Housing Inspector, shall have the power and authority to require more rigid
fire protection features where it is the consensus that special situations of
construction, design, occupancy, fire hazard or other factors require such
safeguards in the interest of public safety.
(Ord. 1674, passed 5-6-1969)
§ 1492.05  FIRE-RESISTANCE RATING FOR WALLS, PARTITIONS, DOORS.
   Fire-resistance ratings for walls, partitions, doors, windows and floor
assemblies shall be in accordance with the applicable provisions of the
Building Code.
(Ord. 1674, passed 5-6-1969)
§ 1492.99  PENALTY.
   (EDITOR’S NOTE:  See §
1482.99 for general Housing Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.)
CHAPTER 1494:  MULTIPLE DWELLINGS, ROOMING HOUSES AND DORMITORIES
Section
1494.01   Operation; certificate required.
1494.02   Renting, leasing and selling; certificate required.
1494.03   Bed linen and towels.
1494.04   Bathroom facilities.
1494.05   Area requirements for rooming houses.
1494.06   Area requirements for dormitories.
1494.07   Closet space.
1494.08   Means of egress.
1494.09   Responsibility of operators for maintenance and supplies.
1494.10   Locks on access doors.
1494.11   Cooking and dining facilities.
1494.12   Shades and draw-drapes.
1494.13   Children under eighteen.
1494.14   Application of provisions relating to dwellings.
1494.99   Penalty.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Ohio State building standards - see Ohio R.C. Ch. 3781; B. & H.
Ch. 1420
   Certificates of occupancy - see P. & Z.
1260.05,
1262.09,
1482.01
   Occupancy permit defined - see B. & H.
1480.04
   Means of egress for dwelling structures and units - see B. & H.
1486.01 et seq.
   Maximum number of persons in dwelling units - see B. & H.
1490.02
   Hallway, stairway and closet space - see B. & H.
1490.07
§ 1494.01  OPERATION; CERTIFICATE REQUIRED.
   No person shall operate a multiple dwelling, rooming house or dormitory
unless he or she possesses and posts in a conspicuous place in such building a
valid certificate of authorized occupancy.
(Ord. 1674, passed 5-6-1969)
§ 1494.02  RENTING, LEASING AND SELLING; CERTIFICATE REQUIRED.
   No owner or agent of an owner shall rent, lease or sell all or any part of a
two- or three-family dwelling, multiple dwelling, rooming house or building
containing a dormitory unless he or she has a valid certificate of authorized
occupancy and exhibits the same to the prospective tenant or purchaser. Before
the prospective tenant may take possession or the sale consumated, the existing
owner shall present to the Housing Inspector, for verification and filing, the
certificate of authorized occupancy with a dated signature of the prospective
tenant or purchaser in the space provided.
(Ord. 1674, passed 5-6-1969)
§ 1494.03  BED LINEN AND TOWELS.
   The operator of a rooming house or dormitory, unless specifically exempted
by the Housing Inspector, shall supply fresh bed linen and towels prior to
letting any room and shall change the same at least every week thereafter and
shall be responsible for the maintenance of all supplied bedding in a clean and
sanitary condition.
(Ord. 1674, passed 5-6-1969)
§ 1494.04  BATHROOM FACILITIES.
   In every rooming house or dormitory, there shall be at least one flush water
closet, lavatory basin and bathtub or shower supplied for each six persons or
fractions thereof, including members of the operator’s family wherever they
share the same facilities, provided that:
   (a)   Where rooms or dormitories are let only to males, flush urinals may be
substituted for not more than one-third the number of water closets;
   (b)   All such facilities shall be so located within a room with privacy in
the dwelling as to be reasonably accessible from a common hall or passageway to
all persons sharing such facilities;
   (c)   Every lavatory basin, tub or shower shall be supplied with hot and
cold water under pressure at all times and shall drain to an approved sanitary
sewer; and
   (d)   No such facility shall be located in a basement or cellar without
written permission from the Housing Inspector and the County Health
Commissioner.
(Ord. 1674, passed 5-6-1969)
§ 1494.05  AREA REQUIREMENTS FOR ROOMING HOUSES.
   Every room in a rooming house shall contain at least 90 square feet for the
first person and at least 60 additional square feet for the second person.
(Ord. 1674, passed 5-6-1969)
§ 1494.06  AREA REQUIREMENTS FOR DORMITORIES.
   In a dormitory, the area shall be computed on the basis of at least 70
square feet for the first person and 50 square feet for each additional person.
(Ord. 1674, passed 5-6-1969)
§ 1494.07  CLOSET SPACE.
   Every rooming unit shall contain at least four square feet of floor-to-
ceiling height closet space per occupant. An equal amount of closet space is
required for each occupant of a dormitory, except that it is permissible for
such closet or closet space to be provided in another part of the house.
(Ord. 1674, passed 5-6-1969)
§ 1494.08  MEANS OF EGRESS.
   Every rooming unit and dormitory shall have access to two or more safe,
unobstructed means of egress leading to a safe and open space at ground level.
(Ord. 1674, passed 5-6-1969)
§ 1494.09  RESPONSIBILITY OF OPERATORS FOR MAINTENANCE AND SUPPLIES.
   The operator of every rooming house or dormitory shall be responsible for
the maintenance of the structure and for the supply of furnishings in a
sanitary and acceptable condition.
(Ord. 1674, passed 5-6-1969)
§ 1494.10  LOCKS ON ACCESS DOORS.
   Access doors to rooming units shall have operating locks to insure privacy.
(Ord. 1674, passed 5-6-1969)
§ 1494.11  COOKING AND DINING FACILITIES.
   Cooking in dormitory rooms and rooming units is prohibited. Communal cooking
and dining facilities in a rooming house or dormitory structure are permitted
only when specifically approved in writing by the Housing Inspector.
(Ord. 1674, passed 5-6-1969)
§ 1494.12  SHADES AND DRAW-DRAPES.
   Every window of every rooming house or dormitory shall be supplied with
shades, draw-drapes or other approved devices or material which, when properly
used, will afford privacy to the occupant.
(Ord. 1674, passed 5-6-1969)
§ 1494.13  CHILDREN UNDER EIGHTEEN.
   No child under 18 years of age shall live in a rooming house or dormitory
unless he or she resides as a bona fide member of a family in a dwelling unit
contained therein.
(Ord. 1674, passed 5-6-1969)
§ 1494.14  APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS RELATING TO DWELLINGS.
   All provisions of this Code pertaining to dwellings, dwelling structures,
exterior premises, their owners or occupants, shall govern multiple dwellings,
rooming houses, dormitories, hotels, motels and tourist homes, where
applicable, except to the extent that any such provision may be in conflict
with the laws of Ohio or any lawful regulation of a state board or agency.
(Ord. 1674, passed 5-6-1969)
§ 1494.99  PENALTY.
   (EDITOR’S NOTE:  See §
1482.99 for general Housing Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.)
PART SIXTEEN:  FIRE PREVENTION CODE
         Chap.
1610.   Ohio Fire Code.
CHAPTER 1610:  OHIO FIRE CODE
Section
1610.01   2017 edition adopted.
1610.02   Purpose.
1610.03   Application of Code.
1610.04   Enforcement; responsibilities of Municipal Fire Safety Inspector.
1610.05   Compliance required.
1610.06   Posting arson laws.
1610.07   Setting fires which spread.
1610.08   Responsibilities upon discovery of unfriendly fires.
1610.09   Inspections.
1610.10   Sale and use of fire equipment; standards; service and repair of
equipment.
1610.11   File and distribution copies.
1610.12   Conflict of laws.
1610.13   Permit fees.
1610.99   Penalty.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Adoption of technical codes - see CHTR.
6.13
   Power to regulate elevators, stairways and fire escapes - see Ohio R.C.
715.26
   Power to regulate against fires - see Ohio R.C. 737.27
   State Fire Marshal - see Ohio R.C. Ch. 3737
   Right to examine buildings - see Ohio R.C. 3737.14
   Gasoline, oils and paint - see Ohio R.C. Ch. 3741
   Fireworks - see Ohio R.C. Ch. 3743; GEN. OFF.
678.10
   Driving over fire hoses - see TRAF.
432.28
   Arson - see GEN. OFF.
642.06,
642.07
§ 1610.01  2017 EDITION ADOPTED.
   Pursuant to §
6.13 of the Charter, there is hereby adopted by and for the municipality the
2017 edition of the Ohio Fire Code (OFC), as adopted by the Ohio Department of
Commerce, Division of State Fire Marshal, published in Division 1301:7 of the
Ohio Administrative Code (OAC).
(Ord. 18-O-2959, passed 5-15-2018)
§ 1610.02  PURPOSE.
   The purpose of the Ohio Fire Code, as adopted in §
1610.01, is to prescribe minimum standards and regulations governing conditions
hazardous to life and property from fire or explosion.
§ 1610.03  APPLICATION OF CODE.
   The Ohio Fire Code, as adopted in §
1610.01, applies to the use of all lands and properties within the municipality
and such other lands or properties owned by the municipality which are situated
outside the corporate limits thereof.
§ 1610.04  ENFORCEMENT; RESPONSIBILITIES OF MUNICIPAL FIRE SAFETY INSPECTOR.
   (a)   No person shall serve as a Municipal Fire Safety Inspector unless he
or she has received a certificate issued by the Ohio Superintendent of Public
Instruction under Ohio R.C. 3303.07 evidencing his or her satisfactory
completion of a fire safety inspection training program.
(ORC 3737.34)
   (b)   The Municipal Fire Safety Inspector, upon examination or inspection,
shall issue citations when he or she finds conditions as specified in Ohio R.C.
3737.41 which are especially dangerous to the safety of persons, buildings,
premises or property, and shall make any necessary remedial orders in
connection therewith. Citation enforcement may be by use of the procedures
established by Ohio R.C. 3737.42 for hearing on the citation or Ohio R.C.
3737.44 for injunctive relief or a temporary restraining order and oral order
for vacation of the building or premises.
   (c)   The Municipal Fire Safety Inspector, upon reasonable belief and after
inspection or investigation, shall, with reasonable promptness, issue a
citation to the responsible person for a violation of the Ohio Fire Code or any
order issued by the Ohio Fire Marshal or any Municipal Fire Safety Inspector.
The citation shall fix a reasonable time for abatement of the violation. Each
citation issued under this division shall be prominently posted by the
responsible person, as prescribed by the Ohio Fire Code, at or near each place
a violation referred to in the citation occurs.
   (d)   Upon request of the Municipal Fire Safety Inspector, the Municipal
Attorney shall institute and prosecute any necessary action or proceeding to
enforce this chapter or Ohio R.C. Chapter 3737.
§ 1610.05  COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly violate any provision of the Ohio Fire Code,
as adopted in §
1610.01, or any order issued pursuant thereto.
(ORC 3737.51(A))
   (b)   No person shall fail to comply with the fire prevention measures or
fire protection activities prescribed in the Ohio Fire Code or fail to comply
with the municipal application and plan submission and processing requirements,
including payment of the fees designated therefor.
§ 1610.06  POSTING ARSON LAWS.
   The owner, operator or lessee of any transient residential building shall
post the provisions of Ohio R.C. 2909.02 and 2909.03 in a conspicuous place in
each room occupied by guests in such building. The owner, operator or lessee of
any nontransient residential building, institution, school or place of assembly
shall post the provisions of such sections in conspicuous places upon such
premises. No person shall fail to comply with this section.
(ORC 3737.61)
§ 1610.07  SETTING FIRES WHICH SPREAD.
   No person shall set, kindle or cause to be set or kindled any fire which,
through his or her negligence, spreads beyond its immediate confines to any
structure, field or wood lot.
(ORC 3737.62)
§ 1610.08  RESPONSIBILITIES UPON DISCOVERY OF UNFRIENDLY FIRES.
   (a)   The owner, operator or lessee, an employee of any owner, operator or
lessee, an occupant, and any person in direct control of any building regulated
under the Ohio Basic Building Code, upon the discovery of an unfriendly fire or
upon receiving information that there is an unfriendly fire on the premises,
shall immediately and with all reasonable dispatch and diligence call or
otherwise notify the Fire Department concerning the fire and shall spread an
alarm immediately to all occupants of the building.
   (b)   For the purposes of this section, “unfriendly fire” means a fire of a
destructive nature as distinguished from a controlled fire intended for a
beneficial purpose.
   (c)   No person shall fail to comply with this section.
(ORC 3737.63)
§ 1610.09  INSPECTIONS.
   No person who is not a certified Fire Safety Inspector shall act as such or
hold himself or herself out to be such unless, prior to commencing any
inspection function, he or she discloses the purpose for which he or she is
making such inspection and the fact that he or she is not employed by any state
or local fire service or agency and that he or she is not acting in an official
capacity for any governmental subdivision or agency.
(ORC 3737.64)
§ 1610.10  SALE AND USE OF FIRE EQUIPMENT; STANDARDS; SERVICE AND REPAIR OF
EQUIPMENT.
   (a)   No person shall sell, offer for sale, or use any fire protection or
fire-fighting equipment that does not meet the minimum standards established by
the Ohio Fire Marshal in the Ohio Fire Code.
   (b)   Except for public and private mobile fire trucks, no person shall
service, test, repair or install for profit any fire protection or fire-
fighting equipment without a certificate issued by the Ohio Fire Marshal.
(ORC 3737.65)
§ 1610.11  FILE AND DISTRIBUTION COPIES.
   Copies of the Ohio Fire Code, as adopted in §
1610.01, are on file with the Clerk of Council for inspection by the public.
Copies are also on file in the County Law Library. In addition, the Clerk of
Council has copies available for distribution to the public, at cost.
§ 1610.12  CONFLICT OF LAWS.
   (a)   The Ohio Basic Building Code shall supersede and govern any order,
standard, rule or regulation of the Ohio Fire Code or the Division of State
Fire Marshal, Department of Commerce, in all cases where any such order,
standard, rule or regulation is in conflict with the Ohio Basic Building Code,
except that rules adopted and orders issued by the Fire Marshal pursuant to
Ohio R.C. Chapter 3743 prevail in the event of a conflict.
(OAC 4101:2-1-04(B); ORC 3781.11(B))
   (b)   In all other cases of conflict between the Ohio Fire Code and any
other municipal ordinance or technical code adopted thereby, the stricter
standard shall control.
§ 1610.13  PERMIT FEES.
   The fee for all permits issued by the Fire Chief or the Municipal Fire
Safety Inspector pursuant to § 1301:7-1-04 (FM-103.0) shall be seventy-five
dollars ($75.00) unless specifically indicated otherwise in the Ohio Fire Code.
§ 1610.99  PENALTY.
   (a)   Criminal penalties.
      (1)   Whoever violates §
1610.05(a) is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree and shall be fined
not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisoned not more than six
months, or both.
(ORC 3737.99(B))
      (2)   Whoever violates §
1610.05(b) or
1610.06 is guilty of a minor misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than one
hundred dollars ($100.00).
(ORC 3737.99(C))
      (3)   Whoever violates §
1610.07 or
1610.09 is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree and shall be fined not
more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) or imprisoned not more than 30
days, or both.
(ORC 3737.99(D))
      (4)   Whoever violates §
1610.08 or
1610.10 is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree and shall be fined not
more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisoned not more than 60 days,
or both.
(ORC 3737.99(E))
   (b)   Civil penalties.
      (1)   Any person who has received a citation for a serious violation of
the Ohio Fire Code or any order issued pursuant to it shall be assessed a civil
penalty of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each such
violation.
      (2)   Any person who has received a citation for a violation of the Ohio
Fire Code or any order issued pursuant to it, and such violation is
specifically determined not to be of a serious nature, may be assessed a civil
penalty of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each such
violation.
      (3)   Any person who fails to correct a violation for which a citation
has been issued, within the period permitted for its correction, may be
assessed a civil penalty of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for
each day during which such failure or violation continues.
      (4)   Any person who violates any of the posting requirements prescribed
by §
1610.04(c) shall be assessed a civil penalty of not more than one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00) for each violation.
      (5)   Due consideration to the appropriateness of the penalty with
respect to the gravity of the violation, the good faith of the person being
charged and the history of previous violations shall be given whenever a
penalty is assessed under this chapter.
      (6)   For purposes of this section, a serious violation shall be
considered to exist if there is a substantial probability that an occurrence
causing death or serious physical harm to persons could result from a condition
which exists, or from one or more practices, means, methods, operations or
processes which have been adopted or are in use, unless the person did not and
could not, with the exercise of reasonable diligence, know of the presence of
the violation.
      (7)   Civil penalties imposed under this chapter shall be paid to the
Clerk of Council for deposit into the General Fund. Such penalties may be
recovered in a civil action in the name of the municipality brought in the
Court of Common Pleas.
(ORC 3737.51(B) to (H))
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
EDITOR’S NOTE: The Codified Ordinances of Columbiana comprises all ordinances
and resolutions of a general and permanent nature.  The provisions of such
general and permanent ordinances and resolutions are set forth in full in the
Codified Ordinances.
   References must be made frequently to many special ordinances and
resolutions, particularly those relating to property, such as easements,
vacations, dedications, plat approvals, acquisitions, disposals, leases, and
the like.  In the following Tables A through I, all such ordinances and
resolutions are listed.  These tables list ordinances and resolutions
chronologically by subject and include both a citation to and a brief
description of each ordinance and resolution.
      Table
         
TABLE A.   FRANCHISES
         
TABLE B.   EASEMENTS
         
TABLE C.   VACATING OF STREETS AND ALLEYS
         
TABLE D.   DEDICATION AND PLAT APPROVAL
         
TABLE E.   ACQUISITION AND DISPOSAL OF REAL PROPERTY
         
TABLE F.   LEASE OF REAL PROPERTY
         
TABLE G.   STREET GRADE LEVELS AND CHANGE OF STREET NAME
         
TABLE H.   ANNEXATION AND DETACHMENT OF TERRITORY
         
TABLE I.   ZONING MAP CHANGES
TABLE A:  FRANCHISES
 
Ord. No. Date Description
-    9-4- To J. C. Thullen and assigns, for electrical light service.
     1889
     11-
-    19-  To Ohio Knob Oil Co. for natural and artificial gas service.
     1902
     5-
-    15-  To G. Heard and assigns, for natural gas service.
     1905
     2-   Fixing price for natural gas service from Natural Gas Co. of West
358  11-  Virginia.
     1920
361  4-6- To Pennsylvania-Ohio Electric Co. for electric service.
     1920
     7-
369  24-  To Ohio Harmony Electric Co. for electric service.
     1920
Res. 11-
-    19-  Extending franchise to Pennsylvania-Ohio Electric Co. for six months.
     1920
     6-
450  15-  To Pennsylvania and Ohio Power and Light Co. for electric service.
     1926
719  6-6- Amends contract with Natural Gas Co. of West Virginia as to meter
     1944 readings.
     10-
823  17-  Authorizes contract with P. D. Gardner for garbage collection.
     1950
850  3-4- Fixing natural gas rates charged by Natural Gas Co. of West Virginia.
     1952
974  9-4- Authorizes contract with Ohio Edison Co. for electrical energy for
     1956 operation of municipal electric distributing plant.
     2-
996  19-  To Ohio Fuel Gas Co. for natural gas service.
     1957
     4-
1166 19-  Fixing the price of natural gas provided by the Ohio Fuel Gas Co.
     1960
     5-   Authorizes contract with Ohio Edison Co. for electric service for
1266 15-  municipal electric distribution system.
     1962
     5-
1361 19-  Fixing price of natural gas provided by Columbia Gas of Ohio, Inc.
     1964
Res. 6-   Authorizes filing complaint with Federal Power Commission re electric
1412 15-  rates charged by Ohio Edison Co.
     1965
     12-
1434 21-  Authorizes contract with Ohio Edison Co. for electric service.
     1965
     10-  Authorizes contract with R. George, dba Columbiana Sanitation Co. for
1483 18-  garbage service.
     1966
Res. 4-2- Authorizes contract with J. L. Lipp, dba Eastern Columbiana County
1587 1968 Cable T.V., for television service.
     6-   Fixing price of natural gas to be provided by Columbia Gas of Ohio,
1611 18-  Inc.
     1968
1791 2-2- Approves assignment by John L. Lipp and Teleview Inc. of all the rights
     1971 granted under Res. 1587 to Tele-Media Corp. of Ohio.
     8-   Fixing price of natural gas to be provided by Columbia Gas of Ohio,
1915 15-  Inc. for four years.
     1972
     10-  Authorizes assignment of all rights granted to Tele-Media Corp. of Ohio
1942 3-   under Ord. 1791 to Tele-Media Co. of Lake Erie.
     1972
Res. 7-2- Approving assignment of grant contained in Ord. 1587, as amended, to
74-  1974 operate a CATV system.
R-9
76-  10-  Fixing the price of natural gas provided by Columbia Gas of Ohio, Inc.
O-   5-   for two years. Repeals Ord. 1915.
258  1976
77-  3-
O-   11-  Authorizes contract with Ohio Edison Co. for electric service.
290  1977
78-  10-  Fixing price of natural gas provided by Columbia Gas of Ohio, Inc. for
O-   17-  one year.
402  1978
80-  1-   Fixing the price of natural gas provided by Columbia Gas of Ohio, Inc.
O-   15-  for one year.
479  1980
80-  7-   Authorizes agreement with Tele-Media Co. of Addil to modify prior
O-   15-  agreement for CATV.
513  1980
80-  10-  Authorizes agreement with Tele-Media Co. of Addil to modify prior
O-   7-   agreement for CATV.
517  1980
81-  1-   Fixing price of natural gas provided by Columbia Gas of Ohio, Inc. for
O-   20-  three years.
543  1981
81-  3-   Authorizes agreement with AMP-Ohio and contract with Ohio Edison Co.
O-   17-  for electric service.
556  1981
83-  12-  Fixing price of natural gas provided by Columbia Gas of Ohio, Inc. for
O-   6-   five years.
698  1983
83-  12-
O-   6-   Authorizes agreement with AMP-Ohio for electric service.
704  1983
83-  1-   Authorizes agreement with Tele-Media Co. of Addil to modify prior
O-   17-  agreement for CATV.
710  1984
85-  6-4-
O-   1985 Authorizes agreement with AMP-Ohio for electric service.
829
Res. 9-1- Consents to assignment of CATV franchise from TCI Media of Addil, Inc.
87-  1987 to TCI Cablevision of Ohio, Inc.
R-91
92-  2-4-
O-   1992 Authorizes agreement with TCI Cablevision of Ohio, Inc.
1280
02-  11-  Determining the future cable television needs for the city and
O-   5-   authorizing the Manager to submit a request for proposal to AT&T
1974 2002 Broadband of Ohio, LLC for a non-exclusive franchise agreement.
03-  9-   Declaring the Council’s preliminary assessment not to renew the cable
O-   16-  television franchise between the city and Comcast.
2065 2003
04-  12-  Authorizing the City Manager to enter into a cable television franchise
O-   7-   renewal agreement with Comcast of Illinois/Ohio/Oregon, LLC.
2154 2004
 
TABLE B:  EASEMENTS
 
Ord. No. Date Description
-    9-4- To J. C. Thullen and assigns, right to erect and maintain electrical plant and
     1889 facilities in municipality.
-    1-9- To Central District and Printing Telegraph Co. right to erect and maintain
     1890 poles and lines, and the like, in municipality.
     5-   To Central District and Printing Telegraph Co. right to erect and maintain
-    19-  poles and lines, and the like, in municipality.
     1896
-    5-3- To C. Holloway and E. B. Byr, right to erect poles, and the like, for telephone
     1899 exchange system.
-    11-  To Ohio Knob Oil Co. right to lay pipe, and the like, for natural and
     1902 artificial gas service.
     11-  To Pennsylvania Co. and the Pittsburgh, Fort Wayne and Chicago Railway Co.
-    30-  right to lay track in municipality.
     1903
     5-   To G. Heard and assigns, right to lay pipe, and the like, for natural gas
-    15-  service.
     1905
     8-   To Youngstown and Southern Railway Co. right to cross certain streets with its
-    13-  track.
     1906
     8-   To Youngstown and Southern Railway Co. right to cross certain streets with its
-    20-  track.
     1906
360  3-2- To Columbiana Boiler Co. right to erect lines, and the like, on part of
     1920 Railroad Street.
361  4-6- To Pennsylvania-Ohio Electric Co. right to erect poles, and the like, for
     1920 electric service in municipality.
     7-   To Ohio Harmony Electric Co. right to erect poles, and the like, for electric
369  24-  service in municipality.
     1920
     8-   To Youngstown and Suburban Railway Co. right to construct branch line across
509  20-  Duquesne Street.
     1929
     9-
725  19-  Reservation of easement for city in alleys vacated by Ord. 725.
     1944
Res. 12-  Authorizes contract with Zellers and Ward for right-of-way across their land
-    5-   for utility purposes.
     1944
Res. 12-  To County Commissioners, right to enter upon city property along county line
-    16-  for road purposes.
     1947
839  9-4- To state, for highway purposes. 
     1951
     2-
996  19-  To Ohio Fuel Gas Co. right to lay pipe, and the like, for natural gas service.
     1957
     2-   To Ohio Fuel Gas Co. right to use certain lands for purposes of regulator
997  19-  station.
     1957
     11-
1034 5-   To Ohio Edison Co. for placing guy pole and wires.
     1957
     1-   Cancelling pipeline right-of-way over property owned by Hunt, formerly owned by
1051 21-  Buchwalter.
     1958
     1-   Authorizes quit-claim deed to Bowen releasing easement rights on land in Center
1052 21-  Township.
     1958
1076 8-5- Authorizes contract with Pennsylvania Railroad Co. to lay pipe under latter’s
     1958 right-of-way.
1084 9-2- Authorizes contract with Youngstown and Southern Railway Co. to lay water line
     1958 under the latter’s right-of-way.
1176 7-5- Authorizes easement agreement with Youngstown and Southern Railway Co. to
     1960 extend sewer system under latter’s tracks.
     10-  Authorizes easement for storm sewer over Lots 4, 5 and 6 of J. Rohrbaugh’s
1324 1-   Executor’s Second Addition.
     1963
1351 1-7- Authorizes agreement with Pennsylvania Railroad Co. to obtain right-of-way over
     1964 its property for sewer purposes.
     9-   Reservation of easement rights in two tracts of land sold pursuant to Ord.
1423 21-  1423.
     1965
87-  1-6- Authorizes execution of permanent easement over property formerly occupied by
O-   1987 Miller Furniture Co.
936
89-  5-
O-   16-  Vacates easement between Lots 20, 21, 26 and 27 in Columbiana Industrial Park.
1104 1989
89-  1-2- Authorizes easement release to extinguish city interests in vacated alley west
O-   1990 of West Street.
1151
94-  2-1- Authorizes purchase of an easement from P.E. Corey for installation of electric
O-   1994 substation and utility lines thereon.
1395
Res.
97-  3-4- Authorizes acquisition of easement from L.J. Lynn for extending water, sewer
R-   1997 and electric lines, and access to the same.
181
Res. 6-   Authorizes acquisition of all easements from the Edison Co. used to provide
98-  16-  electric service to residents of Lynn’s Mobile Manor, and sale of easement to
R-   1998 Ohio Edison Co.
203
Res. 6-
98-  30-  Repeals Res. 98-R-203.
R-   1998
205
Res. 6-
98-  30-  Authorizes acquisition of all easements from Ohio Edison Co. used to provide
R-   1998 electric service to residents of Lynn’s Mobile Manor.
206
Res. 10-
00-  3-   Authorizing Manager to execute a permanent easement.
R-   2000
248
Res. 12-
00-  5-   Ratifying the acquisition of easements and fee interests for highway purposes.
R-   2000
253
01-  1-
O-   16-  Authorizing Manager to execute a permanent easement.
1863 2001
Res. 5-
03-  20-  Authorizing Manager to acquire an easement from Beverly Richardson for State
R-   2003 Route 14/State Route 7 sewer and water line extension project.
293
Res. 7-
03-  25-  Intent to appropriate easement necessary to the construction of the State Route
R-   2003 14/State Route 7 sanitary sewer extension project.
298
03-  8-5-
O-   2003 Directing appropriation of easement from Gwen -Gary Nursery Inc to proceed.
2055
Res. 10-  Authorizing City Manager to acquire a certain easement from Gwen-Gary Nursery
03-  7-   Inc which is necessary to the State Route 17/State Route 7 sewer line extension
R-   2003 project.
305
Res.      Granting an easement to Ohio Edison Co. for lines for the distribution of
03-  3-2- electric current, including communication facilities, upon, over and across
R-   2004 certain real estate owned by the city.
309
Res. 10-
05-  18-  Authorizing the City Manager to acquire and easement from RTT, LLC.
R-   2005
336
Res.
06-  5-2- Authorizing the City Manager to acquire and easement from P. Earl Corey and
R-   2006 Jane Corey.
339
14-  9-2- Authorizing the termination of a certain utility line easement in consideration
O-   2014 of the grant of an alternative utility line(s) easement.
2778
 
TABLE C:  VACATING OF STREETS AND ALLEYS
 
Ord. No. Date Description
     10-
-    9-   Alley lying between Lots 14 and 15 in J. Koch’s Addition.
     1890
-    6-7- Alley lying between Middle Street and Lisbon Street and between Lots 1 and 54
     1893 in W. E. and A. Sturgeon’s Addition.
-    9-3- Alleyways between Bishop property and Flickinger property and Enterprise Works
     1907 and between Bishop property and Flickinger property.
350  9-3- Alley running east from Main Street between Lots 12 and 13 in J. and H. Koch’s
     1918 Addition.
351  -    Part of Middle Street.
     6-   Lots in vicinity of Quincy Avenue; parts of Tacoma Street and Railroad and Long
366  10-  Alleys.
     1920
     10-
374  15-  Part of Railroad Street.
     1920
     8-
434  18-  First alley east of S. Main Street between South Avenue and Woodland Avenue.
     1925
435  9-1- Certain drives in Columbiana Cemetery.
     1925
     5-
448  18-  Part of first alley north of Pittsburgh Street.
     1926
     9-   Unnamed alley from Southern Avenue to Woodland Avenue between Lots 20 and 21 in
511  17-  Oak Park Allotment in Idlewild Land Co.’s Addition.
     1929
532  5-3- Certain drives in Columbiana Cemetery.
     1932
     1-
537  17-  Alley between Lots 2 and 3 in C. Zeigler’s Addition.
     1933
     10-
579  15-  Part of Railroad Street.
     1935
632  3-7- Part of first alley west of West Street.
     1939
634  3-7- Part of E. Vine Alley.
     1939
644  9-5- Area between W. Park Avenue and Lisbon Street.
     1939
     9-
664  17-  Part of Railroad Street.
     1940
669  3-4- Maple Street.
     1941
724  9-5- Part of Prospect Street.
     1944
     9-   Alleys from west line of N. Main Street to east line of Vine Street extension,
725  19-  and from north line of W. Salem Street to south line of S. S. Weaver’s
     1944 property.
     12-
730  19-  Alley located in J. Rohrbaugh’s Executor’s Addition.
     1944
783  9-7- Parts of alleys in Original Addition to municipality.
     1948
     2-
790  15-  Alley in Strickler’s Addition.
     1949
834  6-5- Alley between Lots 47 and 33 in Deemer, Stouffer and Lamb’s Addition.
     1951
     10-
867  6-   Alley between Lots 53 and 54 in J. Todd’s Addition.
     1953
     11-
871  3-   Part of second alley south of Union Street intersecting West Street.
     1953
895  8-3- Alley in J. Rohrbaugh’s Executor’s Addition.
     1954
932  9-6- Alley between Lots 1 and 2 in Strickler’s Addition.
     1955
1022 8-6- Alley between Lots 20 and 21 in J. Rohrbaugh’s Addition.
     1957
1024 9-3- Part of alley between Lots 20 and 21 in W. E. and A. Sturgeon’s First Addition.
     1957
     9-
1136 15-  Part of first alley west of West Street.
     1959
1264 5-1- Alley in Deemer, Stouffer and Lamb’s Addition.
     1962
     7-
1314 16-  North end of Walnut Alley in J. Allen’s Addition.
     1963
     7-
1315 16-  Part of Highland Avenue.
     1963
     1-
1398 19-  Part of alley immediately north of and parallel to Quincy Avenue.
     1965
     10-
1488 4-   Alley in the Columbiana Realty, Inc. Sunset Park Addition.
     1966
     11-
1493 1-   Alley in J. Rohrbaugh’s Executor’s Addition.
     1966
     2-
1511 21-  Alley on north side of Lot 95 in Sunset Park Addition.
     1967
     11-
1568 7-   Part of Railroad Street.
     1967
     11-
1569 7-   Part of Middle Street.
     1967
     1-
1578 16-  Part of alley known as Middle Street.
     1968
     3-
1594 19-  Alley between N. Main and Vine Streets.
     1968
1694 7-1- Part of alley between Lots 20 and 21 in W.E. and A. Sturgeon’s Addition.
     1969
1695 7-1- Alley between Lots 129 and 172 in the Columbiana Land Company Allotment to the
     1969 municipality.
     10-
1703 7-   Alley between Lots 11 and 12 in R.S. Souder’s Third Addition.
     1969
1739 4-7- Alley between Lot 78 in Sunset Park Addition and Lot 91 in Heck’s Sunset Park
     1970 Addition.
     10-  Alley from West Street east to the southeast corner of Lot 34; alley from the
1840 5-   northeast corner of Lot 47 to Union Street.
     1971
73-  3-6- South 17 feet of West Railroad Street.
O-11 1973
73-  6-5- Alley between North Vine Street and Chestnut Alley.
O-33 1973
73-  8-7- Two alleys adjacent to property sold to NRM Corp.
O-39 1973
74-  7-2- Unnamed alley running east and west approximately 180 foot between N. Elm
O-   1974 Street and an unnamed alley running south from Herbster Street.
113
75-  8-5- Unnamed alley between S. Main Street and an unnamed alley running south from
O-   1975 Woodland Avenue.
187
75-  8-
O-   19-  Unnamed alley between N. Middle and N. Vine Streets.
188  1975
75-  8-5-
O-   1975 Unnamed alley south of Cherry Street.
189
75-  11-
O-   4-   Part of Orchard Alley.
198  1975
75-  1-1- First alley north of Prospect Street running west from Elm Street to the first
O-   1976 alley running north and south.
202
76-  6-1- Unnamed alley between S. Main Street and the first unnamed north/south alley to
O-   1976 the west between Lots 3 and 4 in Koch’s Addition.
236
76-  8-3-
O-   1976 Parts of Main and Friend Streets.
252
76-  8-3- Unnamed alley between N. Main Street and Walnut Alley and between Lots 9 and 10
O-   1976 of the Nichols and Allen Addition.
253
76-  8-3-
O-   1976 Parts of West Street.
254
76-  12-  Unnamed 18-foot wide alley between S. Main Street and Enterprise Alley which
O-   10-  runs 180 feet east and west between Lots 16 and 17 in John Koch’s Addition.
264  1976
76-  12-  Part of Wallula Street from the south side of Bell Avenue running in a
O-   10-  southerly direction 513.40 feet to Pittsburgh Street.
265  1976
77-  5-3- Unnamed 16-foot wide alley between Duquesne Street and the first east/west
O-   1977 alley to the north which runs 150 feet between property owned by Rohrer
298       Builders Supply and Charles Thomas Cope.
77-  6-7- Unnamed 16-foot wide alley between Duquesne Street and the first east/west
O-   1977 alley to the north which runs 150 foot between property owned by Lucian Tyson
304       and Olive I. Jones (Palmer).
77-       Unnamed 20-foot wide alley running 180 foot between S. Main Street and the
O-   6-7- first north/south alley to the west and between property owned on the north by
305  1977 Jack W. and Charlotte M. Logan and on the south by Laurence M. and Cynthia A.
          Roessler.
77-  8-2- Unnamed 16-foot wide alley between Duquesne Street and the first east/west
O-   1977 alley to the north which runs 150 feet between property owned by Melvin Bowen
317       and James L. and Miriam L. Munyon.
77-  10-
O-   4-   Parts of E. Railroad Street.
324  1977
79-  3-6- Part of an alley between E. Park Avenue and Prospect Street and running west 62
O-   1979 feet on the south and 60 foot on the north from the westerly boundary of the
437       Youngstown and Southern Rwy.
79-  3-   Various alleys south of Howard Street; east of S. Main Street; west of
O-   20-  Fairfield Avenue and Fairfield School Road.; and north of Metz Road.
439  1979
79-  5-   Part of a 20-foot alley running 180 foot from S. Elm Street to the first alley
O-   15-  to the east between Lots 44 and 45.
446  1979
79-  6-5- Part of a 20-foot unnamed alley east and west between Fairfield Avenue and S.
O-   1979 Main Street and lying between Woodland and Henderson Avenues.
449
79-  7-   Part of a 20-foot unnamed alley northwest of Howard Street and being the first
O-   17-  alley west of Fairfield Avenue.
452  1979
81-  12-  Unnamed 20-foot alley running along north lot lines of Lots 3 to 16 on north
O-   1-   side of Duquesne Street.
582  1981
82-  11-
O-   15-  Alley south of Quincy Avenue between Pershing Avenue and Wyoma Avenue.
628  1983
82-  11-  Part of a 20-foot unnamed alley between Howard Street and E. Southern Avenue,
O-   16-  and being the first alley east of S. Main Street.
642  1982
84-  8-   Part of a ten-foot alley running 168 feet between Albright Street and Albright
O-   21-  Alley.
756  1984
84-  8-
O-   21-  Part of a 20-foot unnamed alley running north and east from Prospect Street.
757  1984
85-  4-2-
O-   1985 Part of a 10-foot alley and Walnut Street.
822
85-  2-4-
O-   1986 Part of a 15-foot unnamed alley from Stanton Avenue to Byer’s Avenue.
864
86-  2-4-
O-   1986 Two alleys in vicinity of Byer’s Avenue, N. Main Street and Stanton Avenue.
872
86-  3-4-
O-   1986 20-foot unnamed alley running 180 feet from W. Park Avenue to an unnamed alley.
885
86-  11-  20-foot unnamed alley running 188.25 feet between Lots 20 and 21 of Deemer’s
O-   3-   Addition.
920  1986
87-  9-1- 20-foot unnamed alley running 180 feet from W. Salem Street between Lots 5 and
O-   1987 6 of Deemer’s Addition.
982
88-  1-   Four unnamed alleys running from Lakeview Drive, E. Park Avenue and Spruce
O-   19-  Street.
1010 1988
88-  10-
O-   4-   Part of Wyoma Street.
1052 1988
88-  10-
O-   18-  Long Alley.
1055 1988
88-  12-
O-   6-   Part of Enterprise Alley.
1065 1988
88-  12-  20-foot unnamed alley running 180 feet east from S. Main Street to Lots 9 and
O-   6-   10 of John Koch’s Addition.
1066 1988
90-  3-6- 20-foot unnamed alley running 179.08 feet east from S. Elm Street, in John
O-   1990 Fitzpatrick’s Addition.
1161
90-  9-4- 20-foot wide unnamed alley approximately 187 feet 4-1/2 in. long, lying between
O-   1990 Lots 18 and 19 of Deemer’s Addition.
1183
92-  4-   Lincoln Way, running 658.62 feet east from the east side of Maple Drive to its
O-   21-  terminus.
1298 1992
92-  9-   20-foot unnamed alley running 190 feet between Lot 18 and Lot 30 in J.
O-   15-  Rohrbaugh’s Executor’s Addition.
1313 1992
93-  4-
O-   20-  20-foot unnamed alley running 90.8 feet at the north line of Walnut Street.
1351 1993
93-  7-
O-   20-  Walnut Street, between N. Main Street and Firestone Avenue.
1352 1993
93-  8-   20-foot unnamed alley running 190.8 feet between Lots 31 and 32 in the Mahlon
O-   17-  Nichols Addition, at the east line of N. Elm Street.
1377 1993
93-  10-  20-foot unnamed alley running 941.80 feet between and parallel to W. Woodland
O-   19-  and W. Henderson Aves.
1378 1993
95-  2-7-
O-   1995 Part of Pershing Street, between Quincy Avenue and Conrail property.
1466
96-  2-
O-   20-  20-foot unnamed alley between N. Middle and W. Main Streets.
1531 1996
96-  12-
O-   17-  Byers Avenue between N. Main Street and Manor Drive.
1573 1996
97-  3-
O-   18-  W. South Alley between S. Vine Street and S. Chestnut Alley.
1597 1997
98-  1-5- Portion of Prospect Street, 8.5 foot wide by 155.75 feet long between N. Elm
O-   1999 Street and an unnamed alley.
1719
99-  8-
O-   17-  20-foot by 175-foot unnamed alley south of Edgewood Ct.
1753 1999
99-  10-
O-   5-   40-foot by 180-foot street known as Maple Street.
1762 1999
00-  4-
O-   18-  Vacating a 20 foot wide unnamed alley between Fifth Street and Sixth Street.
1811 2000
00-  5-   Vacating a 20 foot wide unnamed alley westbound form South Main Street to
O-   16-  Chestnut Alley, located south of Goldie’s Tavern and north of Columbiana Buick-
1813 2000 Olds- Cadillac parking lot.
00-  7-   Vacating Byers Avenue being 50 feet wide and running between North Main Street
O-   18-  and lands of Joyce Ann McKee family trust.
1820 2000
01-  7-   Vacating a portion of Railroad Street over which the railroad right-of-way
O-   17-  passes.
1902 2001
01-  9-4- Vacating a 20-foot by 180-foot unnamed alley between North Main Street and
O-   2001 Chestnut Alley.
1911
04-  5-   Vacating approximately 1,500 feet of Creek Road North of State Route 14 to
O-   18-  Homestead Drive.
2130 2004
04-  9-7-
O-   2004 Vacating Blueberry and Tacoma Street.
2152
06-  10-
O-   17-  Vacating approximately 1,340 feet of Creek Road.
2336 2006
07-  12-
O-   18-  Vacating an unnamed six-foot alley/walkway.
2422 2007
10-  6-1- Vacating an unnamed 20-foot alley beginning at the southeast corner of lot # 9
O-   2010 of Deemers Addition.
2587
11-  4-5-
O-   2011 Vacating a portion of Enterprise Alley.
2635
18-  3-6-
O-   2018 Vacating a ten-foot unnamed alley and one-foot strip.
2948
18-  10-
O-   2-   Vacating 331.04 feet of West Railroad Street.
2981 2018
         
 
TABLE D:  DEDICATION AND PLAT APPROVAL
 
Ord. No. Date Description
-     7-5- Plat of J. Rohrbaugh’s Executor’s Second Addition to municipality.
      1888
      6-
-     12-  Acceptance of Pearl Street extension.
      1905
Res.  10-
-     3-   Plat of W. M. Vogleson’s Addition.
      1917
403   4-4- Plat of C. Stahl Addition.
      1923
      2-
412   19-  Dedication of portion of Public Square as park.
      1924
      3-
446   16-  Plan of Fitzpatrick Brother’s Addition.
      1926
Res.  12-
-     21-  Plat of L. and C. Sponseller.
      1926
Res.  10-
-     18-  Plat of C. Stahl.
      1927
      5-
670   20-  Plat of Columbiana Realty, Inc. Sunset Park Addition.
      1941
      7-
674   15-  Plat of Lake Park Allotment.
      1941
      9-   Dedication to public use of strip of land on south side of Lot 27 of
726   19-  Original Addition to city.
      1944
      3-
763   18-  Acceptance of H. Rapp’s Addition.
      1947
838   8-7- Dedication of land of Board of Education of Columbiana Exempted School for
      1951 alley purposes.
-     1-5- Plat of Heck and Wenderoth’s Sunset Park Second Addition.
      1954
      4-
916   21-  Plat of O. Souder Sr.’s Lakeview Addition.
      1955
      4-
Res.- 21-  Clarifying acceptance of O. Souder Sr.’s Lakeview Addition.
      1955
      10-
1030  1-   Acceptance of Gregg Plat No. 1.
      1957
      10-
1031  15-  Dedication of Sixth Street Extension.
      1957
      11-  Plat of J. Candel First Addition and confirming dedication of street shown
1036  5-   thereon.
      1957
      10-
1092  21-  Plat of O. Souder Sr.’s West Manor Allotment.
      1958
1126  8-4- Amended plat of Wallace’s Addition.
      1959
      10-
1142  6-   Plat of B. Zeller’s First Addition.
      1959
1167  5-3- Dedication of Edgewood Drive for street purposes.
      1960
1170  6-7- Plat of Heather Downs Subdivision No. 3.
      1960
1175  7-5- Plat of R. L. Bott’s First Addition.
      1960
      12-
1202  20-  Plat of Tieman’s Addition.
      1960
      6-   Acceptance of West Manor Development Plat No. 2 and confirming dedication of
1222  20-  utility right-of-way thereon.
      1961
      6-
1223  20-  Dedication of parts of N. Elm Street and Parkview Drive.
      1961
Res.  7-   Part of Stanton Drive and all of Manor Circle and Manor Drive for street
1273  17-  maintenance purposes.
      1962
1308  7-2- Plat of B. Zeller’s Second Addition.
      1963
Res.  7-2- Acceptance of remainder of Stanton Drive in West Manor Development Plat for
1309  1963 street maintenance purposes.
Res.  8-
1317  20-  Part of N. West Street for street maintenance purposes.
      1963
Res.  9-
1379  15-  Part of N. West Street for street maintenance purposes.
      1964
1399  2-2- Amended plat of Tieman’s Addition and R.S. Souder’s First Addition.
      1965
      5-
1408  18-  Plat of D. and N. L. Young’s First Addition.
      1965
      9-
1484  20-  Plat of R.S. Souder’s Second Addition.
      1966
Res.  9-   Acceptance of Edgewood Drive in R.S. Souder’s First Addition for street
1485  20-  maintenance purposes.
      1966
1529  5-2- Amended plat of Lot 10 in R.S. Souder’s Second Addition and of Lots 77, 78
      1967 and 79 in Columbiana Realty Co. Addition.
      12-
1853  7-   Kingwood Manor First Addition, Plat No. 1.
      1971
1877  3-7- Kingwood Manor Second Addition, Plat No. 2.
      1972
73-O- 8-7- Kingwood Manor Third Addition, Lots 14, 15, 31 and 32.
52    1973
74-O- 6-
114   18-  Kingwood Manor Fourth Addition, part of northwest quarter, Sec. 4.
      1974
75-O- 8-   Kingwood Manor Fifth Addition, Plat No. 1, part of northwest quarter, Sec.
191   19-  4.
      1975
77-O- 4-   Kingwood Manor Sixth Addition, Lots 33, 34, 35, 48, 49 and 50 on Plat No.
293   19-  1A.
      1977
77-O- 4-
294   19-  Kingwood Manor Sixth Addition, Lots 36 and 47 on Plat No. 1B.
      1977
77-O- 7-5- Kingwood Manor Sixth Addition, Lots 37, 38, 39, 44, 45 and 46 on Plat No.
319   1977 1C.
79-O- 5-
445   15-  Kingwood Manor Sixth Addition, Lots 40 and 43 on Plat No. 1D.
      1979
79-O- 11-  Kingwood Manor Sixth Addition, Lots 40 and 43 on Plat No. 1D and Lots 41 and
460   6-   42 on Plat No. 1E.
      1979
81-O- 12-
580   1-   Kingwood Manor unplatted Seventh Addition, Lots 1 and 2.
      1981
84-O- 12-
788   4-   Part of Meadow Lane.
      1984
86-O- 11-
921   18-  Meadows Plat No. 2.
      1986
94-O- 8-
1436  16-  Part of Parkview Drive for street purposes.
      1994
Res.  5-   Replat of Lots 4 and 5 fronting on W. Park Avenue, thereby creating Lot 4
97-R- 20-  containing 0.44 acres having 109.75 feet of frontage on W. Park Avenue
184   1997
97-O- 10-  Part of Kauffman Avenue, as shown on Gusin’s Plat No. 1, for street
1633  21-  purposes.
      1997
09-O- 9-   Accepting streets, curbs and storm drains on Timberline Drive located in
2545  15-  Woodland Run Condominium Development.
      2009
 
TABLE E:  ACQUISITION AND DISPOSAL OF REAL PROPERTY
 
Ord. No. Date Description
     10-  Purchase of Lots 24 and 25 in Columbiana Land Co.’s Addition for waterworks
440  6-   purposes.
     1925
     9-
578  20-  Purchase of 10 acres from I. and H. Crum.
     1935
     9-   Acceptance of deed for strip of land on south side of Lot 27 of Original
726  19-  Addition to municipality.
     1944
     4-
734  17-  Part of Prospect Street.
     1945
     9-   Purchase of tract of land extending from present terminus of E. Friend Street
757  17-  to west line of Columbiana Cemetery.
     1946
     11-
760  19-  Sale of Lots 24 and 25 in Columbiana Land Co. Allotment.
     1946
Res. 2-3- Donation of lot in Municipal Cemetery to I. Culp.
-    1948
Res. 4-   Acceptance of deed from Columbiana Realty Co. Inc. for land in N. Vine
-    20-  Street.
     1948
Res. 9-7- Acceptance of deed from heirs of L.H. Sponseller for land comprising parts of
-    1948 Prospect and Court Streets.
     7-   Acceptance of deeds from Powers and Cole for land comprising part of N. Elm
815  18-  Street.
     1950
     7-   Acceptance of deed from Basinger for land comprising part of street or alley
836  17-  in Columbiana Realty Co.’s Addition.
     1951
     11-
872  17-  Sale of real estate west of S. West Street to National Rubber Machinery Co.
     1953
     4-
886  20-  Acceptance of deed from Newell for two tracts for street purposes.
     1954
     9-
1185 20-  Appropriation of one foot reserve in the Bell Park Addition.
     1960
     3-   Purchase of land from Bott for purposes of constructing substation and
1216 21-  reclosers.
     1961
     3-
1217 21-  Purchase of land from Keck.
     1961
     3-
1218 21-  Purchase of land from Butler.
     1961
     1-
1353 21-  Purchase of 3.44 acres from Anderson.
     1964
     7-
1373 21-  Purchase of Sublot 16 in W. E. and A. Sturgeon’s First Addition.
     1964
     9-   Sale of two tracts of land in northwest quarter of Sec. 9 in Fairfield
1423 21-  Township.
     1965
     11-
1567 7-   Purchase of Lot 5 in W.E. and A. Sturgeon’s First Addition from Walker.
     1967
1806 5-4- Purchase of Lot 6 and a part of Lot 7 in W. E. and A. Sturgeon’s Addition.
     1971
     7-   Appropriates electric facilities belonging to the Ohio Edison Co. on Southern
1918 18-  Avenue and Camelot Drive.
     1972
73-  2-   Authorizes sale of parts of sublots 4, 5 and 6 in Josiah Rohrbaugh’s
O-7  20-  Executor’s Second Addition to NRM Corp.
     1973
73-  6-5- Authorizes sale of 0.184 acre to Dowd.
O-32 1973
75-  3-   Authorizes purchase of approximately 19 acres on Metz Road from Elsie M.
O-   18-  Edgerton.
154  1975
76-  5-4-
O-   1976 Authorizes sale of 2.1 acres of ground on Old Route 14.
233
77-  9-
O-   20-  Purchase of a building and 4.77 acres at 42226 S.R. 344.
327  1977
77-  4-4- Authorizes termination of water well lease on the Jacob Roher farm in
O-   1978 exchange for conveyance by Roher of 4.82 acres surrounding the well.
347
78-  2-7-
O-   1978 Authorizes sale of property at 101 W. Park Avenue.
349
78-  5-2- Sale of the west half of Lot 1 in Sturgeon’s First Addition to Bruce A. and
O-   1978 Carolyn Feicht.
372
78-  11-
O-   7-   Sale of property on State Route 344.
410  1978
79-  2-6-
O-   1979 Sale of property on State Route 344.
427
79-  3-
O-   20-  Authorizes sale of building at 22 S. Vine Street.
440  1979
79-  6-
O-   19-  Sale of 22 S. Vine Street to James R. Holloway.
451  1979
79-  9-   Purchase of approximately 15 acres adjacent to Firestone Park for municipal
O-   29-  purposes.
458  1979
81-  7-7-
O-   1981 Authorizes sale of property at west end of Brenda Lane.
574
83-  4-5-
O-   1983 Sale of Lot 5 on Brenda Lane to R. E. Gibson.
664
84-  12-
O-   18-  Purchase of 56.24 acres in Fairfield Township from the Sheets Family.
795  1984
86-  10-
O-   7-   Sale of portions of Columbiana Industrial Park to Francis Figley.
918  1986
86-  10-
O-   21-  Sale of portions of Columbiana Industrial Park to Francis Figley.
919  1986
86-  12-
O-   2-   Sale of portions of Columbiana Industrial Park to Francis Figley.
926  1986
86-  12-
O-   16-  Sale of portions of Columbiana Industrial Park to Ronald Bower.
928  1986
88-  12-  Purchase of property from Donald F. and Thelma Y. Warren for a municipal
O-   6-   parking lot.
1067 1988
Res. 1-3-
89-  1989 Sale of Lot 6 of Substation Plat No. 1 to B. and K. Washburn.
R-98
89-  2-7-
O-   1989 Sale of Lot 7 on Nulf Drive to R. and P. Clayton. 
1088
89-  3-7-
O-   1989 Sale of Lot 28 on Nulf Drive to S. Steven Floyd.
1092
89-  5-   Sale of Lots 29 and 30 (replatted as Lot 29-A), in Columbiana Industrial
O-   16-  Park, to E. and B. Moulin.
1105 1989
89-  5-   Sale of Lots 20, 21, 26 and 27 (replatted as Lot 20-A), in Columbiana
O-   16-  Industrial Park, to D. Davis.
1106 1989
89-  5-
O-   16-  Sale of Lot 18 in Columbiana Industrial Park to F.A.P. Co. Industries, Inc.
1107 1989
Res. 8-
89-  15-  Sale of Lots 3, 6 and 7 of Substation Plat No. 1 to Copperfield Development
R-   1989 Co.
104
89-  10-  Quit claim deed to John F. Kummer to extinguish city interests in Lot 26 and
O-   3-   part of Lot 25 of Original Addition.
1123 1989
89-  10-
O-   17-  Sale of Lot 40 in Columbiana Industrial Park to H. and M. Slaven.
1125 1989
Res. 6-
90-  19-  Sale of Lot 7 of Substation Plat No. 1 to C.L. Rinko.  Repeals Res. 89-R-104
R-   1990 to the extent of conflict herewith.
114
Res. 10-
90-  2-   Sale of Lot 3 of Substation Plat No. 1 to M. Nagel or M. Mancuso.  Repeals
R-   1990 Res. 89-R-104 to the extent of conflict herewith.
115
90-  12-  Sale of Lot 35 in Columbiana Industrial Park to W.B. Tarbet, dba Jet-O-Chem,
O-   4-   Inc.
1193 1990
91-  2-5-
O-   1991 Sale of Lot 19 on Nulf Drive in Columbiana Industrial Park to S.S. Floyd.
1216
91-  2-
O-   19-  Sale of Lot 9 in Columbiana Industrial Park to F.A.P. Co. Industries, Inc.
1217 1991
91-  2-
O-   19-  Sale of Lot 17 in Columbiana Industrial Park to F.A.P. Co. Industries, Inc.
1218 1991
91-  2-
O-   19-  Sale of Lot 10 in Columbiana Industrial Park to F.A.P. Co. Industries, Inc.
1219 1991
91-  5-7-
O-   1991 Sale of Lot 38 in Columbiana Industrial Park to M. Falb.
1230
91-  5-7-
O-   1991 Sale of Lot 32A in Columbiana Industrial Park to M. Falb.
1231
Res. 6-
91-  24-  Purchase of 13.834 acres adjacent to Firestone Park from J. and W. Witmer.
R-   1991
123
91-  10-
O-   15-  Sale of Lot 39 in Columbiana Industrial Park to M. Falb.
1252 1991
91-  10-
O-   15-  Sale of Lot 34 in Columbiana Industrial Park to D. McNeal.
1253 1991
Res. 11-
91-  19-  Purchase of Lots 4 and 5 in Clyde A. Richardson, Sr., First Addition.
R-   1991
128
92-  3-
O-   17-  Sale of Lot 36 in Columbiana Industrial Park to R.M. Graft.
1283 1992
92-  4-7-
O-   1992 Sale of Lot 37 in Columbiana Industrial Park to L.D. George.
1296
92-  9-1-
O-   1992 Purchase of 228 E. Park Avenue.
1312
92-  11-
O-   17-  Sale of Lot 24 in Columbiana Industrial Park to R.C. Hockenberry.
1316 1992
Res. 1-
93-  19-  Option agreement with R., D., O., and N. Witmer for test drilling for water
R-   1993 on 7.68-acre tract.
134
93-  6-1-
O-   1993 Sale of Lot 6 in Columbiana Industrial Park to N.L. Plecas.
1359
93-  8-
O-   17-  Sale of Lot 31 in Columbiana Industrial Park to M.E. Falb.
1375 1993
93-  8-
O-   17-  Sale of Lots 22 and 25 in Columbiana Industrial Park to P. and K. Alexoff.
1376 1993
Res.
93-  9-7- Amends Res. 93-R-134.
R-   1993
139
94-  2-1-
O-   1994 Purchase of 3.00 aces from P.E. Corey for utility purposes.
1395
94-  6-
O-   21-  Sale of Lot 15 in Columbiana Industrial Park to J.Rance and P. Garrett.
1430 1994
94-  10-
O-   4-   Sale of Lot 24 in Columbiana Industrial Park to W.B. Tarbet.
1443 1994
94-  11-
O-   15-  Sale of Lot 14 in Columbiana Industrial Park to W.J. Niemi.
1447 1994
95-  2-7-
O-   1995 Sale of Lot 13 in Columbiana Industrial Park to J.A. Krizan.
1468
95-  2-7-
O-   1995 Sale of Lot 5 in Columbiana Industrial Park to N.L. Plecas.
1469
95-  1-4-
O-   1995 Sale of Lot 41 in Columbiana Industrial Park to Stoy Construction, Inc.
1488
Res. 3-
95-  21-  Purchase of 3.96-acre tract from J.S. Mong, Trustee, for utility line
R-   1995 purposes.
159
Res.
95-  4-4- Purchase of an approximately 1.6-acre tract from R.J. and N.J. Griggy for
R-   1995 utility purposes.
160
Res. 4-
95-  18-  Purchase of 0.163-acre tract from V.J. and C.L. Briceland for utility line
R-   1995 purposes.
161
95-  9-
O-   19-  Sale of Lot 23 in Columbiana Industrial Park to Foster Pattern Works, Inc.
1508 1995
Res.
96-  5-7- Accepting gift of 1.199 acres from K.A. Mullane, Trustee, for recreational
R-   1996 use.
168
Res. 4-
96-  27-  Purchase of real estate within a 1.5 mi. radius of present city limits for
R-   1996 utility purposes.
169
Res.
96-  5-7- Purchase of real estate within 1.5-mile radius of present city limits for
R-   1996 utility purposes.
171
96-  7-2-
O-   1996 Sale of Lot 12 in Columbiana Industrial Park to Rance Industries, Inc.
1555
Res. 9-
96-  17-  Purchase of 1.999 acres in consideration of construction of a portion of
R-   1996 abutting roadway.
176
96-  1-7- Sale of Lots 11 and 16 in Columbiana Industrial Park to F.A. Phillips and
O-   1997 E.S. Susany.
1580
Res. 5-
97-  20-  Purchase of easterly 10 feet of former Lot 5 fronting on W. Park Avenue from
R-   1997 A.R. Hayes, Jr. and A.L. Hayes for expanding adjacent unnamed alley.
184
Res.
97-  9-2- Purchase of 32.44 acres from K.A. Mullane, Trustee.
R-   1997
187
Res. 12-
97-  2-   Purchase of real estate pursuant to authority set forth in Res. 96-R-170.
R-   1997
193
Res.
98-  2-3- Purchase of real estate pursuant to authority set forth in Res. 96-R-170.
R-   1998
201
98-  6-   Transfer to C & S Land Co. real estate adjacent to real estate owned by C & S
O-   30-  Land Co. in consideration of company’s agreement to dismantle and discard
1687 1998 obsolete city water tower.
Res. 7-
98-  21-  Purchase of real estate in Elm Grove Allotment from A.M. Grubbs for utility
R-   1998 purposes.
207
99-  7-
O-   20-  Sale of Lot 41 in Columbiana Industrial Park to R. Holmes, ME Supply Co. Inc.
1749 1999
Res.
99-  9-7- Purchase of real estate in Elm Grove Allotment from W.J. and A.M. Paes for
R-   1999 utility purposes.
228
Res.
99-  9-7- Purchase of Lot 318 of Elm Grove Allotment from S. Morris for utility
R-   1999 purposes.
299
Res. 3-
00-  21-  Ratifying the expenditure of funds by the Manager for the purchase of Lot #
R-   2000 355 in the Elm Grove allotment.
237
Res.
00-  6-6- Authorizing the purchase of real estate from Thomas E. and Marcia Baumgardner
R-   2000 for utility purposes.
239
Res.
00-  6-6- Authorizing the purchase of real estate from Alfredo Digregorio for utility
R-   2000 purchases.
240
Res. 6-   Authorizing the Manager to enter into an option agreement for the purpose of
00-  20-  test drilling for a new water well for the city and purchasing the subject
R-   2000 real estate.
241
Res. 7-
00-  18-  Authorizing the purchase of real estate from Daniel L. and Tammy L. Heck.
R-   2000
242
Res. 8-
00-  15-  Authorizing the trade of lots between the city and Lee J. Davis.
R-   2000
243
Res. 6-   Authorizing the Manager to purchase through an authorized agent real estate
05-  21-  within a radius of 1.5 miles from the present city limits deemed necessary to
R-   2005 the capital improvement of city utility services.
328
05-  7-   Authorizing the Manager to enter into an agreement to purchase certain real
O-   19-  estate deemed necessary and appropriate for the future location of municipal
2220 2005 safety forces facilities or other necessary municipal facilities.
Res. 11-  Authorizing the Manager to enter into an agreement to purchase certain real
05-  1-   estate deemed necessary and appropriate for the future office or parking
R-   2005 facilities.
338
06-  12-  Declaring the improvement of certain real property located in the city to be
O-   19-  a public purpose.
2352 2006
07-  12-  Declaring the improvement of certain real property located in the city to be
O-   27-  a public purpose.
2448 2007
10-  3-
R-   16-  Purchase of real estate - the Edgerton Property.
401  2010
12-  2-7- Authorizing the City Manager to enter into an agreement to purchase certain
R-   2012 real estate deemed necessary and appropriate for the placement of a
429       transformer and wire in conjunction for the Main Street Enhancement Project.
16-  4-   Authorizing the City Manager to enter into an agreement to purchase certain
R-   19-  real estate deemed necessary and appropriate for future Fire Department
490  2016 operations for the municipality.
         
 
TABLE F:  LEASE OF REAL PROPERTY
 
Ord. No. Date Description
Res. -    6-1-1926   Land from W. Nichols for dump purposes.
Res. -    5-17-1927  Land from W. Nichols for dump purposes.
Res. -    6-15-1937  Property for dump purposes.
Res. -    6-21-1938  Property for dump purposes.
Res. -    8-1-1939   Property for dump purposes.
997       2-19-1957  Land to Ohio Fuel Gas Co. for use as regulator station.
Res. 998  2-19-1957  Lease agreement with Edgerton for water well purposes.
1067      6-3-1958   Lease agreement with Weingart for use of dump site.
1078      8-25-1958  Lease agreement with Trotter for dump site.
1184      9-20-1960  Lease agreement with Golden for building immediately east
                     of Municipal Building.
75-O-196  10-21-1975 Authorizes oil and gas lease with Franklin Furniture Co.
                     Authorizes termination of water well lease on the Jacob
77-O-347  4-4-1978   Roher farm in exchange for conveyance by Roher of 4.82
                     acres surrounding the well.
79-O-456  9-4-1979   Month to month lease agreement with Dundon and Assoc. of
                     room in the Municipal Building.
                     Agreement with Historical Society of Columbiana and
82-O-622  6-15-1982  Fairfield Township regarding use of log house and annex
                     thereto.
84-O-753  6-5-1984   Amends lease agreement with Elsie M. Edgerton.
92-O-1312 9-1-1992   Approves lease arrangements in purchase agreement for 228
                     E. Park Avenue.
98-O-1687 6-30-1998  Authorizes Agreement and Indenture of Lease with C. & S.
                     Land Co.
                    
 
TABLE G:  STREET GRADE LEVELS AND CHANGE OF STREET NAME
 
Ord. No. Date Description
-    10-5-1887  Grade on Fairfield Avenue.
-    8-5-1891   Grade on Union Street.
-    6-9-1897   Grade of Duquesne Street.
-    5-14-1900  Grade on Main Street.
-    8-10-1903  Changing grade on S. Main Street.
-    9-21-1903  Changing grade on Cross Street.
-    10-9-1905  Grades on north and south sides of Duquesne Street.
-    5-5-1908   Grade for sidewalks on south side of E. Park Avenue and north
                side of W. Park Avenue.
-    8-11-1908  Amends Ord. passed 5-5-08.
-    4-19-1910  Amends Ord. passed 5-14-1900.
357  8-5-1919   Grade of part of Friend Street.
501  1-23-1929  Grade of part of Herbster Street.
512  9-17-1929  Sidewalk grade on part of Prospect and West Streets.
526  8-18-1931  Sidewalk grade on part of West Street.  Repeals part of Ord.
                512.
540  6-20-1933  Grade on part of E. Friend Street.
541  7-18-1933  Grade on part of Pittsburgh Street.
559  3-20-1934  Grade on part of Lisbon Street.
576  8-20-1935  Grade on part of Prospect Street.  Repeals part of Ord. 512.
581  12-3-1935  Grade of parts of Vine, Friend and Middle Streets.
623  7-5-1938   Part of N. Main Street.
671  5-20-1941  Strawberry Street to Allen Avenue.
804  12-20-1949 Grade for part of first alley east of Elm Street.
805  12-20-1949 Grade for part of N. Vine Street.
806  12-20-1949 Grade for part of Allen Avenue.
807  12-20-1949 Grade of curb of first alley north of W. Park Avenue.
866  10-6-1953  Grade for parts of N. West Street and Park Place.
889  5-18-1954  Grade for part of N. Middle Street.
890  8-17-1954  Grade for part of Seventh Street.
930  9-6-1955   Grade for part of Howard Street.
931  9-6-1955   Grade for part of Lakeview Drive.
966  7-17-1956  Grade for part of Quincy Avenue.
967  7-17-1956  Grade for part of N. Elm Street.
1011 5-16-1957  Grade for alley beginning at south line of W. Friend Street
                between S. Vine and S. Main Streets.
1046 12-17-1957 Grade for alley immediately south of New Plaza Building.
1047 12-31-1957 Grade for Sixth Street.
1212 2-7-1961   Naming of N. Elm Street, Parkview Drive and Park Place.
1224 6-20-1961  Grade for Bell Avenue.
1593 3-19-1968  McDonald Avenue to Blueberry Drive.
 
TABLE H:  ANNEXATION AND DETACHMENT OF TERRITORY
 
Ord. No. Date Description
-     2-24- Annexation of certain territory.
      1913
342   3-6-  Acceptance of application of M. Vaughn et al. for annexation of
      1917  certain territory.
365   6-1-  Acceptance of application for annexation of part of northwest
      1920  quarter, Sec. 10, Twp. 12, Rg. 2.
367   5-4-  Annexation of certain territory.
      1920
637   5-16- Authorizes annexation of part of northeast and northwest quarters
      1939  of Sec. 4, Twp. 12, Rg. 2, in Fairfield Township.
648   9-19- Authorizes annexation of part of northeast and northwest quarters
      1939  of Sec. 4, Twp. 12, Rg. 2, in Fairfield Township.
1123  6-16- Acceptance of application of Hunt et al. for annexation of 441.25
      1959  acres located in Fairfield Township.
1157  2-2-  Acceptance of application of Souder et al. for annexation of 26.366
      1960  acres in Fairfield Township.
      10-   Acceptance of application of Yereb for annexation of part of Sec. 9
1563  17-   of Fairfield Township.
      1967
1632  8-6-  Acceptance of petition for annexation of approximately 340 acres in
      1968  Fairfield Township.
1836  10-5- Acceptance of petition for annexation of approximately 34.85 acres
      1971  in Fairfield Township.
      10-   Acceptance of petition for annexation of approximately 122.82 acres
1841  19-   in Fairfield Township.
      1971
1846  11-2- Acceptance of petition for annexation of approximately 12.08 acres
      1971  in northwest quarter, Sec. 4, in Fairfield Township.
74-O- 11-   Acceptance of petition for annexation of 13.409 acres in southeast
132   19-   quarter, Sec. 33, in Beaver Township in Mahoning County.
      1974
75-O- 10-   Acceptance of petition for annexation of approximately 6.756 acres
193   21-   in Fairfield Township.
      1975
78-O- 7-18- Authorizes annexation of part of the west half of Sec. 4, Twp. 12,
385   1978  Rg. 2 in Fairfield Township.
80-O- 11-   Acceptance of petition for annexation of 24.997 acres in Beaver
520   18-   Township.
      1980
80-O- 11-   Acceptance of petition for annexation of 0.816 acre in Fairfield
521   18-   Township.
      1980
82-O- 11-1- Annexation of two tracts in Secs. 4 and 10 of Fairfield Township.
640   1982
83-O- 11-1- Acceptance of petition for annexation of 51.73 acres in Sec. 10 of
690   1983  Fairfield Township.
84-O- 8-21- Annexation of 2.76 acres in Sec. 4 of Fairfield Township.
759   1984
85-O- 5-21- Annexation of 57.57 acres in Sec. 2 of Fairfield Township.
826   1985
86-O- 2-18- Acceptance of petition of Gwin Contracting Co. for annexation of
877   1986  120.1218 acres in Fairfield Township.
87-O- 9-14- Acceptance of petition for annexation of 120.8611 acres in Beaver
983   1987  Township.
87-O- 9-14- Acceptance of petition for annexation of 37.382 acres in Fairfield
984   1987  Township.
88-O- 9-20- Acceptance of petition for annexation of 82.695 acres in Fairfield
1050  1988  Township.
88-O- 10-4- Amends Ord. 88-O-1050.
1054  1988
89-O- 6-20- Acceptance of petition for annexation of Lot 1 in Charles F. Dill
1108  1989  Plat No. 1 in Beaver Township.
90-O- 1-16- Acceptance of petition for annexation of approximately 10.23 acres
1156  1990  in Beaver Township.
90-O- 6-19- Acceptance of petition for annexation of 3.37 acres in Fairfield
1171  1990  Township.
90-O- 10-   Acceptance of petition for annexation of 1.815 acres in Fairfield
1185  16-   Township.
      1990
90-O- 11-6- Acceptance of petition for annexation of 5.25 acres in Fairfield
1186  1990  Township.
91-O- 9-17- Acceptance of petition for annexation of 40.16 acres in Fairfield
1247  1991  Township.
92-O- 6-16- Acceptance of petition for annexation of 31.60 acres in Fairfield
1302  1992  Township.
93-O- 12-   Acceptance of petition for annexation of 16.504 acres in Beaver
1379  21-   Township.
      1993
95-O- 6-20- Acceptance of petition for annexation of 131.564 acres in Beaver
1492  1995  Township.
95-O- 7-18- Acceptance of petition for annexation of 1,158.34 acres in
1500  1995  Fairfield and Unity Townships.
97-O- 5-20- Acceptance of petition for annexation of 0.65 acres in Fairfield
1609  1997  Township.
Res.  8-18- Authorizes execution of annexation petition for purpose of annexing
98-R- 1998  certain real estate to the municipality.
208
98-O- 8-18- Acceptance of petition for annexation of 59.935 acres in Beaver
1688  1998  Township.
Res.  12-   Authorizes execution of annexation petition for purpose of annexing
99-R- 21-   certain real estate to the municipality.
235   1999
99-O- 12-
1770  21-   Annexation of 4.869 acres in Sec. 9 in Fairfield Township.
      1999
00-O- 3-21- Acceptance of certain territory containing 23.212 acres of land in
1801  2000  Fairfield Township.
00-O- 6-20- Accepting annexation of certain territory containing 39.517 acres
1818  2000  of land in Fairfield Township.
00-O- 9-6-  Accepting annexation of certain territory containing 2.419 acres of
1831  2000  land in Fairfield Township.
00-O- 12-   Amending Ord. 00-O-1831 § 5 to include annexed territory within R-
1858  19-   2 zone.
      2000
Res.  6-5-  Establishing a moratorium on acceptance of annexation of territory
01-R- 2001  form Beaver Township, Mahoning County, through May 8, 2002.
260
            Authorizing the Municipal Attorney to petition the Board of
01-O- 7-17- Commissions of Columbiana and Mahoning Counties to conform the
1903  2001  boundaries of Beaver Township to those boundaries of the City of
            Columbiana to the full extent of the territory within Beaver
            Township which has been annexed to the city to date.
01-O- 11-   Acceptance of annexation of certain territory containing 32.684
1917  20-   acres of land in Beaver Township and Mahoning County.
      2001
04-O- 7-6-  Acceptance of streets, curbs and storm drains in South Bayshore
2145  2004  Drive and Windjammer Drive located in Schooner Bay Plats # 1, #2
            and #3.
05-O- 6-7-  Acceptance of streets, curbs and storm drains in Cimarron Lane,
2199  2005  Hawkins Lane, Pueblo Lane, Apache Lane and Cherokee Lane located in
            Cimarron Plats #2, #4, #5, #6, #7A, #8 and #9.
05-O- 6-7-  Acceptance of streets, curbs and storm drains on Oak Drive, Terra
2200  2005  Verde Avenue and Parkview Drive located in Susany Plat # 1, Terra
            Verde Plats #2 and #3.
05-O- 10-4- Acceptance of streets, curbs and storm drains on a portion of
2231  2005  Cherokee Lane located in Cimarron Plat # 10.
05-O- 9-5-  Acceptance of streets, curbs and storm drains on Homestead Drive,
2327  2006  Royal Birkdale Drive and Aberdeen Court located in Firestone Farms
            Plats # 1, # 2 and #3.
06-O- 9-5-  Acceptance of streets, curbs and storm drains on Cherokee Lane
2328  2006  located in Cimarron Plat # 10.
11-O- 9-20- Accepting annexation of certain territory containing 17.360 acres
2655  2011  of land in Fairfield Township, and Columbiana County.
11-O- 11-1- Accepting annexation of certain territory containing 56.950 acres
2663  2011  of land in Beaver Township, and Mahoning County.
13-O- 10-1- Accepting annexation of certain territory containing 86.734 acres
2737  2013  of land in Fairfield Township, Columbiana County.
 
TABLE I:  ZONING MAP CHANGES
EDITOR’S NOTE: Ordinance 74-O-128, passed October 17, 1974, adopted a new
Zoning Code for the municipality.  Zoning Map changes antedating October 17,
1974, are therefore superfluous and are not included in this Table I.
 
Ord. No. Date Description
74-  12-  Recently annexed 13.409 acres in Beaver Township zoned C-4 Intensive and
O-   3-   Automobile-Oriented Commercial District.
137  1974
77-  1-3-
O-   1978 101 W. Park Avenue from R-2 Residential to C-3 Commercial District.
348
78-  11-
O-   21-  Recently annexed 4.77 acres zoned R-2 Medium Density Residential District.
413  1978
79-  3-6- Parcel 1 on Fairfield Avenue from R-2 Residential to I-3 Industrial District
O-   1979 and Parcel 2 on Pittsburgh Street, from R-2 Residential to I-2 Industrial
431       District.
80-  11-  30-32 W. Railroad Street, 242 S. Vine Street and 238-240 S. Vine Street, from
O-   18-  I-2 Industrial to C-2 Commercial District.
522  1980
83-  5-   Recently annexed 4.763 acres in Fairfield Township zoned R-2 Medium Density
O-   17-  Residential District; recently annexed 18.948 acres in Fairfield Township
665  1983 zoned R-3 High Density Residential District.
83-  12-  Part of southeast quarter of Sec. 3 in Fairfield Township, from R-1 Low
O-   20-  Density Residential to R-3 High Density Residential District.
706  1983
84-  2-   Property west of 16 foot vacated alley in Twp. 12, Rg. 2 of Fairfield
O-   21-  Township from R-2 Medium Density Residential to I-2 Light Industrial
719  1984 District.
84-  2-   Properties at southeast corner of S.R. 164 and 14, from R-3 High Density
O-   21-  Residential to C-4 Intensive and Automobile-Oriented Commercial District.
720  1984
84-  2-   Property of Das Dutch Haus Restaurant at 14895 South Avenue Extension, from
O-   21-  R-3 High Density Residential to C-4 Intensive and Automobile-Oriented
721  1984 Commercial District.
84-  5-   101 E. Park Avenue from R-3 High Density Residential to C-3 Central Business
O-   15-  District.
741  1984
86-  2-   Recently annexed 120.1218 acres in Fairfield Township. zoned I-2 Light
O-   18-  Industrial District.
877  1986
86-  3-   Property behind Das Dutch Haus Restaurant and Koch Ford Motor Co. from R-
O-   18-  3 High Density Residential to C-4 Intensive and Automobile-Oriented
886  1986 Commercial District.
87-  3-   7.117 acres on Sponsellor Road and Heck Road, and 19.573 acres on Heck Road,
O-   17-  from A-O-C Agricultural-Open Space- Conservation to C-4 Intensive and
954  1987 Automobile-Oriented Commercial and I-2 Light Industrial District.
87-  8-   12.37 acres on State Route 14, from R-1 Low Density Residential to R-3 High
O-   18-  Density Residential District.
979  1987
87-  9-   Recently annexed 120.8611 acres in Beaver Township zoned C-4 Intensive and
O-   14-  Automobile-Oriented Commercial District.
983  1987
87-  9-
O-   14-  Zoning of recently annexed 37.382 acres in Fairfield Township.
984  1987
88-  9-   Recently annexed 82.695 acres in Fairfield Township zoned C-4 Intensive and
O-   20-  Automobile-Oriented Commercial and I-2 Light Industrial District.
1050 1988
89-  4-   Property on southside of State Route14, from R-1 Low Density Residential to
O-   18-  C-4 Intensive and Automobile-Oriented Commercial District.
1100 1989
89-  6-   Recently annexed Lot 1 in Charles F. Dill Plat No. 1 in Beaver Township zoned
O-   20-  C-4 Intensive and Automobile-Oriented Commercial District.
1108 1989
90-  1-   Recently annexed 10.23 acres in Beaver Township zoned C-4 Intensive and
O-   16-  Automobile-Oriented Commercial District.
1156 1990
90-  5-   1.90 acres fronting on Pittsburgh Street, from R-2 Medium Density Residential
O-   15-  to I-2 Light Industrial District.
1166 1990
90-  6-   1.44 acres fronting on Fairfield School Road, from R-1 Low Density
O-   19-  Residential to R-2 Medium Density Residential District.
1170 1990
90-  6-   Recently annexed 3.37 acres in Fairfield Township zoned R-2 Medium Density
O-   19-  Residential District.
1171 1990
90-  10-  Recently annexed 1.815 acres in Fairfield Township zoned R-2 Medium Density
O-   16-  Residential District.
1185 1990
90-  11-  Recently annexed 5.25 acres in Fairfield Township zoned I-3 Manufacturing,
O-   6-   Storage and Disposal District.
1186 1990
91-  9-   Recently annexed 40.16 acres in Fairfield Township zoned I-2 Light Industrial
O-   17-  District.
1247 1991
91-  10-  3.015 acres, known as Lot 2, Knisley Plat No. 1, located between Das Dutch
O-   15-  Haus Restaurant and the Lydia Knisely property, from  R-3 High Density
1250 1991 Residential to C-4 Intensive and Automobile-Oriented Commercial District.
91-  10-  109.83 acres, known as Arrowhead Lake Development, from C-4 Intensive and
O-   15-  Automobile-Oriented Commercial to R-3 High Density Residential District.
1251 1991
92-  3-   2.257 acres, fronting on E. Duquesne Street, from R-2 Medium Density
O-   17-  Residential to I-2 Light Industrial District.
1297 1992
92-  6-   Recently annexed 31.60 acres in Fairfield Township zoned I-2 Light Industrial
O-   16-  District.
1302 1992
92-  10-  2.865 acres, known as Lot 2, Knisely Plat No. 1, located between Das Dutch
O-   6-   Haus Restaurant and the Lydia Knisely property, from C-4 Intensive and
1314 1992 Automobile-Oriented Commercial to R-3 High Density Residential District.
93-  8-   1.357 acres, being a tract of land in the Elm Grove Allotment, from R-
O-   17-  2 Medium Density Residential to R-3 High Density Residential District.
1372 1993
93-  8-   7.319 acres, known as Arrowhead Bay, from C-4 Intensive and Automobile-
O-   17-  Oriented Commercial to R-3 High Density Residential District.
1373 1993
93-  12-  Recently annexed 16.504 acres in Beaver Township zoned R-3 High Density
O-   21-  Residential and C-4 Intensive and Automobile-Oriented Commercial District.
1379 1993
93-  12-  30-32 W. Railroad Street and 238 and 242 S. Vine Street, from C-2 Office and
O-   21-  Limited Business to I-2 Light Industrial District.
1387 1993
94-  2-   Lot 2 in C.C. Ziegler’s Addition, from R-2 Medium Density Residential to I-
O-   15-  2 Light Industrial District.
1398 1994
94-  9-   Lots 36, 37, 38, 39 and 40 of Columbiana Industrial Park, Plat No. 2, from I-
O-   20-  2 Light Industrial to C-4 Intensive and Automobile-Oriented Commercial
1437 1994 District.
95-  6-   Recently annexed 131.564 acres in Beaver Township zoned R-1 Low Density
O-   20-  Residential and R-3 High Density Residential District.
1492 1995
95-  6-   228 and 232 S. Vine Street, from R-2 Medium Density Residential to I-2 Light
O-   20-  Industrial District.
1493 1995
96-       Property on S. Main Street, E. Railroad Street and W. Railroad Street, from
O-   1-7- I-1 Industrial Research and Office and I-3 Manufacturing, Storage and
1581 1997 Disposal to C-4 Intensive and Automobile-Oriented Commercial and R-2 Medium
          Density Residential District.
97-  5-   Recently annexed 0.65 acre in Fairfield Township zoned R-1 Low Density
O-   20-  Residential District.
1609 1997
98-  11-  2.689 acres on E. Park Avenue from R-1 Low Density Residential to R-2 Medium
O-   3-   Density Residential District.
1703 1998
99-  1-   Property along S.R. 14, from C-4 Intensive and Automobile-Oriented Commercial
O-   19-  to R-1 Low Density Residential to R-3 High Density Residential District.
1725 1999
99-  2-2- 39.457 acres on S.R. 14, from R-1 Low Density Residential to R-3 High Density
O-   1999 Residential District.
1726
00-  4-4- Rezoning a triangular portion of the property located at 112 State Route 14
O-   2000 from A-O-C Agricultural-Open Space Conservation to C-4 Commercial Intensive
1799      and Automobile Oriented District.
00-  9-5- Rezoning property located along Fairfield School Road from R-1 Residential
O-   2000 Low Density District to R-2 Residential Medium Density District.
1830
01-  5-   Rezoning property north of State Route 14, east of State Route 7 and south of
O-   15-  Heck Road from R-3 Residential High Density and C-4 Commercial Intensive and
1887 2001 Automobile Oriented to R-3 Residential High Density and C-4 Commercial
          Intensive and Automobile Oriented Districts.
01-  9-4- Rezoning approximately 7.07 acres of property located at 191, 213, 225, 235
O-   2001 East State Route 14 from R-2 Residential Medium Density and R-3 Residential
1907      High Density to C-4 Commercial Intensive and Automobile Oriented District.
03-  8-   Rezoning 699 Fairfield Avenue from R-1 Residential Low Density to R-2 Medium
O-   19-  Density Residential District.
2052 2003
03-  8-   Rezoning approximately 7.119 acres located east of State Route 7, north of
O-   19-  State Route 14, south of Heck Road and abuts the northwest corner of the
2054 2003 links at Firestone Farms golf course from C-4 Commercial Intensive and
          Automobile Oriented to R-3 Residential High Density District.
03-  9-   Rezoning 191, 213, 225 and 235 East State Route 14 from R-2 Residential
O-   30-  Medium Density and R-3, Residential High Density to C-3 Commercial Central
2062 2003 Business District.
03-  10-  Rezoning 101 East Park Avenue from R-3 High Density Residential to C-
O-   21-  3 Central Business District.
2068 2003
03-  12-  Rezoning 241, 247, 253 and 259 East State Route 14 from R-2 Medium Density
O-   16-  Residential to C-3 Commercial Central Business District.
2080 2003
04-       Rezoning 4.955 acres located at the northeast corner of the junction of
O-   7-6- County Line and Eureka Roads from R-1 Residential Low Density to R-
2147 2004 3 Residential High Density zoning district and approximately 0.850 acres from
          R-3 High Density Residential to R-1, Low Density Residential District.
06-  4-   Rezoning 22 West Park Avenue from R-2 Residential Medium Density to C-
O-   18-  2 Commercial Office and Limited Business District.
2302 2006
06-  11-  Rezoning 16 Prospect street from R-2 Residential Medium Density to C-
O-   21-  2 Commercial Office and Limited Business District.
2338 2006
07-  6-   Rezoning 16.6 acres from I-2 Light Industrial to C-4 Intensive and Automobile
O-   19-  Oriented Commercial District.
2393 2007
07-  7-   Rezoning approximately 5.7 acres from R-1 Low Density Residential to C-
O-   17-  4 Intensive and Automobile Oriented Commercial District.
2396 2007
 
PARALLEL REFERENCES
Historical References to Ohio Revised Code
References to 1974 Code
References to Resolutions
References to Ordinances
HISTORICAL REFERENCES TO OHIO REVISED CODE
 
ORC Cites Code Section
1.01                                   202.01
1.02                                   202.02
1.05                                   202.02
1.14                                   202.03
1.15                                   202.03
1.23                                   202.05
1.42                                   202.03
1.43                                   202.03
1.44                                   202.02
1.45                                   202.03
1.46                                   202.06
1.47                                   202.07
1.48                                   202.07
1.49                                   202.07
1.50                                   202.08
1.51                                   202.06
1.52                                   202.06
1.54                                   202.04
1.55                                   202.05
1.56                                   202.05
1.57                                   202.04
1.58                                   202.04
1.59                                   202.02
9.60                                   264.04
128.01(A)                              608.19
128.32(E) - (G)                        608.19
128.99(A), (B)                         608.19
701.01                                 202.02
901.51                                 642.04
901.99(A)                              642.04
925.62                                 618.06
925.99(B)                              618.06
955.10                                 618.095
955.21                                 618.08
955.24                                 618.09
955.25                                 618.10
                                       618.09,
955.99(B)                              618.095,
                                       618.10
955.99(E)                              618.08
959.01                                 618.02
959.02                                 618.03
959.03                                 618.04
959.13                                 618.05
959.131                                618.05
959.21                                 618.18
959.99(B)                              618.03
959.99(C)                              618.04
959.99(D)                              618.05,
                                       618.18
959.99(E)                              618.05
959.99(E)(2)                           618.02
959.99(E)(7)                           618.18
1349.17                                672.11
1349.99                                672.11
2901.01                                606.01
2901.02                                606.02
2901.03                                606.03
2901.04                                606.04
2901.09                                606.13
2901.11                                606.05
2901.13                                606.06
2901.21                                606.07
2901.22                                606.08
2901.23                                606.09
2901.24                                606.10
2903.05                                636.01
2903.06                                434.10
2903.08(A)(3), (C)(3), (D)(3), (E)-(G) 434.10
2903.09                                636.001
2903.10                                636.24
2903.13                                636.02
2903.14                                636.03
2903.16                                636.24
2903.21                                636.04
2903.211                               636.05
2903.22                                636.06
2903.31                                636.20
2905.03                                636.07
2905.05                                636.09
2905.12                                636.10
2907.01                                666.01
2907.04                                666.02
2907.06                                666.03
2907.08                                666.05
2907.09                                666.04
2907.10                                666.06
2907.23                                666.07
2907.24(A), (C)(1), (D), (E)           666.08
2907.241                               666.085
2907.25                                666.09
2907.26                                666.10
2907.31                                666.11
2907.311                               666.12
2907.33                                666.13
2907.35                                666.14
2907.36                                666.15
2907.37                                666.16
2907.38                                666.17
2907.39                                666.18
2907.40                                666.99
2909.01                                642.01
2909.03                                642.06
2909.06                                642.08
2909.07                                642.09
2909.08(A) - (E)                       678.11
2909.09                                642.08
2909.10                                624.14
2909.101                               624.14
2909.11(B) - (D)                       642.07
2909.31                                608.18
2911.21                                642.10
2911.211                               642.11
2911.23                                642.10
2911.32                                672.05
2913.01                                642.01
2913.02                                672.01
2913.03                                672.08
2913.04                                642.03
2913.07                                672.24
2913.11                                672.09
2913.21                                672.10
2913.31(B)                             672.12
2913.31(C)(2)                          672.12
2913.32                                672.19
2913.33                                672.13
2913.40                                672.22
2913.401                               672.22
2913.41                                672.14
2913.42                                672.15
2913.43                                672.16
2913.44                                672.17
2913.441                               608.15
2913.45                                672.18
2913.47                                672.20
2913.48                                672.21
2913.51                                672.02
2913.61(B) - (E)                       672.03
2913.71                                672.04
2913.72                                672.045
2915.01                                630.01
2915.02                                630.02
2915.03                                630.03
2915.04                                630.04
2915.05                                630.05
2915.06                                630.14
2915.061                               630.14
2915.09                                630.06
2915.091                               630.10
2915.092                               630.11
2915.093                               630.12
2915.094                               630.13
2915.10                                630.07
2915.11                                630.08
2915.12                                630.09
2915.13                                630.12
2917.01                                648.09
2917.03                                648.01
2917.031                               648.01
2917.04                                648.02
2917.05                                648.03
2917.11                                648.04
2917.12                                648.05
2917.13                                648.06
2917.21                                636.16
2917.211                               666.21
2917.31                                648.07
2917.32                                648.08
2917.40                                636.19
2917.41                                672.07
2919.18                                636.08
2919.21                                636.11
2919.22(A) - (E)                       636.12
2919.22(H)                             636.12
2919.23                                636.13
2919.24                                636.14
2919.25                                636.18
2919.27                                636.05
2921.01                                606.01
2921.13                                608.01
2921.14                                608.02
2921.21                                608.03
2921.22                                608.04
2921.23                                608.05
2921.29                                608.18
2921.31                                608.06
2921.32                                608.07
2921.321                               642.12
2921.33                                608.08
2921.331(A) - (C)                      608.09
2921.331(E)                            608.09
2921.331(F)                            608.09
2921.36                                612.09
2921.42                                608.10
2921.43                                608.11
2921.44                                608.12
2921.45                                608.13
2921.51                                608.14
2921.52(A) - (D)                       608.145
2923.02                                606.11
2923.03                                606.12
2923.11                                678.01,
                                       678.10
2923.12                                678.02
2923.1211(B)                           678.14
2923.1211(C)                           678.14
2923.1212                              678.14
2923.122(C) - (G)                      678.13
2923.126                               678.14
2923.131                               678.025
2923.15                                678.03
2923.16                                678.04
2923.162                               678.095
2923.18                                678.05
2923.19                                678.06
2923.20                                678.07
2923.201                               678.15
2923.211                               678.08
2923.24                                678.12
2925.01                                624.01
2925.03(A)-(C), (I)                    624.02
2925.04(A), (B), (C)(5), (G)           624.025
2925.11                                624.03
2925.12                                624.04
2925.13(A)-(C), (F)                    624.05
2925.14                                624.06
2925.141                               624.06
2925.31                                624.07
2925.32(B)(4)                          624.073
2925.32(D)(2)                          624.073
2925.32(F)                             624.073
2925.32(G)                             624.073
2925.33                                624.076
2925.34                                624.17
2925.36(A)-(C)                         624.08
2925.37(A)                             624.09
2925.37(G)                             624.09
2925.50                                624.13
2925.51                                624.12
2925.511                               624.12
2925.55                                624.15
2925.56                                624.15
2925.57                                624.15
2925.58                                624.15
2927.02                                636.21
2927.021                               636.21
2927.022                               636.21
2927.023                               636.21
2927.03                                636.23
2927.11                                642.05
2927.12                                636.22
2927.15                                636.25
2927.17                                666.20
2929.22                                698.03
2929.23                                666.99
2929.24                                698.02
2929.25                                698.02
2929.26                                698.02
2929.27                                698.02
2929.28                                698.02
2929.31                                698.04
2929.41                                698.05
2935.041                               608.17
2935.36(E)                             698.01
2981.07                                672.23
2981.11                                608.16
2981.12                                608.16
2981.13(A)                             608.16
3701.81                                660.02
3701.82                                660.01
3701.99(B)                             660.01
3701.99(C)                             660.02
3715.05                                624.15
3715.06                                624.15
3716.11                                636.17
3716.99(C)                             636.17
3719.08(A)                             624.10
3719.08(E)                             624.10
3719.172(A)                            624.11
3719.172(B)                            624.11
3719.19                                624.13
3719.99(C)                             624.10
3719.99(E)                             624.11
3737.34                                1610.04
3737.51(A)                             1610.05
3737.51(B) - (H)                       1610.99
3737.61                                1610.06
3737.62                                1610.07
3737.63                                1610.08
3737.64                                1610.09
3737.65                                1610.10
3737.99(B)                             1610.99
3737.99(C)                             1610.99
3737.99(D)                             1610.99
3737.99(E)                             1610.99
3743.01                                678.10
3743.54                                678.10
3743.60(E) - (J)                       678.10
3743.61(E) - (J)                       678.10
3743.63                                678.10
3743.64                                678.10
3743.65(A) - (E)                       678.10
3743.66                                678.10
3743.68(B)                             678.10
3743.80                                678.10
3743.99(C)                             678.10
3743.99(D)                             678.10
3767.13                                660.04
3767.29                                660.06
3767.32                                660.03
3767.99(B)                             660.06
3767.99(C)                             660.02,
                                       660.04
3781.55                                666.04
3791.031                               660.13
4301.01                                612.01
4301.22(A)(2)                          612.10
4301.22(B)                             612.03
4301.244                               612.01
4301.62                                612.07
4301.63                                612.02
4301.631                               612.10
4301.633                               612.02
4301.634                               612.02
4301.637                               612.06
4301.64                                612.04
4301.65                                612.11
4301.69                                612.02
4301.70                                612.06
                                       612.06,
4301.99(A)                             612.07,
                                       612.10,
                                       612.11
4301.99(B)                             612.04
4301.99(C)                             612.02
4301.99(D)                             612.03
4301.99(E)                             612.02,
                                       612.10
4301.99(F)                             612.02
4301.99(H)                             612.03
4301.99(I)                             612.02
4301.99(J)                             612.11
4303.202(D)(2)                         612.08
4303.208(C)                            612.08
4303.25                                612.05
4303.99(D)                             612.08
4501.01(LL)                            402.08
4501.01(TT)                            416.12
4503.11(A)                             436.09
4503.11(C)                             436.09
4503.111                               436.09
4503.12(A)                             436.09
4503.12(D)                             436.09
4503.21                                436.09
4505.18                                436.08
4506.01                                442.01
4506.011                               442.02
4506.04(A)                             442.03
4506.04(B)                             442.03
4506.04(C)                             442.03
4506.10(A)                             442.04
4506.10(E)                             442.04
4506.12(I)                             442.03
4506.12(J)                             442.03
4506.15                                442.05
4506.19                                442.06
4506.20                                442.07
4506.23                                442.08
4507.02(A)(1)                          436.01
4507.02(A)(2)                          436.01
4507.03                                436.01
4507.04                                436.01
4507.05(F)                             436.03
4507.05(I)                             436.03
4507.071(B) - (J)                      436.035
4507.213                               436.01
4507.30                                436.04
4507.35                                436.06
4507.99                                436.01
4509.102                               608.01
4510.037(J)                            436.071
                                       436.071,
4510.04                                436.073,
                                       436.074,
                                       436.075
4510.05                                408.03,
                                       698.07
4510.11                                436.071
4510.111                               436.071
4510.12                                436.072
4510.14                                436.073
4510.16                                436.074
4510.21                                436.075
4510.44                                434.011
4511.01(A)                             402.56
4511.01(B)                             402.22
4511.01(C)                             402.23
4511.01(D)                             402.14
4511.01(E)                             402.32
4511.01(F)                             402.41
4511.01(G)                             402.04
4511.01(H)                             402.24
4511.01(I)                             402.10
4511.01(J)                             402.02
4511.01(K)                             402.55
4511.01(L)                             402.06
4511.01(M)                             402.54
4511.01(N)                             402.42
4511.01(O)                             402.29
4511.01(P)                             402.33
4511.01(Q)                             402.35
4511.01(T)                             402.15
4511.01(U)                             402.17
4511.01(V)                             402.19
4511.01(W)                             402.28
4511.01(X)                             402.27
4511.01(Y)                             402.13
4511.01(Z)                             402.30
4511.01(AA)                            402.215
4511.01(BB)                            402.48
4511.01(CC)                            402.11
4511.01(DD)                            402.31
4511.01(EE)                            402.38
4511.01(FF)                            402.43
4511.01(GG)                            402.20
4511.01(HH)                            402.49
4511.01(II)                            402.435
4511.01(JJ)                            402.44
4511.01(KK)                            402.20
4511.01(LL)                            402.12
4511.01(MM)                            402.40
4511.01(NN)                            402.07
4511.01(OO)                            402.36
4511.01(PP)                            402.56
4511.01(QQ)                            402.52
4511.01(RR)                            402.53
4511.01(SS)                            402.34
4511.01(TT)                            402.51
4511.01(UU)                            402.38
4511.01(VV)                            402.395
4511.01(WW)                            402.185
4511.01(XX)                            402.03
4511.01(YY)                            402.18
4511.01(ZZ)                            402.16
4511.01(AAA)                           402.50
4511.01(BBB)                           402.46
4511.01(CCC)                           402.04
4511.01(DDD)                           402.37
4511.01(EEE)                           402.25
4511.01(FFF)                           402.08
4511.01(GGG)                           402.02
4511.01(HHH)                           402.255
4511.01(III)                           402.305
4511.01(JJJ)                           402.385
4511.01(KKK)                           402.045
4511.01(LLL)                           402.196
4511.01(MMM)                           402.195
4511.01(NNN)                           402.216
4511.01(OOO)                           402.306
4511.01(PPP)                           402.425
4511.01(RRR)                           402.58,
                                       402.135
4511.03                                432.19
4511.031                               414.10
4511.04                                404.03
4511.041                               404.04
4511.042                               404.04
4511.05                                404.05
4511.051                               412.05
4511.12(A)                             414.01
4511.12(B)                             414.01
4511.121(A)-(C)                        414.01
4511.121(D)                            414.01
4511.121(E)                            414.01
4511.13                                414.03
4511.131                               414.04
4511.132                               432.16
4511.14                                414.05
4511.16                                414.07
4511.17                                414.08
4511.18                                414.09
4511.181                               434.01
4511.19(A) - (F)                       434.01
4511.19(G) - (M)                       434.01
4511.191(A)                            434.01
4511.191(D)                            434.01
4511.192                               434.01
4511.194                               434.01
4511.20                                434.02
4511.201                               434.02
4511.202                               434.08
4511.203                               436.05
4511.204                               432.45
4511.205                               432.46
4511.21(A) - (G)                       434.03
4511.21(O)                             434.03
4511.21(P)                             434.03
4511.211                               434.04
4511.213                               432.205
4511.214                               434.11
4511.215                               434.11
4511.216                               434.11
4511.22                                434.05
4511.23                                434.06
4511.24                                434.07
4511.25                                432.01
4511.251                               434.09
4511.26                                432.02
4511.27                                432.03
4511.28                                432.04
4511.29                                432.05
4511.30                                432.06
4511.31                                432.07
4511.32                                432.30
4511.33                                432.08
4511.34                                432.09
4511.35                                432.31
4511.36                                432.10
4511.37                                432.11
4511.38                                432.12
4511.39                                432.13
4511.40                                432.14
4511.41                                432.15
4511.42                                432.17
4511.43                                432.18
4511.431                               432.21
4511.432                               432.22
4511.44                                432.21
4511.441                               416.09
4511.45                                432.20
4511.451                               432.23
4511.452                               416.08
4511.454                               432.20
4511.46                                416.01
4511.47                                416.02
4511.48                                416.03
4511.481                               416.09
4511.49                                416.04
4511.491                               416.11
4511.50                                416.05
4511.51                                416.06
4511.511                               416.07
4511.512                               416.12
4511.52                                444.01
4511.521                               444.11
4511.522                               444.15
4511.53                                444.02
4511.54                                444.03
4511.55                                444.04
4511.56                                444.05
4511.60                                432.29
4511.61                                432.34
4511.62                                432.33
4511.63                                432.34
4511.64                                432.35
4511.65                                414.02
4511.66                                452.01
4511.661                               452.07
4511.67                                452.02
4511.68                                452.03
4511.681                               452.06
4511.69                                452.04
4511.70                                432.25,
                                       452.08
4511.701                               440.08
4511.71                                432.26
4511.711                               432.24
4511.712                               432.36
4511.713(B)                            432.41
4511.714                               432.26
4511.72                                432.27
4511.73                                432.28
4511.74                                412.01
4511.75                                432.32
4511.79                                442.09
4511.81(A)-(H), (K), (L)               438.29
4511.82                                432.42
4511.84                                432.43
4511.85                                440.11
4511.99                                408.02
4511.991                               408.02
4513.02(A)                             438.01
4513.02(H)                             438.01
4513.021                               438.27
4513.03                                438.02
4513.04                                438.03
4513.05                                438.04
4513.06                                438.05
4513.07                                438.06
4513.071                               438.26
4513.08                                438.07
4513.09                                438.08
4513.10                                438.09
4513.11                                438.10
4513.111                               438.10
4513.12                                438.11
4513.13                                438.12
4513.14                                438.13
4513.15                                438.13
4513.16                                438.15
4513.17                                438.16
4513.171                               438.165
4513.182                               438.17
4513.19                                438.18
4513.20                                438.19
4513.21                                438.20
4513.22                                438.21
4513.23                                438.22
4513.24                                438.23
4513.241(C) - (J)                      438.24
4513.241(K)                            438.24
4513.263                               438.30
4513.29                                440.04
4513.30                                438.25
4513.31                                440.06
4513.32                                440.05
4513.34                                440.01
4513.36                                404.02
4513.361                               404.09
4513.60                                452.06
4513.601                               452.06
4513.61                                452.05
4513.64                                452.05
4513.65                                660.07
4513.66                                436.14
4513.68                                436.14
                                       438.17,
                                       438.19,
                                       438.24,
4513.99                                438.25,
                                       440.01,
                                       440.03,
                                       440.04,
                                       440.06
4519.01                                446.01
4519.02                                446.08
4519.20                                446.02
4519.40                                446.03
4519.401                               434.11
4519.41                                446.04
4519.44                                446.05
4519.46                                446.06
4519.48                                446.07
4519.66                                446.09
4549.02                                436.11
4549.021                               436.12
4549.03                                436.13
4549.05                                404.01
4549.08                                436.10
4549.081(B)                            414.01
4549.081(C)                            414.01
4549.11(A)                             436.09
4549.11(B)                             436.09
4549.12(A)                             436.09
4549.12(B)                             436.09
4549.20                                438.32
4933.18                                672.06
4933.19                                672.06
5577.05                                440.02
5577.06                                440.02
5577.11                                440.03
5577.15                                440.05
5577.99(C)                             440.02
5577.99(E)                             440.03
5589.08                                440.07
5589.081                               440.07
5589.12                                642.02
5589.99(B)                             440.07,
                                       642.02
                                       
 
REFERENCES TO 1974 CODE
 
1974 Code 2008 Code
121.01    220.01
311.02    412.07
339.02(a) 440.01
339.02(d) 440.01
339.08    440.06
373.08(b) 444.07
509.08    648.10
509.09    648.11
521.10(c) 660.15
521.11(e) 660.16
529.03(c) 612.03
541.08(b) 642.13
705.01    804.01
705.02    804.02
705.03    804.03
705.04    804.04
705.05    804.05
705.06    804.06
705.07    804.07
705.08    804.08
717.02    840.01
717.06    840.06
717.07    840.07
717.08    840.08
717.09    840.09
717.10    840.10
717.99    840.99
721.01    842.01
721.02    842.02
721.03    842.03
721.04    842.04
721.05    842.05
721.06    842.06
721.07    842.07
721.99    842.99
729.01    866.01
729.02    866.02
729.03    866.03
729.05    866.05
729.06    866.06
729.07    866.07
729.08    866.08
729.09    866.09
903.01    1020.01
903.02    1020.02
903.03    1020.03
903.04    1020.04
903.05    1020.05
903.06    1020.06
903.07    1020.07
903.08    1020.08
903.09    1020.09
903.10    1020.10
903.11    1020.11
903.12    1020.12
903.13    1020.13
903.14    1020.14
903.15    1020.15
903.16    1020.16
903.17    1020.17
903.18    1020.18
903.19    1020.19
903.20    1020.20
903.21    1020.21
903.22    1020.22
903.23    1020.23
903.24    1020.24
903.25    1020.25
903.26    1020.26
903.27    1020.27
903.28    1020.28
903.29    1020.29
903.30    1020.30
903.31    1020.31
930.14(d) 1042.14
1301.04   1440.03
1331.01   1460.01
1331.02   1460.02
 
REFERENCES TO RESOLUTIONS
 
Res. No. Date Passed Code Section
-        10-3-1917  TSO Table D
-        11-19-1920 TSO Table A
-        6-1-1926   TSO Table F
-        12-21-1926 TSO Table D
-        5-17-1927  TSO Table F
-        10-18-1927 TSO Table D
-        6-15-1937  TSO Table F
-        6-21-1938  TSO Table F
-        8-1-1939   TSO Table F
-        12-5-1944  TSO Table B
-        12-16-1947 TSO Table B
-        2-3-1948   TSO Table E
-        4-20-1948  TSO Table E
-        9-7-1948   TSO Table E
-        4-21-1955  TSO Table D
998      2-19-1957  TSO Table F
1273     7-17-1962  TSO Table D
1288     12-18-1962 1022.04
1309     7-2-1963   TSO Table D
1317     8-20-1963  TSO Table D
1379     9-15-1964  TSO Table D
1412     6-15-1965  TSO Table A
1485     9-20-1966  TSO Table D
1587     4-2-1968   TSO Table A
74-R-9   7-2-1974   TSO Table A
87-R-90  8-18-1987  882.01
87-R-91  9-1-1987   TSO Table A
89-R-98  1-3-1989   TSO Table E
89-R-104 8-15-1989  TSO Table E
90-R-114 6-19-1990  TSO Table E
90-R-115 10-2-1990  TSO Table E
91-R-123 6-24-1991  TSO Table E
91-R-121 7-16-1991  1040.01
91-R-128 11-19-1991 TSO Table E
93-R-134 1-19-1993  TSO Table E
93-R-139 9-7-1993   TSO Table E
95-R-159 3-21-1995  TSO Table E
95-R-160 4-4-1995   TSO Table E
95-R-161 4-18-1995  TSO Table E
96-R-169 4-27-1996  TSO Table E
96-R-168 5-7-1996   TSO Table E
96-R-171 5-7-1996   TSO Table E
96-R-176 9-17-1996  TSO Table E
97-R-181 3-4-1997   TSO Table B
97-R-184 5-20-1997  TSO Table D,
                    TSO Table E
97-R-187 9-2-1997   TSO Table E
97-R-192 12-2-1997  206.03
97-R-193 12-2-1997  TSO Table E
98-R-201 2-3-1998   TSO Table E
98-R-203 6-16-1998  TSO Table B
98-R-205 6-30-1998  TSO Table B
98-R-206 6-30-1998  TSO Table B
98-R-207 7-21-1998  TSO Table E
98-R-208 8-18-1998  TSO Table H
99-R-228 9-7-1999   TSO Table E
99-R-299 9-7-1999   TSO Table E
99-R-235 12-21-1999 TSO Table H
00-R-237 3-21-2000  TSO Table E
00-R-239 6-6-2000   TSO Table E
00-R-240 6-6-2000   TSO Table E
00-R-241 6-20-2000  TSO Table E
00-R-242 7-18-2000  TSO Table E
00-R-243 8-15-2000  TSO Table E
00-R-248 10-3-2000  TSO Table B
00-R-253 12-5-2000  TSO Table B
01-R-260 6-5-2001   TSO Table H
01-R-261 6-19-2001  292.01
01-R-263 11-20-2001 1262.16
02-R-269 4-2-2002   220.02
03-R-293 5-20-2003  TSO Table B
03-R-298 7-25-2003  TSO Table B
03-R-305 10-7-2003  TSO Table B
03-R-308 11-5-2003  1262.14
03-R-309 3-2-2004   TSO Table B
05-R-324 6-21-2005  210.02
05-R-328 6-21-2005  TSO Table E
05-R-333 10-18-2005 210.03
05-R-336 10-18-2005 TSO Table B
05-R-338 11-1-2005  TSO Table E
06-R-339 5-2-2006   TSO Table B
06-R-349 11-21-2006 210.01
07-R-361 9-4-2007   1062.09
07-R-362 9-18-2007  294.01
08-R-380 - -2008    1052.01
09-R-387 4-7-2009   660.19
09-R-390 6-16-2009  254.06
09-R-396 12-15-2009 882.01
10-R-401 3-16-2010  TSO Table E
12-R-429 2-7-2012   TSO Table E
16-R-490 4-19-2016  TSO Table E
                   
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
-          10-5-1887  TSO Table G
-          7-5-1888   TSO Table D
-          9-4-1889   TSO Table A
-          9-4-1889   TSO Table B
-          1-9-1890   TSO Table B
-          10-9-1890  TSO Table C
-          8-5-1891   TSO Table G
-          6-7-1893   TSO Table C
-          5-19-1896  TSO Table B
-          6-9-1897   TSO Table G
-          5-3-1899   TSO Table B
-          5-14-1900  TSO Table G
-          3-11-1901  1474.01 -
                      1474.03
-          11-1902    TSO Table B
-          11-19-1902 TSO Table A
-          8-10-1903  TSO Table G
-          9-21-1903  TSO Table G
-          11-30-1903 TSO Table B
-          3-17-1904  660.15
-          5-15-1905  TSO Table A
-          5-15-1905  TSO Table B
-          6-12-1905  TSO Table D
-          10-9-1905  TSO Table G
-          8-13-1906  TSO Table B
-          8-20-1906  TSO Table B
-          9-3-1907   TSO Table C
-          5-5-1908   TSO Table G
-          8-11-1908  TSO Table G
-          4-19-1910  TSO Table G
-          2-24-1913  TSO Table H
342        3-6-1917   TSO Table H
350        9-3-1918   TSO Table C
351        -          TSO Table C
357        8-5-1919   TSO Table G
358        2-11-1920  TSO Table A
360        3-2-1920   TSO Table B
361        4-6-1920   TSO Table A,
                      TSO Table B
367        5-4-1920   TSO Table H
365        6-1-1920   TSO Table H
366        6-10-1920  TSO Table C
369        7-24-1920  TSO Table A,
                      TSO Table B
374        10-15-1920 TSO Table C
403        4-4-1923   TSO Table D
406        5-29-1923  432.44
412        2-19-1924  642.13,
                      TSO Table D
434        8-18-1925  TSO Table C
435        9-1-1925   TSO Table C
440        10-6-1925  TSO Table E
446        3-16-1926  TSO Table D
448        5-18-1926  TSO Table C
450        6-15-1926  TSO Table A
501        1-23-1929  TSO Table G
509        8-20-1929  TSO Table B
511        9-17-1929  TSO Table C
512        9-17-1929  TSO Table G
526        8-18-1931  TSO Table G
532        5-3-1932   TSO Table C
537        1-17-1933  TSO Table C
540        6-20-1933  TSO Table G
541        7-18-1933  TSO Table G
559        3-20-1934  TSO Table G
576        8-20-1935  TSO Table G
578        9-20-1935  TSO Table E
579        10-15-1935 TSO Table C
581        12-3-1935  TSO Table G
623        7-5-1938   TSO Table G
632        3-7-1939   TSO Table C
634        3-7-1939   TSO Table C
637        5-16-1939  TSO Table H
644        9-5-1939   TSO Table C
648        9-19-1939  TSO Table H
664        9-17-1940  TSO Table C
669        3-4-1941   TSO Table C
670        5-20-1941  TSO Table D
671        5-20-1941  TSO Table G
674        7-15-1941  TSO Table D
684        3-17-1942  452.13
719        6-6-1944   TSO Table A
724        9-5-1944   TSO Table C
725        9-19-1944  TSO Table B,
                      TSO Table C
726        9-19-1944  TSO Table D,
                      TSO Table E
730        12-19-1944 TSO Table C
734        4-17-1945  TSO Table E
757        9-17-1946  TSO Table E
760        11-19-1946 TSO Table E
763        3-18-1947  TSO Table D
783        9-7-1948   TSO Table C
790        2-15-1949  TSO Table C
804        12-20-1949 TSO Table G
805        12-20-1949 TSO Table G
806        12-20-1949 TSO Table G
807        12-20-1949 TSO Table G
815        7-18-1950  TSO Table E
823        10-17-1950 TSO Table A
834        6-5-1951   TSO Table C
836        7-17-1951  TSO Table E
838        8-7-1951   TSO Table D
839        9-4-1951   TSO Table B
845        12-4-1951  1464.01,
                      1464.02
850        3-4-1952   TSO Table A
860        4-7-1953   264.01
866        10-6-1953  TSO Table G
867        10-6-1953  TSO Table C
871        11-3-1953  TSO Table C
872        11-17-1953 TSO Table E
-          1-5-1954   TSO Table D
886        4-20-1954  TSO Table E
888        5-18-1954  254.03
889        5-18-1954  TSO Table G
895        8-3-1954   TSO Table C
890        8-17-1954  TSO Table G
916        4-21-1955  TSO Table D
930        9-6-1955   TSO Table G
931        9-6-1955   TSO Table G
932        9-6-1955   TSO Table C
966        7-17-1956  TSO Table G
967        7-17-1956  TSO Table G
974        9-4-1956   TSO Table A
996        2-19-1957  TSO Table A,
                      TSO Table B
997        2-19-1957  TSO Table B,
                      TSO Table F
1011       5-16-1957  TSO Table G
1022       8-6-1957   TSO Table C
1024       9-3-1957   TSO Table C
1030       10-1-1957  TSO Table D
1031       10-15-1957 TSO Table D
1034       11-5-1957  TSO Table B
1036       11-5-1957  TSO Table D
1046       12-17-1957 TSO Table G
1047       12-31-1957 TSO Table G
1051       1-21-1958  TSO Table B
1052       1-21-1958  TSO Table B
1067       6-3-1958   TSO Table F
1076       8-5-1958   TSO Table B
1078       8-25-1958  TSO Table F
1084       9-2-1958   TSO Table B
1092       10-21-1958 TSO Table D
1123       6-16-1959  TSO Table H
1126       8-4-1959   TSO Table D
1136       9-15-1959  TSO Table C
1142       10-6-1959  TSO Table D
1157       2-2-1960   TSO Table H
1166       4-19-1960  TSO Table A
1167       5-3-1960   TSO Table D
1170       6-7-1960   TSO Table D
1175       7-5-1960   TSO Table D
1176       7-5-1960   TSO Table B
1184       9-20-1960  TSO Table F
1185       9-20-1960  TSO Table E
1202       12-20-1960 TSO Table D
1212       2-7-1961   TSO Table G
1216       3-21-1961  TSO Table E
1217       3-21-1961  TSO Table E
1218       3-21-1961  TSO Table E
1222       6-20-1961  TSO Table D
1223       6-20-1961  TSO Table D
1224       6-20-1961  TSO Table G
1264       5-1-1962   TSO Table C
1266       5-15-1962  TSO Table A
1308       7-2-1963   TSO Table D
1314       7-16-1963  TSO Table C
1315       7-16-1963  TSO Table C
1324       10-1-1963  TSO Table B
1351       1-7-1964   TSO Table B
1353       1-21-1964  TSO Table E
1361       5-19-1964  TSO Table A
1373       7-21-1964  TSO Table E
1398       1-19-1965  TSO Table C
1399       2-2-1965   TSO Table D
1408       5-18-1965  TSO Table D
1420       8-17-1965  432.44
1423       9-21-1965  TSO Table B,
                      TSO Table E
1434       12-21-1965 TSO Table A
1484       9-20-1966  TSO Table D
1488       10-4-1966  TSO Table C
1483       10-18-1966 TSO Table A
1493       11-1-1966  TSO Table C
1511       2-21-1967  TSO Table C
1514       3-7-1967   1044.15
1529       5-2-1967   TSO Table D
1533       5-2-1967   452.15
1563       10-17-1967 TSO Table H
1567       11-7-1967  TSO Table E
1568       11-7-1967  TSO Table C
1569       11-7-1967  TSO Table C
1578       1-16-1968  TSO Table C
1593       3-19-1968  TSO Table G
1594       3-19-1968  TSO Table C
1609       5-21-1968  1024.01 -
                      1024.06
1611       6-18-1968  TSO Table A
1632       8-6-1968   TSO Table H
1633       8-6-1968   1022.01,
                      1022.03
1666       2-18-1969  254.02
1672       4-1-1969   1040.01
                      1480.01 -
                      1480.04,
                      1482.01 -
                      1482.20,
                      1484.01 -
                      1484.15,
                      1486.01 -
1674       5-6-1969   1486.24,
                      1488.01 -
                      1488.19,
                      1490.01 -
                      1490.08,
                      1492.01 -
                      1492.05,
                      1494.01 -
                      1494.14
1694       7-1-1969   TSO Table C
1695       7-1-1969   TSO Table C
1697       8-5-1969   254.02
1703       10-7-1969  TSO Table C
1739       4-7-1970   TSO Table C
1791       2-2-1971   TSO Table A
1806       5-4-1971   TSO Table E
1801       5-18-1971  452.14
1836       10-5-1971  TSO Table H
1840       10-5-1971  TSO Table C
1841       10-19-1971 TSO Table H
1846       11-2-1971  TSO Table H
1853       12-7-1971  TSO Table D
1877       3-7-1972   TSO Table D
-          5-2-1972   Charter
                      5.01
1918       7-18-1972  TSO Table E
1915       8-15-1972  TSO Table A
1942       10-3-1972  TSO Table A
73-O-7     2-20-1973  TSO Table E
3-O-11     3-6-1973   TSO Table C
73-O-12    3-20-1973  1044.16
73-O-30    5-1-1973   224.01
73A-O-29   5-1-1973   1044.01
73-O-29    5-1-1973   1044.05 -
                      1044.08
73-O-32    6-5-1973   TSO Table E
73-O-33    6-5-1973   TSO Table C
                      444.12,
73-O-34    6-5-1973   444.13,
                      446.10,
                      446.11
73-O-35    6-19-1973  660.18
73-O-39    8-7-1973   TSO Table C
73-O-40    8-7-1973   1044.11
73-O-41    8-7-1973   1472.01,
                      1472.02
73-O-52    8-7-1973   TSO Table D
73-O-55    9-4-1973   206.02
73-O-56    9-4-1973   206.01
73-O-61    11-6-1973  444.14
73-O-66    11-20-1973 880.01 -
                      880.10
                      880.11 -
73-O-66    11-20-1973 880.13,
                      880.16
                      1042.01,
74-O-78    2-19-1974  1042.03 -
                      1042.17
74-O-95    5-21-1974  1222.01
74-O-114   6-18-1974  TSO Table D
74-O-113   7-2-1974   TSO Table C
74-O-123   8-20-1974  452.03
                      1260.01 -
                      1260.18,
                      1260.20 -
                      1260.25,
                      1260.27 -
                      1260.35,
                      1262.01 -
                      1262.22,
                      1262.99,
                      1264.01 -
                      1264.11,
                      1264.13,
                      1266.01 -
                      1266.10,
                      1268.01 -
                      1268.05,
                      1270.01 -
                      1270.05,
                      1272.01 -
                      1272.05,
                      1274.01 -
                      1274.07,
74-O-128   10-17-1974 1276.01 -
                      1276.07,
                      1278.01 -
                      1278.07,
                      1280.01 -
                      1280.07,
                      1282.01 -
                      1282.07,
                      1284.01 -
                      1284.07,
                      1286.01 -
                      1286.07,
                      1288.01 -
                      1288.07,
                      1290.01 -
                      1290.07,
                      1292.01 -
                      1292.13,
                      1294.04,
                      1294.05,
                      1294.09 -
                      1294.13,
                      1296.01 -
                      1296.15
                      1222.01,
                      1240.01 -
                      1240.12,
                      1242.01 -
                      1242.07,
                      1242.99,
                      1244.01 -
74-O-129   10-17-1974 1244.08,
                      1246.01 -
                      1246.22,
                      1248.01 -
                      1248.18,
                      1250.01 -
                      1250.13,
                      1250.15 -
                      1250.29
74-O-132   11-19-1974 TSO Table H
74-O-137   12-3-1974  TSO Table I
75-O-154   3-18-1975  TSO Table E
75-O-175   5-14-1975  1260.19
75-O-162   5-20-1975  1264.12
75-O-187   8-5-1975   TSO Table C
75-O-189   8-5-1975   TSO Table C
75-O-188   8-19-1975  TSO Table C
75-O-191   8-19-1975  TSO Table D
75-O-195   10-7-1975  1274.02
75-O-193   10-21-1975 TSO Table H
75-O-196   10-21-1975 TSO Table F
75-O-198   11-4-1975  TSO Table C
75-O-197   11-18-1975 1040.01
75-O-202   1-1-1976   TSO Table C
76-O-233   5-4-1976   TSO Table E
76-O-236   6-1-1976   TSO Table C
76-O-245   6-1-1976   262.02
76-O-252   8-3-1976   TSO Table C
76-O-253   8-3-1976   TSO Table C
76-O-254   8-3-1976   TSO Table C
76-O-257   9-7-1976   264.03
76-O-258   10-5-1976  TSO Table A
                      Charter
                      4.07,
                      4.08,
                      4.09,
                      5.05,
                      6.08,
-          11-2-1976  6.09,
                      6.15,
                      8.09,
                      8.10,
                      9.09,
                      10.01,
                      10.02
76-O-264   12-10-1976 TSO Table C
76-O-265   12-10-1976 TSO Table C
77-O-290   3-11-1977  TSO Table A
77-O-293   4-19-1977  TSO Table D
77-O-294   4-19-1977  TSO Table D
77-O-298   5-3-1977   TSO Table C
77-O-304   6-7-1977   TSO Table C
77-O-305   6-7-1977   TSO Table C
77-O-319   7-5-1977   TSO Table D
77-O-317   8-2-1977   TSO Table C
77-O-320   8-16-1977  1278.02,
                      1280.02
77-O-327   9-20-1977  TSO Table E
77-O-324   10-4-1977  TSO Table C
77-O-338   12-6-1977  1278.02
77-O-348   1-3-1978   TSO Table I
78-O-349   2-7-1978   TSO Table E
77-O-347   4-4-1978   TSO Table E,
                      TSO Table F
78-O-372   5-2-1978   TSO Table E
78-O-385   7-18-1978  TSO Table H
                      1066.01,
78-O-395   8-15-1978  1066.03,
                      1066.04,
                      1066.05
78-O-397   8-15-1978  256.01
78-O-402   10-17-1978 TSO Table A
78-O-410   11-7-1978  TSO Table E
78-O-413   11-21-1978 TSO Table I
78-O-421   12-19-1978 1048.02
79-O-427   2-6-1979   TSO Table E
79-O-431   3-6-1979   TSO Table I
79-O-437   3-6-1979   TSO Table C
79-O-439   3-20-1979  TSO Table C
79-O-440   3-20-1979  TSO Table E
                      1294.05,
79-O-441   4-3-1979   1294.12,
                      1294.14
79-O-442   4-3-1979   1294.12
79-O-445   5-15-1979  TSO Table D
79-O-446   5-15-1979  TSO Table C
79-O-449   6-5-1979   TSO Table C
79-O-451   6-19-1979  TSO Table E
79-O-452   7-17-1979  TSO Table C
79-O-456   9-4-1979   TSO Table F
79-O-458   9-29-1979  TSO Table E
79-O-460   11-6-1979  TSO Table D
79-O-470   12-18-1979 262.03
79-O-472   12-18-1979 1062.01 -
                      1062.06
                      1044.01 -
80-O-477   1-15-1980  1044.03,
                      1044.12,
                      1044.13
80-O-479   1-15-1980  TSO Table A
80-O-497   4-15-1980  262.01
80-O-512   7-15-1980  1442.01 -
                      1442.03
80-O-513   7-15-1980  TSO Table A
80-O-517   10-7-1980  TSO Table A
80-O-520   11-18-1980 TSO Table H
80-O-521   11-18-1980 TSO Table H
80-O-522   11-18-1980 TSO Table I
80-O-528   12-16-1980 286.01
81-O-543   1-20-1981  TSO Table A
81-O-556   3-17-1981  TSO Table A
81-O-574   7-7-1981   TSO Table E
81-O-575   7-7-1981   262.01
81-O-580   12-1-1981  TSO Table D
81-O-582   12-1-1981  TSO Table C
81-O-589   12-15-1981 1040.03
82-O-622   6-15-1982  TSO Table F
82-O-624   7-20-1982  1040.02
82-O-626   7-20-1982  1280.02
82-O-640   11-1-1982  TSO Table H
82-O-642   11-16-1982 TSO Table C
83-O-663   4-5-1983   820.01 -
                      820.07
83-O-664   4-5-1983   TSO Table E
83-O-668   5-3-1983   618.16
83-O-665   5-17-1983  TSO Table I
                      434.02,
83-O-680   6-21-1983  434.08,
                      618.03,
                      660.01
83-O-690   11-1-1983  TSO Table H
82-O-628   11-15-1983 TSO Table C
83-O-698   12-6-1983  TSO Table A
83-O-704   12-6-1983  TSO Table A
83-O-706   12-20-1983 TSO Table I
83-O-705   1-3-1984   1048.01
83-O-710   1-17-1984  TSO Table A
84-O-719   2-21-1984  TSO Table I
84-O-720   2-21-1984  TSO Table I
84-O-721   2-21-1984  TSO Table I
84-O-718   3-20-1984  224.02
84-O-733   3-20-1984  1064.02
84-O-741   5-15-1984  TSO Table I
84-O-753   6-5-1984   TSO Table F
84-O-754   6-19-1984  1048.03
84-O-756   8-21-1984  TSO Table C
84-O-757   8-21-1984  TSO Table C
84-O-759   8-21-1984  TSO Table H
84-O-771   10-16-1984 1064.01
84-O-772   11-5-1984  298.02
84-O-788   12-4-1984  TSO Table D
84-O-795   12-18-1984 TSO Table E
84-O-803   1-2-1985   1470.01 -
                      1470.10
85-O-820   3-19-1985  262.02,
                      262.03
85-O-822   4-2-1985   TSO Table C
85-O-826   5-21-1985  TSO Table H
85-O-829   6-4-1985   TSO Table A
85-O-836   7-16-1985  1062.07
85-O-841   9-3-1985   852.01 -
                      852.08
85-O-864   2-4-1986   TSO Table C
86-O-872   2-4-1986   TSO Table C
86-O-877   2-18-1986  TSO Table H,
                      TSO Table I
86-O-885   3-4-1986   TSO Table C
86-O-886   3-18-1986  TSO Table I
86-O-913   9-16-1986  618.17
86-O-918   10-7-1986  TSO Table E
86-O-919   10-21-1986 TSO Table E
86-O-920   11-3-1986  TSO Table C
86-O-921   11-18-1986 TSO Table D
86-O-926   12-2-1986  TSO Table E
86-O-928   12-16-1986 TSO Table E
87-O-936   1-6-1987   TSO Table B
                      1260.19,
87-O-954   3-17-1987  1288.04,
                      TSO Table I
87-O-979   8-18-1987  TSO Table I
87-O-982   9-1-1987   TSO Table C
87-O-983   9-14-1987  TSO Table H,
                      TSO Table I
87-O-984   9-14-1987  TSO Table H,
                      TSO Table I
88-O-1010  1-19-1988  TSO Table C
88-O-1011  1-19-1988  432.42
88-O-1037  6-21-1988  882.02
88-O-1039  6-21-1988  660.17
88-O-1050  9-20-1988  TSO Table H,
                      TSO Table I
88-O-1052  10-4-1988  TSO Table C
88-O-1054  10-4-1988  TSO Table H
88-O-1055  10-18-1988 TSO Table C
88-O-1065  12-6-1988  TSO Table C
88-O-1066  12-6-1988  TSO Table C
88-O-1067  12-6-1988  TSO Table E
89-O-1088  2-7-1989   TSO Table E
89-O-1092  3-7-1989   TSO Table E
89-O-1100  4-18-1989  TSO Table I
89-O-1104  5-16-1989  TSO Table B
89-O-1105  5-16-1989  TSO Table E
89-O-1106  5-16-1989  TSO Table E
89-O-1107  5-16-1989  TSO Table E
89-O-1108  6-20-1989  TSO Table H,
                      TSO Table I
89-O-1123  10-3-1989  TSO Table E
89-O-1125  10-17-1989 TSO Table E
89-O-1131  11-21-1989 254.01
89-O-1151  1-2-1990   TSO Table B
90-O-1156  1-16-1990  TSO Table H,
                      TSO Table I
90-O-1161  3-6-1990   TSO Table C
90-O-1166  5-15-1990  TSO Table I
90-O-1170  6-19-1990  TSO Table I
90-O-1171  6-19-1990  TSO Table H,
                      TSO Table I
90-O-1183  9-4-1990   TSO Table C
90-O-1185  10-16-1990 TSO Table H,
                      TSO Table I
90-O-1186  11-6-1990  TSO Table H,
                      TSO Table I
90-O-1193  12-4-1990  TSO Table E
91-O-1216  2-5-1991   TSO Table E
91-O-1217  2-19-1991  TSO Table E
91-O-1218  2-19-1991  TSO Table E
91-O-1219  2-19-1991  TSO Table E
91-O-1220  2-19-1991  1066.02
91-O-1228  4-2-1991   660.08
91-O-1229  5-7-1991   1062.08
91-O-1230  5-7-1991   TSO Table E
91-O-1231  5-7-1991   TSO Table E
91-O-1245  8-20-1991  1294.05
91-O-1248  9-3-1991   1048.01
91-O-1247  9-17-1991  TSO Table H,
                      TSO Table I
91-O-1250  10-15-1991 TSO Table I
91-O-1251  10-15-1991 TSO Table I
91-O-1252  10-15-1991 TSO Table E
91-O-1253  10-15-1991 TSO Table E
91-O-1267  12-17-1991 412.06,
                      444.06
92-O-1280  2-4-1992   TSO Table A
92-O-1283  3-17-1992  TSO Table E
92-O-1297  3-17-1992  TSO Table I
92-O-1296  4-7-1992   TSO Table E
92-O-1298  4-21-1992  TSO Table C
92-O-1302  6-16-1992  TSO Table H,
                      TSO Table I
92-O-1311  8-18-1992  1060.01
92-O-1312  9-1-1992   TSO Table E,
                      TSO Table F
92-O-1313  9-15-1992  TSO Table C
92-O-1314  10-6-1992  TSO Table I
92-O-1317  11-3-1992  1260.26
92-O-1319  11-3-1992  1260.35,
                      1262.05
92-O-1316  11-17-1992 TSO Table E
                      1276.08,
                      1278.08,
93-O-1338  2-16-1993  1280.08,
                      1282.08,
                      1284.08
93-O-1345  3-16-1993  880.15
93-O-1351  4-20-1993  TSO Table C
93-O-1359  6-1-1993   TSO Table E
93-O-1369  6-15-1993  254.05
93-O-1370  7-6-1993   1250.14,
                      1260.33
93-O-1352  7-20-1993  TSO Table C
93-O-1372  8-17-1993  TSO Table I
93-O-1373  8-17-1993  TSO Table I
93-O-1375  8-17-1993  TSO Table E
93-O-1376  8-17-1993  TSO Table E
93-O-1377  8-17-1993  TSO Table C
93-O-1378  10-19-1993 TSO Table C
93-O-1379  12-21-1993 TSO Table H,
                      TSO Table I
93-O-1387  12-21-1993 TSO Table I
94-O-1395  2-1-1994   TSO Table B,
                      TSO Table E
94-O-1398  2-15-1994  TSO Table I
94-O-1430  6-21-1994  TSO Table E
94-O-1436  8-16-1994  TSO Table D
94-O-1437  9-20-1994  TSO Table I
94-O-1443  10-4-1994  TSO Table E
94-O-1447  11-15-1994 TSO Table E
95-O-1488  1-4-1995   TSO Table E
95-O-1466  2-7-1995   TSO Table C
95-O-1468  2-7-1995   TSO Table E
95-O-1469  2-7-1995   TSO Table E
95-O-1471  3-7-1995   1062.07
95-O-1492  6-20-1995  TSO Table H,
                      TSO Table I
95-O-1493  6-20-1995  TSO Table I
95-O-1500  7-18-1995  TSO Table H
95-O-1508  9-19-1995  TSO Table E
96-O-1528  2-20-1996  1262.05
96-O-1531  2-20-1996  TSO Table C
96-O-1533  3-19-1996  880.14
96-O-1555  7-2-1996   TSO Table E
96-O-1571  10-15-1996 1260.34
-11-5-1996 Charter 9.03
96-O-1573  12-17-1996 TSO Table C
96-O-1590  12-30-1996 254.04
96-O-1580  1-7-1997   TSO Table E
96-O-1581  1-7-1997   TSO Table I
97-O-1597  3-18-1997  TSO Table C
97-O-1609  5-20-1997  TSO Table H,
                      TSO Table I
97-O-1621  8-19-1997  440.12
97-O-1628  10-21-1997 660.14
97-O-1633  10-21-1997 TSO Table D
97-O-1635  11-18-1997 1062.07
97-O-1648  1-6-1998   452.16
97-O-1649  1-6-1998   452.17
98-O-1672  4-21-1998  1062.08
98-O-1687  6-30-1998  TSO Table E,
                      TSO Table F
98-O-1688  8-18-1998  TSO Table H
                      1044.02,
                      1044.09,
98-O-1696  9-15-1998  1044.10,
                      1044.13,
                      1044.16
98-O-1698  10-6-1998  1240.12,
                      1260.35
98-O-1703  11-3-1998  TSO Table I
                      1274.02,
                      1276.02,
98-O-1705  12-15-1998 1278.02,
                      1280.02,
                      1282.02
98-O-1706  12-15-1998 1062.07
98-O-1719  1-5-1999   TSO Table C
99-O-1723  1-5-1999   1042.02,
                      1044.04
99-O-1725  1-19-1999  TSO Table I
99-O-1726  2-2-1999   TSO Table I
99-O-1749  7-20-1999  TSO Table E
99-O-1753  8-17-1999  TSO Table C
99-O-1762  10-5-1999  TSO Table C
99-O-1770  12-21-1999 TSO Table H
99-O-1776  12-21-1999 264.02
00-O-1801  3-21-2000  TSO Table H
00-O-1799  4-4-2000   TSO Table I
00-O-1811  4-18-2000  TSO Table C
00-O-1813  5-16-2000  TSO Table C
00-O-1818  6-20-2000  TSO Table H
00-O-1820  7-18-2000  TSO Table C
00-O-1830  9-5-2000   TSO Table I
00-O-1831  9-6-2000   TSO Table H
                      872.01 -
00-O-1838  10-3-2000  872.16,
                      872.99
00-O-1843  11-21-2000 1062.07
00-O-1858  12-19-2000 TSO Table H
01-O-1863  1-16-2001  TSO Table B
01-O-1869  2-20-2001  1062.07
01-O-1883  4-17-2001  1048.01
01-O-1882  5-1-2001   284.01
01-O-1887  5-15-2001  TSO Table I
                      868.01 -
01-O-1888  5-15-2001  868.29,
                      868.99
01-O-1889  5-15-2001  1282.02
01-O-1890  5-15-2001  1272.02,
                      1274.02
01-O-1902  7-17-2001  TSO Table C
01-O-1903  7-17-2001  TSO Table H
01-O-1907  9-4-2001   TSO Table I
01-O-1908  9-4-2001   1442.02,
                      1442.03
01-O-1909  9-4-2001   1262.05
01-O-1911  9-4-2001   TSO Table C
01-O-1913  10-16-2001 452.18
                      1298.01 -
01-O-1915  10-16-2001 1298.13,
                      1298.99
01-O-1917  11-20-2001 TSO Table H
01-O-1921  12-4-2001  220.01
02-O-1936  2-15-2002  220.01
                      868.06,
02-O-1941  3-19-2002  868.12,
                      868.13,
                      868.16
02-O-1957  7-16-2002  1040.02,
                      1040.03
02-O-1964  8-20-2002  852.04
02-O-1965  8-20-2002  452.21
02-O-1970  9-3-2002   1022.02
02-O-1971  10-1-2002  1044.10
02-O-1974  11-5-2002  TSO Table A
02-O-1975  11-5-2002  1048.01
02-O-1980  12-17-2002 1242.05,
                      1262.05
03-O-1999  1-7-2003   270.01
03-O-2016  3-18-2003  880.14
                      1294.04,
03-O-2021  4-1-2003   1294.05,
                      1294.06,
                      1294.07
03-O-2032  5-20-2003  1048.05
03-O-2046  7-25-2003  660.10
03-O-2055  8-5-2003   TSO Table B
03-O-2051  8-19-2003  1280.02
03-O-2052  8-19-2003  TSO Table I
03-O-2054  8-19-2003  TSO Table I
03-O-2065  9-16-2003  TSO Table A
03-O-2062  9-30-2003  TSO Table I
                      1260.35,
03-O-2067  10-21-2003 1294.05,
                      1294.10,
                      1294.14
03-O-2068  10-21-2003 TSO Table I
03-O-2080  12-16-2003 TSO Table I
03-O-2081  12-16-2003 1296.08
03-O-2082  12-16-2003 1260.20
04-O-2126  4-6-2004   660.05,
                      1024.01
04-O-2128  4-20-2004  1062.07
04-O-2130  5-18-2004  TSO Table C
04-O-2145  7-6-2004   TSO Table H
                      880.01 -
04-O-2146  7-6-2004   880.19,
                      880.99
04-O-2147  7-6-2004   TSO Table I
-          8-8-2004   660.16
04-O-2152  9-7-2004   TSO Table C
04-O-2157  11-2-2004  1060.03
04-O-2154  12-7-2004  TSO Table A
04-O-2155  12-7-2004  1042.02,
                      1044.04
04-O-2166  12-21-2004 270.01
04-O-2173  12-21-2004 1044.10
05-O-2182  2-1-2005   1060.02
05-O-2185  2-15-2005  1260.32
05-O-2198  6-7-2005   1046.01 -
                      1046.12
05-O-2199  6-7-2005   TSO Table H
05-O-2200  6-7-2005   TSO Table H
05-O-2220  7-19-2005  TSO Table E
05-O-2231  10-4-2005  TSO Table H
                      1466.01 -
06-O-2285  2-7-2006   1466.32,
                      1466.99
06-O-2289  3-7-2006   1062.07
06-O-2302  4-18-2006  TSO Table I
05-O-2327  9-5-2006   TSO Table H
06-O-2328  9-5-2006   TSO Table H
06-O-2336  10-17-2006 TSO Table C
06-O-2338  11-21-2006 TSO Table I
06-O-2352  12-19-2006 TSO Table E
07-O-2369  3-20-2007  220.03
07-O-2380  4-17-2007  1272.02
07-O-2393  6-19-2007  TSO Table I
07-O-2396  7-17-2007  TSO Table I
07-O-2401  9-4-2007   1044.02,
                      1044.13
07-O-2405  9-18-2007  870.01,
                      870.02
07-O-2406  10-16-2007 208.01 -
                      208.07
07-O-2412  11-20-2007 1292.06
07-O-2422  12-18-2007 TSO Table C
07-O-2448  12-27-2007 TSO Table E
                      1050.01 -
08-O-2455  3-18-2008  1050.09,
                      1050.99
08-O-2463  5-6-2008   618.01
08-O-2489  10-21-2008 1294.05,
                      1294.10
08-O-2490  11-4-2008  660.05,
                      1024.01
                      1260.35,
                      1262.05,
                      1272.02,
                      1274.02,
09-O-2511  2-17-2009  1276.02,
                      1278.02,
                      1280.02,
                      1282.02,
                      1284.02
                      1420.01,
09-O-2513  2-17-2009  1424.01,
                      1426.01
                      1268.04,
09-O-2517  3-17-2009  1270.04,
                      1272.04,
                      1274.04
09-O-2535  8-18-2009  1466.06
09-O-2543  9-15-2009  262.01
09-O-2545  9-15-2009  TSO Table D
09-O-2546  10-6-2009  210.04
09-O-2547  10-6-2009  298.01
09-O-2548  11-17-2009 1040.02
10-O-2587  6-1-2010   TSO Table C
10-O-2604  10-19-2010 264.05
10-O-2619  1-4-2011   452.185
11-O-2635  4-5-2011   TSO Table C
11-O-2655  9-20-2011  TSO Table H
11-O-2663  11-1-2011  TSO Table H
                      1294.04,
                      1294.05,
                      1294.09,
11-O-2664  11-15-2011 1294.10,
                      1294.11,
                      1294.12,
                      1294.13,
                      1294.14
12-O-2704  10-16-2012 1260.05,
                      1260.22
13-O-2731  6-4-2013   1426.01
13-O-2734  7-16-2013  1260.32
13-O-2735  7-16-2013  1266.10
                      1276.05,
                      1278.05,
13-O-2736  7-16-2013  1284.05,
                      1286.05,
                      1288.05
13-O-2737  10-1-2013  TSO Table H
14-O-2758  3-18-2014  298.01
14-O-2761  4-15-2014  1062.07
14-O-2773  7-15-2014  1048.01
14-O-2778  9-2-2014   TSO Table B
14-O-2781  9-16-2014  1420.01,
                      1424.01
14-O-2783  11-4-2014  1062.07
14-O-2784  11-4-2014  1062.05,
                      1062.99
                      881.01 -
15-O-2839  11-17-2015 881.19,
                      881.97 -
                      881.99
15-O-2801  3-17-2015  452.14
                      1045.01 -
15-O-2820  5-19-2015  1045.35,
                      Ch. 1045, Appendix A,
                      Ch. 1045, Appendix B
15-O-2826  6-16-2015  1260.35
15-O-2835  10-6-2015  1290.05
15-O-2853  1-5-2016   220.01,
                      220.03
16-O-2854  2-2-2016   678.09
16-O-2860  4-5-2016   1044.10
16-O-2865  5-3-2016   1298.05
16-O-2873  7-19-2016  660.17
16-O-2875  7-19-2016  Charter 4.12
16-O-2883  10-4-2016  881.05,
                      881.09
16-O-2895  1-3-2017   1294.01 -
                      1294.17
17-O-2898  1-17-2017  624.16
17-O-2904  4-4-2017   1062.07
17-O-2916  5-2-2017   1048.01
17-O-2933  9-5-2017   1048.01
18-O-2948  3-6-2018   TSO Table C
                      844.01 -
18-O-2954  4-17-2018  844.06,
                      844.99
18-O-2959  5-15-2018  1610.01
18-O-2981  10-2-2018  TSO Table C
19-O-2992  1-15-2019  1062.07
19-O-2993  1-15-2019  210.05
19-O-2996  2-19-2019  210.06
                     
 
