Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution Contents Page 1
TABLE OF CONTENTS
1 PURPOSE, TITLE, APPLICABILITY, INTERPRETATION AND LEGAL EFFECT
2 DEFINITIONS
3 DISTRICTS AND ZONING MAP
4 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
5 COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
6 OFFICE DISTRICTS
7 SPECIFIC PLAN DISTRICTS
8 SPECIAL PUBLIC INTEREST (SPI) OVERLAY DISTRICTS
9 NONCONFORMITIES AND REDEVELOPMENT EXCEPTIONS
10 ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES
11 TEMPORARY USES
12 VEHICULAR USE AREAS
13 SIGNS
14 BUFFER YARDS AND RESOURCE PROTECTION
15 GENERAL LANDSCAPE MATERIAL STANDARDS
16 AMENDMENTS
17 CONDITIONAL USES
18 PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT OVERLAY AND PUD REVIEW PROCEDURES
19 DECISION MAKING/ADMINISTRATIVE BODIES AND OFFICIALS
20 ZONING CERTIFICATES, GENERAL APPLICATION PROCEDURES AND FEES
21 VARIANCES
22 APPEALS TO THE BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS
23 ADMINISTRATIVE INTERPRETATIONS
24 ENFORCEMENT
A APPENDIX
 I INDEX
C

Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution Page 2-1
1 2 PURPOSE, TITLE, APPLICABILITY, INTERPRETATION AND LEGAL EFFECT
PURPOSE, TITLE, APPLICABILITY,
INTERPRETATION AND LEGAL EFFECT
1-1 AUTHORITY AND PURPOSES.
This Resolution is adopted pursuant to the authority granted to the Township by Section 519.01 et seq. of the Ohio
Revised Code for the following purposes (without indicating order or priority): To promote the public health,
safety, morals, and general welfare of the TOWNSHIP;
a. To help secure safety from fire, flood, panic and other dangers;
b. To enable the Township to implement adopted objectives and policies related to land use;
c. To facilitate implementation of township land use plans duly adopted by the Regional Planning Commission;
d. To facilitate revitalization and redevelopment of blighted areas by zoning for more appropriate uses;
e. To encourage compatibility between different proposed land uses in the Township and to protect the character
of existing residential, office, and commercial development areas of the Township from the encroachment of
incompatible uses;
f. To conserve and protect property and property values;
g. To secure the most appropriate use of land;
h. To facilitate adequate but economical provision of public improvements.
1-2 TITLE.
This resolution shall be known and may be cited and referred to as the "Zoning Resolution for the Unincorporated
Territory of Northeast Green Township, Green Township, Ohio," "Zoning Resolution" or "Resolution".
1-3 JURISDICTION.
These provisions shall apply to all unincorporated land areas of Green Township that are subject to Township
zoning pursuant to voter approval in accordance with the requirements of the Ohio Revised Code. Those areas are
indicated on the Official Zoning District Map(s) on file with the office of the Green Township Zoning Secretary
and the Hamilton County Regional Planning Commission.
1-4 INTERPRETATION.
The provisions of this Resolution shall be construed to achieve the purposes for which they are adopted. In
interpreting and applying the provisions of this Resolution, these provisions shall be held to be the minimum
requirements for the promotion of public health, safety, morals, convenience, comfort, prosperity and general
welfare. It is not intended by this Resolution to interfere with or abrogate or annul any easements, covenants,
building restrictions or other agreements between parties. However, where this Resolution imposes a greater
restriction upon the use of buildings or premise or upon the height of buildings, or requires larger open spaces than
are imposed or required by other laws, rules, regulations or permits, or by easements, covenants, building
restrictions or agreements, the provisions of this Resolution shall govern. For the purposes of this Resolution, the
following additional rules of interpretation shall apply:
a. In the event of a conflict between the text of these provisions and any caption, figure, illustration, table, or map,
the text of these provisions shall control.
b. The words "shall", "must", and "will", as used in these provisions, are mandatory and indicate an obligation to
comply with the particular provisions to which they apply.
c. The word "may" as used in these provisions is permissive.
C H A P T E R
1
Page 2-2 Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution
d. Words used or defined in one tense or form shall include other tenses and derivative forms.
e. Words used in the singular shall include the plural and words used in the plural shall include the singular unless
the context of the particular usage clearly indicates otherwise.
f. The masculine gender shall include the feminine, and the feminine gender shall include the masculine.
g. Headings and captions used throughout this resolution are for convenience and reference only and shall in no
way be held to explain, modify, amplify, or aid in the interpretation or meaning of any provision in this
resolution. Statements of intent or purpose statements used throughout this resolution are for general
information only and shall in no way be held to be requirements or standards.
1-5 SEVERABILITY.
It is hereby declared to be the intent of the Township that nothing in this Resolution shall be construed to conflict
with the laws of the State of Ohio or to limit additional requirements, if any, imposed by law. This Resolution and
the various articles, sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases are severable. If any article, section,
paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this Resolution shall be declared unconstitutional by the decree of any
court of competent jurisdiction, such constitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining articles, sections,
paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases of this Resolution.
1-6 AMENDMENT OF PREEXISTING ZONING RESOLUTION AND ESTABLISHMENT OF
ZONING DISTRICTS.
a. The Zoning Resolution adopted by the Green Township Board of Trustees on August 10, 1953 and as amended
through February 25, 2002, together with all Zoning District Maps which are a part of such Resolution, is
hereby superseded and amended to read as set forth in this Resolution. However, this Resolution, including the
Zoning District Maps, shall be deemed a continuation of the previous Resolution and not a new enactment,
insofar as the substance of revisions of the previous Resolution are included in this Resolution, whether in the
same or different language. This Resolution shall be so interpreted upon all questions of construction relating
to tenure of officers and boards established by the previous Resolution, to questions of conforming and
nonconforming uses, buildings and structures, and to questions as to the dates upon which such uses, buildings
or structures become conforming or nonconforming.
b. To the extent that this Resolution reestablishes zoning districts of the same land use category and with the same
district designation and names, these districts and their boundaries as indicated on the Zoning District Maps
under the preexisting Zoning Resolution shall be deemed as continuing until such time as they may be amended
pursuant to the provisions of this Resolution. Zoning districts which are not reestablished by this Resolution, as
indicated on Table 1-6, are hereby repealed and shall be indicated as repealed on the Zoning District Maps as of
the effective date of this Resolution.
c. To the extent that this Resolution establishes zoning districts of the same land use category, but different names
from those under the preexisting Resolution, these new district names shall replace the old zoning district
names on the Zoning District Maps in accordance with Table 1-6, but shall retain their existing boundaries.
d. Zoning districts established by this Resolution in addition to the zoning districts established under the
preexisting Zoning Resolution are indicated in Table 1-6 and shall become effective upon the adoption of such
Zoning District Map amendments by the Board of Township Trustees as are necessary to give effect to the new
districts.
e. The Planned Unit Development (PUD) Overlay District as provided for in Chapter 18 is hereby adopted as a
zoning district map amendment to the official zoning map and is applicable to all land within the jurisdiction of
these regulations in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 18 and Section 3-2.
Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution Page 2-3
TABLE 1-6
DISTRICT EQUIVALENCIES, DELETIONS AND ADDITIONS
ZONING RESOLUTION
DISTRICTS REESTABLISHED AND ESTABLISHED
PREEXISTING ZONING
RESOLUTION DISTRICTS
Residential Districts Residential Districts
A Residential
B Residential
C Residential
"A" Residence District
"B" Residence District
"C" Residence District
Commercial Districts Office and Commercial Districts
O Office
D Retail Business
"O" Office District
"D" Retail Business District
Overlay Districts Overlay Districts
SPI-NQ Special Public Interest-Neighborhood Quality
SPI-SC Special Public Interest-Suburban Center/Corridor
PUD Planned Unit Development
Specific Plan Districts Planned Districts
(see Section 3-4)
CUP Community Unit Plan Overlay District
DD Planned Retail Business District
OO Planned Office District
"PUD" Planned Unit Development
District
"DD" Planned Retail/Multi-Family
Residence District
"OO" Planned Office/MulitFamily Residence District
1-7 REDEVELOPMENT EXCEPTION.
To the extent that this Resolution establishes new standards for landscape, buffers, building heights, building
setbacks and yard requirements, such new standards, as specified in Section 1-7.2 below, shall not apply to the first
redevelopment of developed sites when a zoning certificate was issued prior to 04/01/03. Redevelopment shall
include the following whenever a zoning certificate is required:
a. additions or expansions or reconstruction of any existing use,
b. the change of an existing use to another use permitted in the existing zone district, or
c. the expansion of any existing vehicular use area for a permitted use lawfully established prior to 04/01/02
In order to utilize a Redevelopment Exception, the owner of such use must demonstrate, through the submission of
a redevelopment plan in accordance with Chapter 20 (Zoning Certificate, General Application Procedure and Fees),
that the proposed redevelopment, expansion or other construction activity meets all of the criteria in Section 1-7.1.
1-7.1 Redevelopment Exception Criteria.
Any proposed redevelopment shall be permitted without full compliance with this Zoning Resolution as
provided in Section 1-7.2 if the redevelopment meets the following criteria:
a. The proposed redevelopment must be located on a site that is one (1) acre or less if any building is
proposed to be expanded or reconstructed (this maximum site size is not applicable if the proposed
redevelopment or construction activity is limited to expansion of a vehicular use area without any
building additions, expansion or reconstruction);
Page 2-4 Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution
b. The proposed redevelopment must not result in more than a twenty percent (20%) increase of required
parking spaces (as measured under Chapter 12 (Vehicular Use Areas) of this Zoning Resolution for the
existing and proposed use);
c. The proposed redevelopment must not result in more than ten (10) additional parking spaces being
constructed;
d. The proposed redevelopment must be only for a use currently permitted as-of-right or permissible as a
PUD or conditional use in a zone district that is not a Specific Plan District (previously referred to as
Planned Districts);
e. The proposed redevelopment must conform to the Standards for Redevelopment exceptions in Chapter
9; and
f. The proposed redevelopment must result in the first issuance of a Zoning Certificate on the site
(including all contiguous parcels under the same ownership at the time of application) since 04/01/02
and a complete Zoning Certificate application must be filed prior to 04/01/03.
1-7.2 Exceptions Authorized.
Redevelopment in accordance with the criteria in Section 1-7.1 shall be exempt from the following
provisions of this Zoning Resolution:
a. Chapter 5 (Commercial Districts), and Chapter 7 (Special Purpose Districts) where such standards in
any of these chapters is inconsistent with the Dimensional Standards for Redevelopment (which
establishes previously adopted height and setback requirements) listed in Chapter 9 (Uses permitted asof-right or permissible as a PUD or Conditional Use in single family districts are not entitled to the
redevelopment exception);
b. Section 10-9 (Drive-In or Drive-Through Service Windows);
c. Section 12-6 (Landscaping for Vehicular Use Areas);
d. Section 12-8 (Off-Street Loading Requirements);
e. Chapter 14 (Buffer Yards and Resource Protection); and
f. Chapter 15 (General Landscape Material Standards).
The opportunity to redevelop without being subject to application of the entirety of this Zoning Resolution
is provided only once for each eligible site. Developments to which the entire Zoning Resolution does not
apply will be issued a “Redevelopment Zoning Certificate” as provided in Chapter 20. Additional
modifications may be requested through variance or PUD application.
1-8 INITIAL EFFECTIVE DATE.
This Resolution shall be in full force and effect from and after the earliest period allowed by law and, in accordance
with Section 1-6, shall supersede the regulations and Zoning District Maps of the Zoning Resolution initially
effective on dates as indicated below, and as subsequently amended. The Zoning Resolution shall be in full force
and effect after the earliest period allowed by law: Green Township Precincts C, J, V, EE as delineated on
November 15, 1953.
B a l a n c e o f T h i s P a g e i n t e n t i o n a l l y l e f t B l a n k ]

Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution Page 2-1
2 DEFINITIONS
DEFINITIONS
2-1 DEFINITIONS GENERALLY.
For the purposes of this Resolution, certain terms and words are defined and are used in this Resolution in that
defined context. Any words not herein defined shall be construed as defined in the Hamilton County Building Code
and in normal dictionary usage.
2-2 ADDITIONAL DEFINITIONS.
Additional definitions relating to specific portions of this Resolution are found in Chapter 13 (Signs).
2-3 DEFINITIONS.
For the purposes of this Resolution, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
A
ABUTTING. Having a common border with, or being separated from such common borders by an alley or
easement.
ACCESSORY APARTMENT. A single dwelling unit apartment intended for use as a complete independent living
facility that is in the same structure as, under the same ownership as, and subordinate to a residence constructed as a
single-family residence, and with one of the two dwelling units occupied as the principal residence of the owner.
ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE. An accessory structure or use: (1) is subordinate to and serves a principal
building or a principal use; (2) is subordinate in area, extent and purpose to the principal structure or principal use
served; (3) contributes to the comfort, convenience or necessity of the occupants, business or industry of the
principal structure or principal use served; and (4) is located on the same lot as the principal structure or principal
use served, except as otherwise expressly authorized by the provisions of this Resolution. An accessory structure
attached to a principal building in a substantial manner by a wall or roof shall be considered part of the principal
building.
ADJUSTMENT (OF PLANS). A change in the development plan wherein written conditions or recorded easements
are not modified and the revised (adjusted) plan is in substantial conformity with the intent of the previously
approved plan (PUD’s, S-PUD’s, & SPI’s).
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICIAL. Primary authority for administering the duties of the Northeast Green Township
Zoning Commission as required by this Resolution; responsibilities may be assigned to one or more individuals by
the administrative head (Secretary/Executive Director) of the Green Township Development Department. The staff
person or persons to whom such administrative functions are assigned shall be referred to in this resolution as the
"Administrative Official." (See responsibilities in Chapter 19)
AGGRIEVED PARTY OR PERSON. Any owner of a legal or equitable interest in property on which development
proposed under these regulations has been denied approval, or any person whose legal right has been invaded or
infringed or whose pecuniary interest is directly affected, as distinct from any damages to the rest of the community,
by a government act complained of.
AGRICULTURE, RURAL. (1) Farming, ranching or pasturage; (2) Agriculture, aquaculture and fishing lakes,
horticulture, ornamental horticulture, floriculture, viticulture and wine-making, olericulture, pomiculture;
(3) Production or cultivation of land for mushrooms, timber, nursery stock, sod, tobacco, field crops, and without
limitation, other such agricultural and horticultural commodities; (4) Dairying, and dairy production; (5) Animal or
poultry husbandry, and the production of poultry and poultry products, livestock, equine or furbearing animals, and
C H A P T E R
2
Page 2-2 Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution
wildlife native to this state, including breeding, raising, shearing, grazing or other feeding; (6) Beekeeping and
related apiarian activities and the production of honey, beeswax, honeycomb, and related products; (7) Any
activities listed in (1)-(6) above when carried on by agriculturally oriented groups such as 4-H Clubs, Future
Farmers of America; (8) On-site storing, handling, and processing incidental to the production of the foregoing
agricultural or horticultural products or commodities; (9) Accessory uses and activities directly related to any of the
activities listed in (1)-(8) above including wholesale selling of products, commodities and animals; (10) Farm
markets where fifty per cent or more of the gross market income is derived from produce raised on farm(s) owned or
operated by the market owner, in a normal crop year. The term "rural agriculture" shall not include suburban
agriculture.
AGRICULTURE, SUBURBAN. (1) Farming, pasturage, horticulture, floriculture, or viticulture on lots of one acre
or less in platted subdivisions, or in unplatted subdivisions with 15 or more lots that are contiguous or separated only
by right-of-way, where at least 35% of the lots are developed; or (2) dairying, and animal or poultry husbandry on
lots of five acres or less in any platted subdivision, or in any unplatted subdivision resulting in 15 or more lots, each
smaller than five acres and contiguous or separated only by right-of-way, where at least 35% of the lots are
developed.
AIRPORT. A facility intended and used as the place where one or more fixed-wing or rotary-wing aircraft is
regularly stored, maintained, or repaired while not in flight with an area that the aircraft may use to take off and
land.
ALLEY. A public or private way which is less than thirty (30) feet wide is dedicated for public use by vehicles and
pedestrians and which affords only a secondary means of access to abutting property.
ATHLETIC/PLAY FIELD, PRIVATE. An outdoor athletic field or play field operated by a nonprofit club,
association, or other nonprofit organization.
AUDITORIUM. A room, hall, or building used for public gatherings.
B
BAR. A use primarily functioning as an alcoholic beverage consumption establishment or tavern, serving customers
on the premises, where no kitchen service is provided for on premises food preparation for onsite consumption.
BAR-TAVERN/Restaurant/Cafe. A use primarily functioning as an alcoholic beverage consumption establishment
or tavern, serving customers on the premises, where limited kitchen service is provided for food preparation for on
premise consumption.
BASEMENT. A story having less than one-half (½) its height above grade. The portion of a basement above grade
is counted as a story for the purpose of height regulation.
BOARD. The Board of Trustees of Green Township.
BOARDING HOUSE. A building other than a hotel where meals only or lodging and meals are provided for
compensation for three (3) but not more than twenty (20) persons.
BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS (BZA). The Green Township Board of Zoning Appeals as established by this
Resolution.
BUFFER OR BUFFERYARD. An area of healthy and viable vegetation, natural or planted, adjoining or
surrounding a land use and unoccupied in its entirety by any building structure, paving or portion of such land use,
for the purposes of separating, screening and softening the effects of the land use. No part of this buffer is to be
used for active recreation, parking, or interior access drives. A buffer may include a wall, fence or berm, connecting
driveways, underground utilities and permitted signage as provided in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 14
or any other related chapter.
Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution Page 2-3
BUFFER, BOUNDARY. A linear area adjacent to the side and/or rear property line that is set aside to separate,
screen, and soften the detrimental impacts of different uses or intensities upon one another and upon the surrounding
neighborhood.
BUFFER, STREETSCAPE. A linear area adjacent to the front property line extending from side lot-line to side lotline that is set aside to shield or enhance views into the parking lot, establish coordination among diverse buildings,
setbacks and uses, to define the street and access points, to retain the quality of the environment by providing
appropriate vertical mass in keeping with dimensions of horizontal voids, and to diminish the presence of
wires/poles, lights and other clutter along the public right-of-way.
BUILDABLE AREA. Space remaining on a lot after the minimum zoning requirements for yards, setbacks,
coverage and allowances for panhandles, easements and restrictions have been met.
BUILDING. A temporary or permanent structure having a roof supported by walls and which can be used for the
shelter, housing, or enclosure of persons, animals, motor vehicles, boats and other goods.
BUILDING, HEIGHT OF. The vertical distance from the average grade to the highest point of the coping of a flat
roof or to the deck line of a mansard roof, or to the mean height level between eaves and ridge for gable, hip and
gambrel roofs excluding elevator shafts, chimneys and other structures.
BUILDING LINE. The line indicating the minimum horizontal distance required between the street right-of-way
line and the building or any projection thereof other than a step or uncovered porch, establishing a minimum front
yard setback.
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL. A building containing the principal use of the lot.
BULK. The three dimensional space occupied by a structure or building, defined by its height, width, and depth.
C
CALIPER. A measurement of the size of a tree equal to the diameter of its trunk measured four (4) inches above
natural grade for trees having calipers less than or equal to six (6) inches diameter; and measured as the diameter at
breast height (DBH of 4 ½ feet above grade) for tree calipers greater than six (6) inches diameter.
CANDLEPOWER. The total luminous intensity of a light source expressed in foot-candles measured at ground
level. Maximum (peak) candlepower is the largest amount of foot-candles emitted by any lamp, light source, or
luminaries.
CELLAR. A story having more than one-half (½) of its height below grade. A cellar is counted as a story for the
purpose of height regulation only if used for purposes other than storage, utilities or the quarters of a janitor or
watchman employed on the premises.
CEMETERY. An area of land set apart for the sole purpose of the burial of bodies of dead persons or animals, and
for the erection of customary markers, monuments, and mausoleums.
CHURCH / PLACE OF WORSHIP. A building used principally for religious worship.
CLINIC, MEDICAL, DENTAL, OR OPTICAL. A use or structure intended or used primarily for the testing and
treatment of human medical, dental, or optical disorders, but not including overnight boarding of patients.
CLUB. A building or portion thereof or premises owned or operated by a corporation, association, or group of
persons for a social, educational, recreational, charitable, political, patriotic or athletic purpose, but not primarily for
profit or to render a service which is customarily carried on as a business.
CLUB, PRIVATE. Lands and facilities operated by or for a group or association of persons, and their guests, which
are not available for unrestricted public access or use.
Page 2-4 Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution
COLLEGE OR UNIVERSITY. An institution of higher education authorized by the State to offer baccalaureate or
graduate degrees.
COMMERCIAL ACTIVITY. An occupation, employment or enterprise which is carried on for profit by the owner,
lessee or licensee, except for activities carried on by a not-for-profit organization which utilizes the proceeds of such
activities solely for the purposes for which it is organized.
COMMERCIAL, OFFICE. A use or structure where business or professional services are made available to the
public, including but not limited to financial institutions, tax preparation, accounting, architectural, legal services,
medical laboratories, optical laboratories, dental laboratories, psychological counseling, real estate and securities
brokering, professional consulting services, and hotels and motels, but not including the cutting or styling of hair, or
recreational facilities or amusements.
COMMERCIAL, RETAIL BUSINESS (SALES AND SERVICES). A building, property, or activity, where the
principal use or purpose of which is the sale of goods, products, or merchandise directly to the consumer. In
addition, it shall include the provision of personal services, including but not limited to barber shops, beauty parlors,
laundry and dry cleaning establishments, tailoring shops, shoe repair shops and similar establishments.
COMPOST BIN. A fixed or moveable structure made up of fencing or other material for the purpose of containing
and cultivating compost.
CONDITIONAL USE. A use permissible within a district other than a principally permitted use, requiring
application for a Conditional Use Certificate and approval by the Board of Zoning Appeals as stated in Chapter 17.
CONSTRUCTION DEBRIS. Those materials resulting from the alteration, construction, destruction, rehabilitation,
or repair of any manmade physical structure, including but not limited to houses, buildings, industrial or commercial
facilities, or roadways and as regulated in the Ohio Revised Code.
CONTINUING CARE RETIREMENT FACILITY. A housing development that is planned, designed, and operated
to provide a full range of accommodations and services for older adults, including independent living, congregate
housing (self-contained apartments), and medical care.
CULTURAL FACILITY. Establishments providing cultural, historic, or educational services to the public and
which are not operated for profit. Typical uses include museums, outdoor drama theaters (not drive-ins), botanical
gardens, and zoos.
D
DANCE CLUB, CONCERT CLUB or SHOW CLUB A commercial business establishment or activity that
provides assemblage space with limited or no fixed seating for dancing, concerts, talent shows or similar and related
activities in a public or member only setting. Dance or Concert clubs shall include all-age venues or clubs, as well
as premises that have a State of Ohio liquor license and /or dining facilities that provide space for concert
performances, stage shows, talent shows, dancing, or dance events without fixed auditorium style seating.
DAY CARE, ADULT. A place that provides community based programs designed to meet the health, social and
related needs of functionally impaired adults during daytime hours.
DAY CARE CENTER, CHILD. Any place in which child day care is provided, with or without compensation, for
thirteen (13) or more children at one time, or any place that is not the permanent residence of the licensee or
administrator in which child day care is provided, with or without compensation, for seven (7) or more children at
one time or four (4) or more children under two years of age at one time. For the purposes of this definition, any
children under six years of age who are related to the provider of child day care and who are on the premises shall be
counted.
DAY CARE, CHILD TYPE A. A permanent residence of the administrator in which child day-care is provided for
seven (7) to twelve (12) children at one time or for four (4) to twelve (12) children at one time if, for the latter, four
(4) or more children are under two years of age. Any children under six years of age who are related to a licensee,
administrator, or employee and who are on the premises shall be counted. 
Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution Page 2-5
DAY CARE, CHILD TYPE B. A permanent residence of the provider in which child day-care is provided for one
(1) to six (6) children at one time and in which no more than three (3) children may be under two years of age at one
time. Any children under six years of age who are related to the provider and who are on the premises shall be
counted.
DENSITY, GROSS. The quotient of the total number of dwelling units divided by the gross area of a site (including
public rights-of-way), expressed in gross dwelling units per acre. (Total number of dwelling units ? Total gross
acreage = Gross Density)
DENSITY, NET. The quotient of the total number of dwelling units divided by the area of the site consisting of the
gross area minus the area for rights-of-way and easements for public streets, expressed in net dwelling units per
acre. For calculation of preliminary or conceptual plans where actual location and area of right-of-way is not yet
determined, the net density shall be based on 82% of the gross area. (Total number of dwelling units ? Total gross
acreage less R.O.W. and easements for public streets = Net Density)
DEVELOPER. Any person seeking approval under these provisions for any form of development.
DEVELOPMENT. Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate that requires a Zoning Certificate
or other approval under this Resolution. For the purposes this Resolution, the following activities or uses shall be
considered “development”:
a. The reconstruction, alteration of the size, or material change in the external appearance of a structure on land or
water.
b. A change in the intensity of use of land such as an increase in the number of dwelling units in a structure or on
land or a material increase in the number of businesses, manufacturing establishments, offices, or dwelling units
in a structure or on land.
c. Commencement of drilling (except to obtain soil samples), mining, or excavation on a parcel of land.
d. Deposit of refuse, solid or liquid waste, or fill on a parcel of land.
e. Subdivision of land.
"Development" includes all other activity customarily associated with it. When appropriate to the context,
"development" refers to the act of developing or to the result of development. Reference to any specific operation is
not intended to mean that the operation or activity is not development. Reference to particular types of operations is
not intended to limit the scope of this definition.
DEVELOPMENT PLAN, PRELIMINARY. A plan for the specific development and specific use of a parcel as a
planned unit development pursuant to the requirements of Chapter 18, submitted prior to the submission of a final
development plan and indicating such items and features as are required pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 18.
DIAMETER AT BREAST HEIGHT (DBH). A measurement of the size of a tree equal to the diameter of its trunk
measured four and one-half (4½) feet above natural grade.
DISTRICT, ZONING. A portion of the unincorporated territory of Green Township established pursuant to
Chapter 3 within which certain regulations and requirements apply pursuant to the provisions of this Resolution.
The administrative approval of planned unit developments (PUD-1 or PUD-2) within the Planned Unit Development
Overlay District shall neither create a new district under the provisions of this Resolution nor be deemed an
amendment to this Resolution for the purpose of Section 519.12 of the Ohio Revised Code.
DORMITORY. A building used as a group living quarters for a student body or religious order as an accessory use
for a college, university, boarding school, orphanage, convent, monastery or other similar institutional use.
DRAINAGEWAY. A minor watercourse identified by the presence of an intermittent or perennial waterway or by
the presence of the following seasonally saturated soil types as identified by a soil survey prepared by the U.S.
Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service: Ave Silt Loam; Avonburo Silt Loam, Dana Silt Loam;
Fincastle Silt Loam; Henshaw Silt Loam; Markland Silt Clay Loam; Patton Silt Clay Loam; Raub Silt Loam; 
Page 2-6 Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution
Rossmore Silt Loam; Wakeland Loam; Xenia Silt Loam, and also including any area of less than one-quarter acre
which meets the definition of a wetland as defined herein, except for size.
DRIP LINE. The perimeter of the circular area surrounding the trunk of a tree measured as one (1) foot of radius
from the centerline of the trunk for each one (1) inch caliper or a vertical line extending from the outermost branches
of a tree to the ground.
DRIVE, ACCESS. The connecting access linkage between any roadway and off-street parking area having no
parking along the drive.
DRIVE, ENTRY. That part of an access drive leading to a vehicular use area that encompasses the first thirty feet
from the right-of-way or easement of the street and a parking setback of eight feet from the curb or pavement of the
drive.
DRIVE, PRIVATE. A shared means of vehicular ingress and egress located within an easement of access serving
rear or panhandle lots, not dedicated to a political subdivision by recorded instrument that is maintained by the party
or parties using such private drive for private access.
DRIVEWAY. A private way, other than a street or alley, to one lot of record for the use of vehicles and pedestrians.
DRIVE-IN OR DRIVE-THROUGH FACILITY. An establishment or facility that by design of physical facilities or
by service or packaging procedures encourages or permits customers to receive a service or obtain a product or to be
entertained while remaining in a motor vehicle on the premises.
DWELLING. Any structure or portion thereof which is designed or used for residential purposes
DWELLING UNIT. A single unit of one or more rooms providing complete, independent living facilities for one or
more persons, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation, but not including
a tent, cabin, recreational vehicle or other temporary or transient structure or facility. A Dwelling unit shall include
a Modular Industrialized Unit but shall not include a Manufactured HUD Unit, a Mobile home or recreational
vehicle and camping equipment or a Manufactured Home except “permanently-sited manufactured homes” that
conform to the requirements for permanently-sited manufactured housing as that term is defined in this chapter
within the definition of “Residential, Single Family Dwelling Unit – Detached.”
E
EASEMENT. A recorded right or privilege of a person, other than the owner or tenant, to use land for a specific
purpose.
EASEMENT OF ACCESS. An easement for immediate or future use, to provide vehicular access and
accommodation for utilities, from a street to a lot, a principal building or an accessory building.
EDUCATIONAL FACILITIES (PUBLIC AND PRIVATE). Any building used for education or instruction on an
elementary or secondary level, approved under the regulations of the State
EQUINE. A horse, pony, mule or ass.
EFFECTIVE DATE. The date that amendments to this zoning resolution were effective.
EFFECTIVE DATE, INITIAL. The date that this zoning resolution was first established and in effect as specified
in Section 1- 8 of this resolution.
F
FAMILY. A person or group of persons occupying a premises and living as a single housekeeping unit, including a
“family home” as herein defined, but as distinguished from a group occupying a boarding house, fraternity/sorority
house, hotel or other type of contractual living quarters.
Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution Page 2-7
FAMILY HOME. A residential facility shared by at least six (6) but not more than eight (8) mentally retarded or
developmentally disabled individuals plus paid professional support staff provided by a sponsoring agency either
living with the residents on a 24-hour basis or present on shifts, who live together as a single housekeeping unit in a
long-term, family-like environment in which staff persons provide care, education, and participation in community
activities for the residents in order to enable them to live as independently as possible in a residential environment.
This definition shall not include an alcoholism or drug treatment center, a work release facility for convicts or exconvicts, or other housing facilities serving as an alternative to incarceration.
FARM MARKET. The use of any land for a roadside produce stand where fifty percent (50%) or more of the gross
income received from the market is derived from produce raised on farms owned or operated by the market operator
in a normal crop year and provided that the structure shall not exceed 800 square feet and such structure and parking
areas shall be at least sixty (60) feet from every property line of adjacent parcels in residence districts; and that a
sign advertising such products shall not exceed twelve (12) square feet in area.
FESTIVAL, TEMPORARY. A time of celebration, characterized by a program of cultural events or entertainment,
which takes place for a specified, temporary duration.
FINANCIAL INSTITUTION. A building, property or activity, the principal use or purpose of which is the
provision of financial services, including but not limited to banks, facilities for automated teller machines
("ATMs"), credit unions, savings and loan institutions and mortgage companies. "Financial Institution" shall not
include any use or other type of institution which is otherwise listed in the Table of Permissible Uses for each
category of zoning district or districts under this Resolution.
FLOOR. The top surface of an enclosed area in a building (including the basement), such as the top of the slab in
concrete slab construction or the top of the wood flooring in wood frame construction.
FLOOR AREA, GROSS. The sum of the horizontal areas of each floor of the building, measured from the exterior
walls or from the center line of party walls, including the floor area of accessory buildings and structures.
FLOOR AREA, NET. The sum of the horizontal areas of each floor of the building, measured from the exterior
walls or from the center line of party walls, including the floor area of accessory buildings and structures. The term
does not include any area used exclusively for the parking of motor vehicles or for building or equipment access,
such as stairs, elevator shafts, and maintenance crawl space or areas occupied by mechanical equipment, toilet or
rest rooms.
FOOT-CANDLE. A unit of illumination produced on a surface, all points of which are one (1) foot from a uniform
point source of one (1) standard candle.
FRONTAGE, BUILDING. The length of an enclosed building facing a public or private street.
FRONTAGE, STREET OR LOT. The length of right-of-way or easement of access along the front yard or yards of
a lot as measured at the Building Line.
G
GARAGE, PRIVATE. An accessory building or an accessory portion of the principal building, including a carport,
which is intended for and used for storing the privately owned motor vehicles, boats and trailers of the family or
families resident upon the premises, and in which no business, service or industry connected directly or indirectly
with motor vehicles, boats and trailers is carried on.
GARAGE, STORAGE. Any building or premises used for storage of motor-driven vehicles pursuant to previous
arrangements and not to transients, and at which automobile fuels and oils are not sold, and motor-driven vehicles
are not equipped, repaired, hired or sold.
GOVERNMENT FACILITY. Any building or structure used by government for administrative or service purposes,
but not including buildings devoted solely to the storage and maintenance of equipment and materials. Includes but
not limited to police and fire stations, government buildings, and similar uses and facilities.
Page 2-8 Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution
GRADE. A reference plane representing the average of finished ground level adjoining the building at all exterior
walls. When the finished ground level slopes away from the exterior walls, the reference plane shall be established
by the lowest points within the area between the building and the lot line or, when the lot line is more than six (6)
feet (1829 mm) from the building, between the building and a point six (6) feet (1829 mm) from the building.
GRANNY COTTAGE. Temporary detached residential unit on a single-family lot subordinate in size, location, and
appearance to the primary residence and providing complete housekeeping facilities for the exclusive use of the
occupants. The owner of the principal residence and lot must live in one of the dwelling units on the lot and at least
one occupant of the principal residence and one of the detached units must be related by blood, marriage, adoption
or other legal relationship.
GREENHOUSE. A glassed or translucent enclosure used for the cultivation or protection of plants.
GROUP HOME. A residential facility shared by nine (9) to sixteen (16) handicapped individuals plus paid
professional support staff provided by a sponsoring agency either living with the residents on a 24-hour basis or
present on shifts, who live together as a single housekeeping unit in a long-term, family-like environment in which
staff persons provide care, education, and participation in community activities for the residents in order to enable
them to live as independently as possible in a residential environment. The definition shall not include an
alcoholism or drug treatment center, a work release facility for convicts or ex-convicts, or other housing facilities
serving as an alternative to incarceration.
H
HALFWAY HOUSE. An establishment whose primary purpose is the rehabilitation of persons. Such services
include drug and alcohol rehabilitation, assistance to emotionally and mentally disturbed persons, and rehabilitation
for prison parolees and juveniles.
HANDICAP. With respect to a person, a physical or mental impairment which substantially limits one or more
major life activities, a record of such an impairment, or being regarded as having such an impairment. This
definition does not include current illegal use of, or addiction to, a controlled substance. As used in this definition,
the following terms and phrases have the following meanings:
a. "physical or mental impairment": Any physiological disorder or condition, cosmetic disfigurement or anatomical loss
affecting one or more of the following body systems: neurological; musculoskeletal; special sense organs; respiratory,
including speech organs; cardiovascular; reproductive; digestive, genitourinary, hemic and lymphatic; skin; and
endocrine; or
Any mental or psychological disorder such as mental retardation, organic brain syndrome, emotional or mental illness,
and specific disabilities. The term "physical or mental impairment" includes but is not limited to such diseases and
conditions as orthopedic, visual, speech and hearing impairments, cerebral palsy, autism, epilepsy, muscular dystrophy,
multiple sclerosis, cancer, heart disease, diabetes, human immunodeficiency virus infection, mental retardation,
emotional illness, drug addiction (other than addiction caused by current illegal use of a controlled substance) and
alcoholism.
b. "major life activities": Functions such as caring for one's self, performing manual tasks, walking, seeing, hearing,
speaking, breathing, learning and working.
c. "has a record of such an impairment". A history of, or has been classified as having, a mental or physical impairment
that substantially limits one or more major life activities.
d. "is regarded as having an impairment":
1. A physical or mental impairment that does not substantially limit one or more major life activities but that
is treated by another person as constituting such a limitation;
2. A physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more major life activities only as a result
of the attitudes of others toward such impairment; or
3. Having none of the impairments defined in Paragraph (a) of this definition but is treated by another person
as having such an impairment.
Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution Page 2-9
HOBBY BREEDER. One who breeds occasional litters of dogs, cats, or other household pets for recreation for the
purpose of, but not limited to, improving the physical and mental soundness of the breed and who may improve the
breeding program by exhibiting in conformation, hunting, performance, or other tests.
HOME OCCUPATION. Any occupation or profession conducted entirely within a dwelling and carried on by the
inhabitants thereof, and which is an accessory use clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the structure for
dwelling purposes in connection with which there is no display that will indicate from the exterior that the building
is being utilized for any purpose other than that of a dwelling. Home occupations shall not include any retail or
wholesale business of any kind or any similar intensity of activities regardless of remuneration involving in-person
transactions on the premises.
HOSPITAL. An institution providing health services and medical or surgical care to persons, primarily temporary
in-patients, with illness, disease, injury, deformity, or other physical or mental condition, and including as an
integral part of the institution related facilities such as laboratories, out-patient facilities or training facilities.
"Hospital" does not include institutions for the permanent care of, or occupation by, the poor, infirm, incurable or
insane.
HOTEL OR MOTEL. A building containing more than four individual rooms for the purpose of providing, for
periods not exceeding thirty days, overnight lodging facilities to the general public for compensation with or without
meals, and which has common facilities for reservations and cleaning services, combined utilities, and on-site
management and reception.
I
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE. Any hard-surfaced, man-made area that does not readily absorb or retain water,
including but not limited to building roofs, parking and driveway areas, sidewalks and paved recreational facilities.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE RATIO (ISR). The total area of impervious surfaces divided by the net area (excluding
right-of-way) of the lot.
INDUSTRIALIZED UNIT (MODULAR). A modular structure which complies with the standards and
specifications for Industrial Units of Closed Construction, as provided for by the Ohio Basic Building Code as
amended and as authorized by the Board of Building Standards pursuant to Ohio Revised Code Section 3781.01 et
seq. as amended and to which is affixed a permit, sticker, plate or other recognized, official identification indicating
such compliance. The structure is composed of components substantially assembled in an off-site manufacturing
plant and transported to the building site for final assembly on a permanent foundation.
INDUSTRIAL USE. The assembly, fabrication or processing of goods and materials, or any operation or facility
including buildings, equipment structures, or stationary items used for industrial purposes.
INDUSTRIAL, EXCAVATION/EXTRACTION USE. Any operation, including buildings, equipment, structures
and other stationary items which are used for the extraction and processing of sand, gravel and other materials or the
filling of land.
INSTITUTIONAL USE. A building, structure or land used for educational, religious, human care or similar types
of public or quasi-public purposes. This category shall include but not be limited to schools, universities, churches
and other places of worship, cemeteries, correctional facilities, halfway houses, nursing and convalescent homes,
day care centers, continuous care retirement facility and hospitals.
INTERIOR PARKINGLOT LANDSCAPING. An area set aside, usually as an island in a parking lot, to provide
environmental relief. The interior buffer will help to define spaces and indicate directions for pedestrian and
vehicular circulation.
J
JUNK VEHICLE. See VEHICLE, INOPERABLE OR ABANDONED
Page 2-10 Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution
K
KENNEL, COMMERCIAL. A structure or premises used for the housing, grooming, breeding, boarding, training,
selling or other animal husbandry activities for dogs, cats or other household pets for financial or other
compensation.
KENNEL, PRIVATE. The home and premises of a hobby breeder.
L
LAKE. A natural or artificial body of water encompassing an area of two (2) or more acres which retains water year
round.
LAKE, COMMERCIAL FISHING/PAY LAKE. A private or publicly owned lake or pond, where a fee is charged
in exchange for the permission to fish.
LANDSCAPING. The improvement of a lot, parcel or tract of land with grass, shrubs, and trees. Landscaping may
include pedestrian walks, flower beds, ornamental objects such as fountains, statuary, and other similar natural and
artificial objects designed and arranged to produce an aesthetically pleasing effect.
LIGHT, CUTOFF. An artificial outdoor light source designed to ensure that no light is directly emitted above a
horizontal line parallel to the ground.
LIGHT, NON-CUTOFF. An artificial outdoor light source designed to allow light to be directly emitted above a
horizontal line parallel to the ground, as illustrated in Section 12-7.
LIGHTING, OUTDOOR. Any source that is installed or mounted outside of an enclosed building, but not including
street lights installed or maintained along public streets by a government agency or public utility.
LIVESTOCK. Hoofed mammals, including but not limited to horses, cattle, sheep, swine, goats, bison, llamas, and
other species typically raised for food, fiber or draft. Also includes domestic fowl and game birds.
LOT. A parcel of land resulting from the subdivision of a larger parcel of land and occupied or intended to be
occupied by a principal use or structure, together with any accessory structures or uses and such accessways, parking
area, yards, and open spaces required under the provisions of this Resolution.
LOT AREA. The total horizontal area included within the lot lines of the lot. No public right-of-way or access
easement for a public street or handle of a panhandle lot shall be included in the calculation of the lot area, nor shall
the public right-of-way cross the lot area.
LOT, CORNER. A lot abutting upon two (2) or more public or private streets at their intersection or upon two parts
of the same street, and in either case forming an interior angle of less than one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees. A
corner lot abutting public streets, or abutting private streets that provide vehicular access to driveways must have
two required front yards. A corner lot is not created by having frontage on a private drive as defined herein.
LOT, DEPTH. The mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines.
LOT, DEVELOPED. A lot with at least one building, structure, or improvement that is subject to real property
taxation or that is subject to the tax on manufactured homes under Section 4503.06 of the Revised Code.
LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE. A lot with opposite ends abutting on public or private streets.
LOT, INTERIOR. Any lot other than a corner lot.
LOT, PANHANDLE. A lot also known as a “rear lot” or a “flag lot” which utilizes a narrow strip of land or stem
not a building site to provide access to, or legal frontage on, a public street, or a private street in a PUD. The
panhandle of such lot is not considered a building site, nor is the area of such panhandle included in calculating the
lot area.
Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution Page 2-11
LOT, REVERSE. A lot intended to have its rear yard abutting any road frontage.
LOT LINES. The lines bounding a lot.
LOT LINE, FRONT. In the case of an interior lot, the line separating the lot from the street.
LOT LINE, REAR. The lot line(s) generally opposite the front lot line.
LOT LINE, SIDE. Any lot lines not a front lot line or a rear lot line. A side lot line separating a lot from another lot
or lots shall be called an interior side lot line.
LOT OF RECORD. A lot which is part of a subdivision, the map or metes and bounds description of which has
been recorded in the office of the Recorder of Hamilton County; or a parcel of land, the deed to which was of record
on or prior to adoption of zoning. For the purpose of these regulations, any improvement plan of a subdivision
which has been approved by official action of the Regional Planning Commission of Hamilton County shall have the
same status as if the subdivision plan was officially recorded in the office of the Recorder of Hamilton County.
LOT WIDTH. The distance between the side lot lines measured along the front yard setback.
LUMINAIRE. A complete lighting unit consisting of a light source and all necessary mechanical, electrical, and
decorative parts.
M
MANUFACTURED HOME. A nonself-propelled building unit or assembly of closed construction fabricated in an
off site facility, and which conforms with the federal construction and safety standards established by the Secretary
of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) pursuant to the “Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety
Standards of 1974, and that has a label or tag permanently affixed to it certifying compliance with all applicable
federal construction and safety standards. A manufactured home is transportable in one or more sections, which, in
the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or forty body feet or more in length or, when erected on site,
is three hundred twenty or more square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis, designed to be used as a
dwelling with or without permanent foundation when connected to required utilities. Calculations used to determine
the number of square feet in a structure’s exterior dimensions are measured at the largest horizontal projections
when erected on site. These dimensions include all expanded rooms, cabinets, and other projections containing
interior space, but do not include bay windows. For the purposes of this section, chassis means a steel frame
specifically designed and constructed with wheels or running gear and towing tongue installed for transportation on
public streets or highways and designed without the need for a permanent foundation arriving at the site complete
and ready for residential occupancy except for minor and incidental unpacking and assembly operations; location on
wheels, jacks, blocks, or other foundation, connections to utilities and the like.
MINI-STORAGE FACILITY. A building or group of buildings in a controlled access compound that contains
equal or varying sizes of individual, compartmentalized, and controlled access stalls or lockers for the storage of
residential or commercial customer's goods or wares. Such facilities do not include sales, service, or storage of
hazardous materials.
MOBILE HOME. A non-self-propelled building unit or assembly of closed construction that is fabricated in an offsite facility, built on a permanent movable chassis which is eight (8) feet or more in width and more than thirty five
(35) feet in length which when erected on site is 320 or more square feet, that is transportable in one more sections
and which does not qualify as a manufactured home or industrialized unit.
MODIFICATION (OF STANDARDS). A change in a specification or requirement where strict adherence to a
written regulation due to unusual site conditions serves no meaningful purpose or makes it physically impossible to
achieve compliance.
MODULAR HOME. See Industrialized Unit.
Page 2-12 Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution
MOORING OR FLOAT. An object or structure secured in the water, such as by cables, lines, chains, or anchors,
and intended or used for securing one or more boats in the water.
N
NATURAL RESOURCES. All natural areas of lakes, ponds, wetlands, floodplains, drainageways, forests, and
steep slopes as defined in this Chapter or in Chapter 14.
NONCOMPLYING STRUCTURE. Any structure lawfully existing on the effective date of this Resolution, or any
amendment thereto, which is in noncompliance with the standards and regulations of this Resolution or any
amendment thereto.
NONCONFORMING USE. Any use lawfully being made of any land, building, or structure on the initial effective
date of this Resolution or any amendment thereto which is not permitted as-of-right or by Redevelopment Exception
and not permissible as a Conditional Use or as a Planned Unit Development under this Resolution or any
amendment thereto in the District in which it is situated.
NURSERY. A place where the primary activity is the on-site growing of plants, trees and shrubs for sale.
NURSING OR CONVALESCENT HOME. A home, institution, building or residence, public or private, whether
operated for profit or not, presently licensed pursuant to Ohio law, which provides maintenance, personal care or
nursing to ill, physically infirm, convalescing, or aged persons who are not related by blood or marriage to the
operator. The definition of nursing or convalescent home does not include hospitals, clinics or similar institutions
which are devoted primarily to the diagnosis and treatment of the sick or injured.
O
OCCUPANCY (Commercial) The number of individuals permitted by Building Code, Fire Code or by specific
Federal or State Statute legally permitted to congregate in a specific location, based on the size, construction,
function, or use of the specific location, building or portion of a building. .
OPEN SPACE. Land used for recreation, resource protection, hillside, floodway, lake, pond, amenity and/or
buffers. In no event shall any area of a lot constituting the minimum lot area of said lot nor any part of an existing
or future road or right-of-way be counted as constituting open space.
OWNER. Any full owner, part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant
by the entirety with legal or equitable title to the whole or to part of a structure or land.
P
PARCEL. Any quantity of land and water capable of being described with such specificity that its location and
boundaries may be established as distinct from other parcels which is designated by its owner or developer as land to
be used or developed as a unit, or which has been used or developed as a unit.
PARK. Any land owned by the public and open for use by the general public for active or passive recreational
purposes or as a refuge for wildlife.
PARK AND RIDE FACILITY. Parking lot provided to encourage transfer from private automobile to mass transit
or to encourage carpooling for purposes of commuting.
PARKING LOT. An area of land devoted to unenclosed parking spaces for five or more vehicles.
PARKING SPACE. A paved area either within a structure or in the open, including stacking spaces, exclusive of
driveways, access drives and aisle, permanently reserved for the parking of a motor vehicle and connected to a street
or alley by a surfaced driveway of adequate width to permit easy movement of the vehicle to and from such space.
PATIO AREA. A roofless inner space or space adjoining a residence which is used for dining or recreation.
Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution Page 2-13
PERSON. An individual, corporation, governmental agency, estate, trust, partnership, association, two or more
persons having a joint or common interest, or any other legal entity.
PET, HOUSEHOLD. Domesticated animals that share the same domicile or premises with humans; are dependent
upon humans for food, water and shelter; and are kept as companions, including but not limited to dogs, cats, caged
birds of a variety of species, rodents, rabbits, and nonpoisonous reptiles and amphibians, that are not included in the
definitions of livestock and exotic wildlife.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD). A type of development that enables residential, commercial or office
uses to be developed alone or in combination under one unified plan of development under more flexible standards
pursuant to the standards and procedures set forth in Chapter 18 of this Resolution. (See PUD-1 and PUD-2 for
explanation of alternative processes for administrative approval.)
POND. A natural or artificial body of water of less than two (2) acres which retains water year round.
PRINCIPAL USE. The primary purpose or function that a lot serves or is proposed to serve.
PROJECT AREA. Any area of land, regardless of the number of individual parcels or zone districts contained or
proposed therein on which development is proposed under these regulations.
PUBLIC SERVICE. A building, structure, or place used by or for the general populous, owned or operated by a
government organization. This category shall include but not be limited to police and fire stations, government
buildings and storage yards, government facilities such as libraries, as well as park and rides, and other similar uses
and facilities.
PUD. (See Planned Unit Development)
PUD-1. Planned unit development whose net density or intensity requires Township Zoning Commission approval.
(See “Planned Unit Development”)
PUD-2. Planned unit development whose net density or intensity requires both Township Zoning Commission and
Board of County Commissioner approval. (See “Planned Unit Development”)
PUD PLAN (PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT PLAN). A plan for the use and development of the tract
showing the areas within which buildings, parking areas, and buffering are to be located accompanied by a detailed
description on the plat identifying the permissible range or limits of size, height, type, and other pertinent details for
buildings, structures, signage, lighting, pedestrian ways, vehicular access, circulation patterns, parking areas,
landscaping and buffering, impervious surface ratio, density, yards and other information with regard to the lot and
neighboring lots as may be necessary for the enforcement of this Resolution and any other requirements as identified
on the application form or forms provided by the Administrative Official. All dimensions shown on these plats
relating to the location and size of the lot to be built upon shall be based on an actual survey.
PUD Plans are required in the following two types of Planned Unit Developments:
a. a plan which is submitted to the Township Zoning Commission within the established PUD Overlay District for
administrative approval (PUD-1) or recommendation to the Board of Trustees for administrative approval (PUD-2).
(Note: The administrative approval creates an alternative set of overlay regulations, available at the election of the
property owner, for a specific development plan but does not preclude the development of the property for other uses
permitted in an underlying non-PUD district.)
b. a plan submitted to the Township Zoning Commission as a part of the zone amendment process for legislative approval
of a Specific Plan District. (Note: The legislative approval requires compliance with a PUD Plan and conditions of
approval by the Board of Trustees and precludes the development of the property for any use that does not comply with
the approved PUD Plan. The rezoning can be initiated only by the property owner.)
Page 2-14 Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution
R
RECREATION CENTER, INTERNAL. Buildings or facilities owned or operated as a non-profit enterprise by a
condominium, homeowners, or property owners association with the intent that their usage be only by residents of
the development.
RECREATION, COMMERCIAL. A public or private indoor or outdoor recreation facility operated as a
commercial activity, including but not limited to batting cages, bowling alleys, drag strips, raceways, golf driving
ranges, gun-firing ranges, mechanical rides, miniature golf courses, racquet clubs, arenas, amphitheaters, stadiums,
health and fitness facilities, and swimming pools.
RECREATION, COMMUNITY FACILITY, PRIVATE. A building or facility operated by a private or non-profit
group for a social or recreational purpose, but not as a commercial activity. Includes but is not limited to country
clubs, athletic fields, golf courses, swim/tennis facilities, and YMCAs.
RECREATION, COMMUNITY FACILITY, PUBLIC. A building or facility operated by a governmental agency
for a social or recreational purpose, but not as a commercial activity. Includes but is not limited to athletic fields,
golf courses, swim/tennis facilities, parks, playgrounds, wildlife reservations, forests, senior centers, and recreation
centers.
RECREATION, CULTURAL, and ENTERTAINMENT. A public or private facility, of a non-commercial nature,
designed and equipped to be used for sport, leisure, cultural, or entertainment activities including internal recreation
centers, private and public community recreation facilities, and cultural facilities, but excluding commercial
recreation facilities.
RESEARCH LABORATORY. A place equipped for experimentation, testing and analysis, and observation and
study for scientific research.
RESIDENTIAL FACILITY. A home or facility in which a person with a mental illness, mental retardation or
developmental disability resides, except a home subject to Chapter 3721 of the Ohio Revised Code or the home of a
relative or legal guardian in which a person with a mental illness, mental retardation or developmental disability
resides.
RESIDENTIAL USE. A home, abode, dwelling unit or place, where a family or individual(s) live, where such a
place has areas for living and eating within the structure. This category includes but is not limited to single-family
detached units, single-family detached units in PUD’s (clustered, patio-dwelling, and zero lot-line), multi-family
units, and manufactured or mobile homes as well as uses such as bed & breakfast facilities, granny cottages, group
homes, and day care /Type A.
RESIDENTIAL, MULTI-FAMILY. Two or more attached dwelling units sharing one or more common walls
between any two units and/or stacked one above another. This category shall include but not be limited to twofamily, three-family, apartments, townhouses, dormitories, fraternities and sororities, and boarding houses.
RESIDENTIAL, SINGLE-FAMILY CLUSTERED. A building intended or used primarily for residential purposes
to be occupied by one family, and located in a grouping of structures that are arranged closer to one another than
District setback requirements would normally allow to provide open space and/or conservation of natural features
and which are built as part of a Planned Unit Development at a net density permitted in the underlying zone districts.
RESIDENTIAL, SINGLE FAMILY DWELLING UNIT -- DETACHED. A dwelling designed for and occupied by
not more than one family as that term is defined in this Resolution and surrounded by open space or yards and which
has no roof, wall or floor in common with any other dwelling unit. The type of construction of such units shall
conform either to the OBOA (Ohio Building Officials Association), or CABO (Council of American Building
Officials) One and Two family dwelling code, or other applicable building code, or be classified as an Industrialized
Unit under the Ohio Basic Building Code, or conform to the Ohio Revised Code (ORC 303.212) definition of
permanently-sited manufactured housing, as follows:
Permanently-Sited Manufactured Housing must:
Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution Page 2-15
a. Be constructed pursuant to the HUD Code (Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, 42
U.S.C.A. 88 stat. 700, 5401 and 5403) after January 1, 1995. It must have a permanent label or tag attached to it as
specified in 42 U.S.C.A. 5415, certifying compliance with all federal construction and safety standards.
b. Be attached to a permanent frost-free foundation (slab, crawl space foundation or full foundation).
c. Be connected to appropriate utilities.
d. Have a length of at least 22 feet and a width of at least 22 feet, as manufactured.
e. Have at least 900 square feet of living area.
f. Have conventional residential siding (i.e. lap, clapboard, shake masonry, vertical natural materials), a 6-inch minimum
eave overhang including appropriate guttering and a minimum “A” roof pitch of 3:12.
g. Have removed its indications of mobility (temporary axles, trailer tongue, running lights) upon placement upon its
foundation.
h. Be intended to be assessed and taxed as permanent real estate, not personal property. The title for such structure shall
be surrendered to the county Auditor upon its placement on its permanent foundations, and such surrender shall be
notice to the Auditor to tax said structure as real estate from that day forward.
i. Meet all applicable zoning requirements uniformly imposed on all single-family dwellings in the particular district,
(excepting contrary requirements for minimum roof pitch and requirements that do not comply with HUD construction
and safety standards for manufactured housing).
RESIDENTIAL, TWO-FAMILY. A structure on a single lot containing two dwelling units, each of which is totally
separated from the other by an unpierced wall extending from ground to roof or an unpierced ceiling and floor
extending from exterior wall to exterior wall, except for a common stairwell exterior to both dwelling units.
RESIDENTIAL, THREE-FAMILY. A building consisting of three (3) dwelling units whether one above the other
or side by side, and which share a common entrance or entrance way, or have separate entrances or entrance ways,
in a single building occupying one (1) lot.
RESIDENTIAL, TOWNHOUSE. A one-family dwelling in a row of at least three such units in which each unit has
its own front and rear access to the outside, no unit is located over another unit, and each unit is separated from any
other unit by one or more common fire resistant walls.
RESIDENTIAL, ZERO LOT-LINE. A building or portion thereof designed for residential purposes. The dwelling
unit is a single-family detached unit that is placed against one of the side lot lines to allow more open and yard
space.
RESTAURANT. An establishment where prepared and ready-to-consume food is available to the general public for
consumption on or off the premises.
RESTAURANT-Tavern An establishment where prepared and ready-to-consume food is available to the general
public for consumption on or off the premises and alcoholic beverage consumption occurs as a supplement to the
preparation and sale of food for onsite consumption.
RIGHT-OF-WAY (R.O.W.). A strip of land dedicated by recorded instrument occupied or intended to be occupied
by a public street or railroad and within which may be located electric transmission lines, gas pipe lines, water
mains, sanitary sewers or storm sewers
S
SATELLITE DISH ANTENNA. A device incorporating a reflective surface that is solid, open mesh, or bar
configured and is in the shape of a shallow dish, cone, horn, or cornucopia. Such device shall be used to transmit
and/or receive radio or electromagnetic waves between terrestrially and/or orbital based uses. This definition is
meant to include but not be limited to what are commonly referred to as satellite earth stations, and satellite
microwave antennas.
Page 2-16 Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution
SCHOOL. A privately-owned or publicly-owned pre-school, elementary school, middle school, junior high school,
high school, or vocational or professional school, with no rooms regularly used for housekeeping or sleeping rooms.
SCREEN. A method of reducing the impacts of noise and unsightly visual intrusions with less offensive or more
harmonious elements which is 100 % opaque.
`
SHOPPING CENTER. A group of two or more retail establishments and/or restaurants, planned and developed
with a unified design of buildings with off-street parking, landscaped areas, and service areas and pedestrian malls
or plazas provided on the property as part of the unified design.
SHRUB. A plant that at the time of planting, is at least eighteen inches (18”) tall above the highest root, or of a size
requiring a two (2) gallon pot.
SHRUBS, HEDGE. Plants that at maturity will range in height from 7 feet to 15 feet and are spaced from 3 to 6 feet
on center depending upon the variety.
SHRUBS, BLOOMING. Plants that flower or undergo change in leaf color. They range in height from 2 to 14 feet.
SIGN. Any object, device, display or structure, or part thereof, situated outdoors or indoors and visible from the
exterior of the building or structure, that is used to advertise, identify display direct or attract attention to an object,
person, institution, organization, business, product, service, event or location by any means, including words, letters,
figures, designs, symbols, fixtures, colors illumination or projected images. Signs do not include the flag or emblem
of any nation, organization of nations, state or city, or any fraternal, religious or civic organizations; nor does it
include works of art which in no way identify a product or business logo. See related sign definitions that are listed
in Chapter 13.
SITE AREA, GROSS. The computed area contained within the lot lines which includes rights-of-way, either as an
easement or dedicated.
SITE AREA, NET. The computed area contained within the lot lines, less any land within rights-of-way and
easements for public streets.
SOLAR PANEL (PV) A single photovoltaic panel or group of photovoltaic panels that convert solar energy to
electricity or other energy source for consumer or commercial consumption.
SOLID WASTE. Any unwanted residual solid or semisolid material resulting from industrial, commercial,
agricultural, and community operations, excluding earth or material from construction, mining, or demolition
operations, or other waste materials of the type that would normally be included in demolition debris, nontoxic fly
ash, spent nontoxic foundry sand, and slag and other substances that are not harmful or inimical to public health, and
includes, but is not limited to, garbage, tires, combustible and non-combustible material, street dirt, and debris.
"Solid waste" does not include any material that is an infectious waste or a hazardous waste.
STABLE. A structure and/or land use in or on which equines are bred, boarded, trained, or kept for sale or hire.
STADIUM. A structure or facility designed, intended, or used primarily for athletic or entertainment events and
containing seating for spectators of those events, but not including a raceway or drag strip.
STEEP SLOPES. Land area where the inclination of the land's surface from the horizontal is twenty percent (20%)
or greater.
STORY. That portion of a building, other than a cellar as defined herein, included between the surface of any floor
and the surface of the floor next above it or, if there be no floor above it, then the space between the floor and the
ceiling next above it.
STORY, HALF. A space under a sloping roof which has the line of intersection of roof decking and wall face not
more than three (3) feet above the top level, and in which space not more than two-thirds (2/3) of the floor area is
finished off for use.
Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution Page 2-17
STREAM. A shallow watercourse that flows year round generally less than 40 feet wide.
STREET, MAJOR ARTERIAL. A street which serves the major activity centers, high traffic volume corridors, and
the longer trip desires. With major arterials, service to the adjacent land is subordinate to the provision of travel
service.
STREET, COLLECTOR. A street which provides both land access and traffic circulation within residential,
commercial, and industrial areas. It differs from an arterial in that collector streets may penetrate these areas and
arterials usually do not. Collector streets distribute traffic from arterial streets and channel traffic from local streets.
STREET, MINOR ARTERIAL. Public streets having the primary purpose of collecting traffic from intersecting
local streets and distributing this volume to the nearest arterial. A secondary purpose is to carry moderate volumes
of through traffic. Access to abutting land uses is a secondary function which, with proper land planning, may be
limited so long as the abutting land use is not materially and adversely affected by such limitation.
STREET, LOCAL. Streets having the primary purpose of providing access to individual properties that abut them.
Local streets serve residential, commercial, and industrial land uses providing links for short-distance trips and
access to the collector and arterial system on a local level. Frontage roads may also be considered local streets.
STREET, PRIVATE. A shared means of vehicular ingress and egress located within an easement of access serving
as frontage for lots in a residential PUD, not dedicated to a political subdivision by recorded instrument that is
maintained by the party or parties using such private street for private access.
STREET, PUBLIC. A publicly dedicated or owned right-of-way constructed to County Engineer standards intended
or used for vehicular and pedestrian movement and, except where limited or controlled access, affording the
principal means of access to abutting property.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATION. Any change in the supporting members of a building, such as bearing walls or
partitions, columns, beams or girders, or any increase in the area of cubical contents of the building.
STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires location on the ground or attached to
something having a location on the ground, including, but without limiting the generality of the foregoing,
advertising signs, billboards, areas improved for parking, backstops for tennis courts and pergolas.
STRUCTURE, PRINCIPAL. A structure containing the principal use of the lot.
SUMMER CAMP. A publicly or privately owned facility providing outdoor recreational activities and shelter for
one or a group of persons, usually children, for a temporary period of time.
T
TEMPORARY USE. A temporary use is one established for a fixed period of time with the intent to discontinue
such use upon the expiration of such time. Such uses do not involve the construction or alteration of any permanent
building or structure.
TERMINAL, TRUCK. A structure or land primarily used for the temporary storage of goods awaiting transfer or
wholesale distribution by means of motor carrier transportation.
THEATER, MOVIE AND DRAMA, INDOOR. A building in which movies are screened before a live audience, or
in which dramatic performances are carried out with fixed seating.
THEMED SPECIAL PURPOSE VENUE. A building or portion of a building used for a special themed production
or event typically associated with legal or social holidays or events (such as Haunted Houses or similar attraction)
located in a commercial setting. 
Page 2-18 Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution
THOROUGHFARE PLAN. An officially adopted plan by the Board of County Commissioners and Regional
Planning Commission which provides guidance in the development of future transportation networks capable of
safely accommodating traffic volumes generated by growth and development.
TRAILER, UTILITY. Any towed vehicle open or enclosed specifically designed for the purpose of transporting
equipment, tool, supplies, materials, or goods of a similar nature that will not permit temporary human habitation for
travel, recreation, vacation or other transient purposes.
TRAILER, RV. Any towed or self-propelled vehicle constructed, re-constructed or added to by means of
accessories in such a manner as will permit the use and occupancy thereof for temporary human habitation for
travel, recreation, vacation or other primarily transient purposes, as opposed to a mobile home as defined in this
Resolution; or office use, or storage or conveyance of machinery, tools or equipment, including those vehicles that
are attached to an automobile or truck for the sole purpose of transportation.
TRAILER, LIVESTOCK. Any towed vehicles that are attached to an automobile or truck for the sole purpose of
transporting goods or farm animals.
TRAILER, TEMPORARY OFFICE Any enclosed towed vehicle specifically designed to serve as a temporary
office or commercial purpose, where human habitation is limited to regular business hours or to specific special
events.
TREES, CANOPY. A deciduous tree which at maturity will shed its leaves annually and provide shade. (See
Section 15-3)
TREES, EVERGREEN. A coniferous tree with needles or a broadleaf tree which retains its leaves throughout the
year. (See Section 15-3)
TREE, UNDERSTORY. A lower growing tree which screens, flowers, defines space and provides seasonal interest.
(See Section 15-3).
U
USE. The purpose of activity for which land, or any structure thereon, is designed, arranged, or intended, or for
which it is occupied or maintained.
PERMITTED. Any use which is identified with a “P” in applicable Tables.
PERMISSIBLE. Any use which is identified in “PUD-1”, “PUD-2” or “C” in applicable or with a “S-PUD” in
applicable Tables.
V
VEHICLE, COMMERCIAL. A vehicle which displays any commercial activity and which use is primarily for
commercial purposes.
VEHICLE, INOPERABLE OR ABANDONED. A motor vehicle which is stored outdoors and so damaged,
wrecked, dismantled, unlicensed or in other condition as to be inoperative. Without limiting the term, a motor
vehicle is abandoned if its state registration as displayed on the license plate has been removed or expired for more
than 90 days. This definition shall not be deemed to include farm machinery other than automobiles or trucks.
VEHICLE, OPERABLE UNLICENSED ON RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY. Any vehicle which through parcel size,
condition, visibility, adverse impact, duration or location which has received a Temporary Zoning Certificate.
VEHICULAR STORAGE YARD. Fleet storage or other inactive vehicle storage, which is not accessible to
vehicular traffic of the general public.
Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution Page 2-19
VEHICULAR USE AREA. All areas subject to vehicular traffic including parking lots, access-ways, loading areas
and service areas.
VETERINARY FACILITY. A structure or building set up for the medical care of animals, including offices, clinic
space and indoor kennels for detaining animals, but not including outdoor kennel areas.
VIDEO GAME PARLOR. A place in which a collection of electronic, coin-operated games are played.
W
WAREHOUSING. The indoor storage and/or sale of goods, materials, or merchandise for shipment to or
processing on other property.
WATERCOURSE. A course or channel in which water flows, consisting of bed, banks, and water; includes rivers,
creeks, and other streams confined in a channel, but not necessarily flowing all the time. Gullies, ravines, swales,
sloughs, and similar depressions do not ordinarily constitute watercourses.
WATERWAY. A body of water, such as a lake, pond, continuously flowing stream, creek, river, channel, or canal
which functions as a water route.
WETLANDS. Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration
sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adopted
for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, bottomlands, and similar
areas. Size is not a limitation. Wetlands are also identified as areas that contain hydrophytic vegetation, hydric
soils, and wetland hydrology.
WHOLESALE. The sale of goods to retailers or jobbers rather than consumers.
WILDLIFE, EXOTIC. Indigenous or non-indigenous wildlife, including those animals that could be considered
dangerous but not limited to lions, tigers, ocelots, jaguars, leopards, mountain lions, cheetahs, lynx, bobcats,
jaguarundi, bears, hyenas, wolves or coyotes, or any life-threatening reptiles and arachnids, including but not limited
to crocodilians, poisonous reptiles and tarantulas.
WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEM/ WINDMILL/TURBINE/ (Commercial) A mechanical devise used for
the purpose of converting naturally occurring wind or wind energy into consumable power through direct generation
or battery charging for commercial purposes or commercial distribution or consumption off-site.
WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEM/WINDMILL/TURBINE/ (Private) A mechanical devise used for the
purpose of converting naturally occurring wind or wind energy into consumable power through direct generation or
battery charging for primary use on the property on which the device is installed.
Y
YARD. An open space on the same lot with a building, unoccupied and unobstructed by any portion of a structure
from the ground upward, except as otherwise provided herein.
(See Appendix 1: Building and Yard Requirements)
YARD, FRONT. A yard extending across the front of a lot between the side lot lines and being the horizontal
distances from the main building (or any projection thereof, other than the projection of the usual steps or
entranceway) to:
a. the right-of-way line
b. the easement line (where vehicular access to the lot is provided by a private street or a private drive)
c. the terminus of the easement (where vehicular access to a panhandle lot is provided by a driveway extending from the
terminus of an easement located outside the panhandle area)
Page 2-20 Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution
d. the terminus of the panhandle (where vehicular access to a panhandle lot is provided by a driveway extending from the
terminus of the panhandle area or the terminus of an easement located inside the panhandle area).
(See Appendix 1: Building and Yard Requirements)
YARD, REAR. A yard extending across the area of a lot between the side lot lines and being the horizontal
distances between the rear lot line and the main building or any projection thereof, other than steps, unenclosed
balconies or unenclosed porches. On corner lots the rear yard shall be considered as parallel to the street upon
which the lot has its least dimension. (See Appendix 1: Building and Yard Requirements)
YARD, REQUIRED. A front, side or rear yard that runs parallel to a property line, the depth of which shall be
determined by the minimum setbacks established for the zone district in which the lot is located. In measuring a
required yard for the purpose of determining the minimum width of a side yard, the depth of a front yard or the
depth of a rear yard, the minimum horizontal distance between the lot line or applicable easement line and the
nearest portion of the main building or projection thereof (excluding the projection of the usual steps or
entranceway) external building projections shall be used. On panhandle lots, where the front yard is measured from
an easement line inside the panhandle area, the main building must also be setback from the property line of the
panhandle a distance not less than the minimum side yard requirement of the district. (See Appendix 1: Building
and Yard Requirements)
YARD, SIDE. A yard being the minimum horizontal distance between the main building or any projection thereof,
and the side line of the lot extending from the front yard to the rear yard. (See Appendix 1: Building and Yard
Requirements)
Z
ZONING CERTIFICATES. A written certification that a structure, use or parcel of land is or will be in compliance
with the requirements of this Resolution, and in compliance with all other conditions of approval.
ZONING COMPLIANCE PLAN. A site plan for the specific development and specific use of a parcel or tract of
real estate required to obtain a Zoning Certificate, as further described in Section 20-1.2 The Zoning Compliance
Plan shall show the specific use or uses, illustrated by a plat, drawn to scale, showing the boundaries of such parcel
or tract, the location, size, height and use of all existing structures, and the exact location and pertinent details of
proposed buildings, structures, signage, lighting, pedestrian ways, vehicular access, circulation patterns, parking
areas and buffering accompanied by a detailed description of the plat identifying the impervious surface ratio,
density and requirements for yards, parking, landscaping and buffers, the existing and intended use of each building
or part of a building, the number of families or housekeeping units the building is designed to accommodate, and
such other information with regard to the lot and neighboring lots as may be necessary for the enforcement of this
Resolution and any other requirements as identified on the application form or forms provided by the Administrative
Official. All dimensions shown on these plats relating to the location and size of the lot to be built upon shall be
based on an actual survey.
[ B A L A N C E O F T H I S P A G E I N T E N T I O N A L L Y L E F T B L A N K ]
Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution Page 2-21
[ T H I S P A G E I N T E N T I O N A L L Y L E F T B L A N K ]

Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution Page 3-1
3 DISTRICTS AND ZONING MAP
DISTRICTS AND ZONING MAP
3-1 DISTRICTS.
In order to carry out the purposes of this Resolution, Green Township is divided into the following zoning districts:
a. Residential Districts
1. A Residential ("Lowest" Density)
2. B Residential
3. C Residential
b. Commercial Districts
1. O Office
2. D Retail Business
c. Special Public Interest Overlay Districts
1. SPI-NQ Special Public Interest-Neighborhood Quality
2. SPI-SC Special Public Interest-Suburban Center/Corridor
d. Planned Unit Development Overlay District (PUD) (see applicability in Sections 1-6(e) and 18-2)
1. PUD Planned Unit Development
e. Specific Plan Districts
1. CUP Community Unit Plan Overlay District
2. DD Planned Retail/Multi-Family District
3. OO Planned Office/Multi-Family District
3-2 PERMITTED USES.
The uses permissible with a Permitted Use Zoning Certificate, a Conditional Use Zoning Certificate, or a Planned
Unit Development (PUD) Zoning Certificate are summarized in the Table of Permissible Uses found in Table 3-10.
When used in connection with a particular use in the Table of Permissible Uses, the designations “P”, “PUD-1”,
“PUD-2”, “C”, and “S-PUD” shall have the following meanings:
3-2.1 Permitted Use.
The letter “P” means the use is permitted as-of-right in the indicated zoning district with a Permitted Use
Zoning Certificate issued by the office of the Administrative Official certifying that the plats and plans for
the proposed use comply with all applicable provisions of the Northeast Green Township Zoning
Resolution.
3-2.2 Planned Unit Development - 1.
The designation “PUD-1” means that based upon the intensity of land use, established in conjunction with
Table 3-10, the Table of Permissible Uses, the use is permissible in the indicated zoning district, with a
PUD Zoning Certificate issued by the office of the Township Zoning Inspector certifying:
a. approval of a PUD Plan for the project area by the Northeast Green Township Zoning Commission
pursuant to Chapter 18; and
C H A P T E R
3
Page 3-2 Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution
b. approval of a Zoning Compliance Plan certifying that the plats and plans for the proposed use comply
with all other applicable provisions of the Zoning Resolution, including all conditions of approval.
3-2.3 Planned Unit Development - 2.
The designation “PUD-2” means that based upon the intensity of land use, established in conjunction with
Table 3-10, the Table of Permissible Uses, the use is permissible in the indicated zoning district, with a
PUD Zoning Certificate issued by the office of the Township Zoning Inspector certifying:
a. approval of the proposed PUD-2 by the Board of Township Trustees because the proposed
development exceeds the maximum density or intensity of use established for PUD-1 approval
pursuant to Chapter 18; and
b. that the plats and plans for the proposed use comply with all other applicable provisions of the
Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution, including all conditions of approval.
3-2.4 Conditional Use.
The letter “C” means that the use is permissible in the indicated zoning district, provided it is listed in
Table 17-12 in Chapter 17, in Table 3-10, the Table of Permissible Uses, or in any other part of this
Resolution, with a Conditional Use Zoning Certificate issued by the office of the Township Zoning
Inspector certifying:
a. approval of the proposed conditional use by the Board of Zoning Appeals pursuant to the standards and
procedures set forth in Chapter 17, and
b. that the plats and plans for the proposed use comply with all other applicable provisions of the
Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution, including all conditions of approval.
3-2.5 Specific PUD.
The designation “S-PUD” means that the use is permissible in the indicated zoning district, with a PUD
Zoning Certificate issued by the office of the Township Zoning Inspector certifying:
a. approval of a zone amendment and PUD Plan for the specific use by the Board of Township Trustees
pursuant to Chapter 16 and Chapter 7, and
b. that the plats and plans for the proposed use comply with all other applicable provisions of the
Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution, including all conditions of approval.
3-2.6 Change of Use (Commercial)
A change in the commercial use of a building or a portion of a building or lot that requires or results in an
overall increase in required or actual parking of more than 20% above the preceding actual or required
parking for the use - use or uses as determined by Table 12-10 shall be required to comply with all
applicable site and buffer landscape standards pursuant to Chapter 14
3-3 ZONING MAP.
The Board of Township Trustees, upon recommendation of the Township Zoning Commission, shall adopt a Zoning
Map, in accordance with Section 1-6, which shall set out and delineate the zoning districts established by Section 3-
1 with relation to all land within the jurisdiction of these regulations. The Zoning Map is hereby designated,
established and incorporated as part of these provisions, and the original, which shall be on file at the office of the
Rural Zoning Commission, shall be as much a part of these provisions as if it were fully described in these
provisions.
3-4 STATUS OF PLANNED DISTRICTS.
Areas of the Township identified on the Zoning Map which are designated “DD” Planned Retail/Multi-Family
Residence District, and “OO” Planned Office/Multi-Family Residence District, prior to the effective date of this
Resolution shall continue to be designated as planned development districts as authorized by Ohio Revised Code
Section 519. 021 and the covenants and conditions as contained in the Board of Township Trustees’ Resolution of
approval and development plans approved and in effect at the time of their development shall be retained.
Adjustments and revisions shall be administered in accordance with procedures provided for in Chapter seven (7). 
Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution Page 3-3
3-5 ADDITIONAL USE, HEIGHT AND AREA REGULATIONS AND EXCEPTIONS.
The district regulations hereinafter set forth in this Section qualify or supplement, as the case may be, the district
regulations appearing elsewhere in this Resolution.
3-5.1 Height Of Institutions Related To Yards.
Public or private service buildings, hospitals (except as otherwise provided), institutions or schools, when
permitted in a District, may be erected to a height not exceeding sixty (60) feet, and churches and temples
may be erected to a height not exceeding seventy-five (75) feet if the building is setback from each required
yard line at least one (1) foot for each foot of additional building height above the height limit otherwise
provided in the District in which the building is built.
3-5.2 Height of Single Family Dwelling Related to Side and Rear Yard.
Single-family dwellings in the “A”, “B” and “C” Residential Districts may be increased in height by not
more than ten (10) feet when the side and rear yards are increased over the yard requirements of the District
in which they are located by not less than ten (10) feet, but they shall not exceed three (3) stories in height.
3-5.3 Structures Exempt from Height Limit.
Church spires, domes, flagpoles, aerials, antennas, windmills, chimneys, cooling towers, elevator
bulkheads, fire towers, belfries, monuments, stacks, derricks, conveyors, stage tower or scenery lofts, tanks,
water towers, silos, farm buildings, or necessary mechanical appurtenances, may be erected to any lawful
and safe height
3-5.4 Rear Yard on Double Frontage Lots.
Rear Yard requirements for buildings on double frontage lots may be waived if an open space is provided
equivalent to the required front yard of the district. Such open space shall run parallel with the secondary
right-of-way line and shall contain no accessory structures.
3-5.5 Rear Yards Adjacent to Alleys.
In computing the depth of a rear yard or the width of a side yard where the rear or side yard opens on an
alley, one half of the alley width may be included as a portion of the rear or side yard as the case may be.
3-5.6 Construction in Required Yard.
Every part of a required yard shall be open to the sky unobstructed, except as otherwise provided in Section
3-5 and except for accessory buildings in a rear yard, and except for the ordinary projections of awnings,
bay windows, skylights, sill, belt courses, cornices, wing walls, and ornamental features projecting not to
exceed thirty (30) inches in the A Residential District and not to exceed eighteen (18) inches in all other
Districts. In residential districts additions to existing single family dwellings may maintain existing side
yard setbacks established by the building on the lot if all other setbacks are met.
3-5.7 Low Projections in Required Front and Rear Yards.
Terraces, uncovered porches, platforms, patios, decks, handicapped ramps and ornamental features which
do not extend more than three (3) feet above grade may project into a required front or rear yard, but shall
not be closer to any side lot line than the side yard requirement.
3-5.8 Stairways and Balconies in Required Yards.
Open or lattice-enclosed fire escapes, fireproof outside stairways, and balconies opening upon fire towers
projecting into a yard not more than five (5) feet and the ordinary projections of chimneys and flues may be
permitted but not closer than two (2) feet to any lot line in any case.
Page 3-4 Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution
3-5.9 Required Yard for Multiple Family Dwellings.
For the purpose of the yard requirements, a two-family or multiple dwelling shall be considered as one
building occupying a single lot.
3-5.10 Projection of Porches in Required Front Yards.
A covered, unenclosed or screened porch attached to the main structure may project into a required front
yard for a distance not exceeding ten (10) feet.
3-5.11 Front Yards on Infill Sites.
Where forty (40%) percent or more of the lots in a subdivision are occupied by buildings, the minimum
front yard on any lot shall not be less than the average depths of the front yards of the two buildings on
each side and within one hundred (100) feet of such lot, or where there is a building within one hundred
(100) feet of the lot on one side only, the minimum front yard shall be the same as that of such adjacent
building, provided, however, that no yard shall be required to exceed seventy-five (75) feet in the “A”
Residential Districts or to exceed fifty (50) feet in any other district requiring a front yard.
3-5.12 Limitation of One Main Building on Lot.
Every building hereafter erected or structurally altered shall be located on a lot as herein defined, and in no
case shall there be more than one main building on a lot except as specifically provided hereinafter in
Section 3-5.13.
Where a proposed building/development is located on several lots of record, such parcels shall be
consolidated prior to issuance of a Zoning Certificate. Furthermore, all accessory structures shall be
located on the same parcel as the principal use.
3-5.13 Yard Requirements Where Lot Includes More Than One Main Building.
Where a lot is used for institutional, commercial, or multiple family purposes, and where the zoning
compliance plan is specifically approved therefore by the Township Zoning Inspector, more than one main
building may be located on the lot, but only when such buildings conform to all yard and open space
requirements at the perimeter of the lot for the district in which the lot is located.
3-6 AGRICULTURE REGULATIONS.
Except as hereinafter provided, nothing contained in this Resolution shall regulate the use of any land for
agricultural purposes or the construction or use of buildings or structures incident to the use for agricultural purposes
of the land on which such buildings or structures are located, and no zoning certificate shall be required for any such
use, building or structure, for lots that are five (5) acres or greater. Lots greater than one acre and less than five
acres are subject to Suburban Agriculture uses per Table 3-10.
3-7 AGRICULTURAL AND SUBURBAN AGRICULTURAL USES.
A building or premises shall be used only in accordance with the following requirements if listed as “permitted” in
Table 3-10:
3-7.1 Agricultural Setbacks.
Agriculture on lots as provided in this section provided any buildings, structures, exterior storage, refuse,
livestock pens, or supplies shall be at least one hundred (100) feet from every property line of adjacent
parcels in residence or office districts and further provided that specific agricultural uses listed in this
article shall comply with specific standards for such uses.
3-7.2 Greenhouse Setbacks.
Greenhouses over one-hundred thirty square feet in size on lots as provided in this section shall be at least
sixty (60) feet from every property line of adjacent parcels in residence or office districts, provided any 
Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution Page 3-5
exterior storage or refuse or supplies and the heating plant shall be at least one hundred (100) feet from
every property line of adjacent parcels in residence districts.
3-7.3 Agricultural Accessory Uses.
Accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to any permitted agricultural or suburban agricultural
use:
a. Compost piles or bins, on lots as provided in section 3-6, and 3-7 which are located on the premises
and at least twenty-five (25) feet from every property line.
b. Roadside stands, or farm markets, on exempt lots as provided in section 3-6, where 50 percent or more
of the gross income received from the market is derived from produce raised on farms owned or
operated by the market operator in a normal crop year and provided that the structure shall not exceed
eight hundred (800) square feet and such structure and parking areas shall be at least sixty (60) feet
from every property line of adjacent parcels in residence districts; and that a sign advertising such
products shall not exceed twelve (12) square feet in area.
3-8 DAIRYING, AND ANIMAL AND POULTRY HUSBANDRY REGULATIONS.
Except as hereinafter provided, nothing contained in this Resolution shall prohibit the use of any land for dairying,
and animal and poultry husbandry or the construction or use of buildings or structures incident to the use for such
agricultural purposes of the land on which such buildings or structures are located, and no zoning certificate shall be
required for any such use, building, or structure, for lots that are five (5) acres or greater. Lots greater than one acre
and less than five acres are subject to agricultural setback limitations per Section 3-7, provisions of Section 3-9 and
Suburban Agriculture uses per Table 3-10.
3-9 DAIRYING, AND ANIMAL AND POULTRY HUSBANDRY USES.
A building or premises shall be used only in accordance with the following requirements if listed as “permitted” in
Table 3-10:
3-9.1 Veterinary Facilities and Animal Care.
In any residential district veterinary facilities or other animal care facilities, including livery stables, riding
academies, and grooming parlors on lots as provided in Section 3.8, are permitted if any outside animal
enclosure or outside run is at least one hundred (100) feet from any property line of adjacent parcels in
residence or office districts
3-9.2 Veterinary Facilities in Office Districts.
In the “O” Office District, veterinary facilities are permitted only without outside runs.
3-9.3 Veterinary Facilities in Retail Districts.
In the “D” Retail Business District, veterinary facilities or other animal care facilities, including livery
stables, riding academies, and grooming parlors, on lots as provided in Section 3.8, are permitted if any
outside animal enclosure or outside run is at least one hundred (100) feet to any property line of adjacent
parcels in residence or office districts.
3-9.4 Agricultural Accessory Uses.
Accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to any of the uses in section 3.8, including:
a. Household Pet /Private Kennel Enclosures. The keeping of household pets provided, however, that
any exterior enclosure in which household pets are kept shall be located in the rear yard and such
enclosure (except property line fences) shall be at least twenty (20) feet from every property line.
b. Livestock Enclosures. The keeping of livestock, on lots as provided in section 3-8, provided, however,
that any such accessory buildings or enclosures (including all fences), for such animals or fowl, other
than household pets, shall be at least one hundred (100) feet from every property line.
Page 3-6 Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution
Table 3-10- Table of Permissible Uses
Zoning Certificates
(Designations and
Requirements)
P= Permitted as-of-right with a Permitted Use Zoning Certificate after approval by the
Northeast Green Township Zoning Inspector
PUD-1= Permissible with a Planned Unit Development Zoning Certificate after public
hearing and administrative approval by the Northeast Green Township Zoning Commission
PUD-2 = Permissible with a Planned Unit Development Zoning Certificate after public
hearing and administrative approval by the Board of Township Trustees
C= Permissible with a Conditional Use Zoning Certificate after public hearing and
administrative approval by the Board of Zoning Appeals
S-PUD= Permissible with a Planned Unit Development Zoning Certificate after legislative
approval of a zoning amendment to a Specific Plan District by the Board of Township
Trustees
Zoning Districts A-C= Single Family Residence Districts including A, B and C
O= Office District/Multi-Family
D= Retail Business District/Multi Family
DD= Planned Multi-Family District/Retail/Multi-Family
OO= Planned Office District/Multi-Family
Intensity ISR= Impervious Surface Ratio (the total area of buildings and hard-surfaced areas divided
by the area of the lot excluding right-of-way)
Permissible Uses By District
Zoning District A-C O D DD OO
Residential Uses
Single Family Dwelling Unit
Detached P PUD-1 PUD-1 S-PUD S-PUD
Low Density
(Based on Underlying Zone)
PUD-1 PUD-1 PUD-1 S-PUD S-PUD
Moderate Density
(Max 9.7 DU/A)
PUD-1 PUD-1 S-PUD
High Density
(Max 14.5 DU/A)
PUD-2 PUD-2 S-PUD
Accessory in home Day Care
Child- Type A
C PUD-1 PUD-1 S-PUD S-PUD
Accessory in home Day Care
Child- Type B
(Six children or less)
P P P S-PUD S-PUD
WITH Group Home C S-PUD S-PUD
Multi-Family
Low Density Duplex
(2-unit building) Max
Density (5.8 DU/A)
PUD-1 P P S-PUD S-PUD
Moderate Density
(Max 9.7 DU/A)
P P S-PUD S-PUD
High Density
(Max 14.5 DU/A)
PUD-1 S-PUD S-PUD
(Table Continued Next Page) 
Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution Page 3-7
Zoning District A-C O D DD OO
Commercial Uses
Office
Low Intensity
(Max ISR= .60)
P P S-PUD S-PUD
Moderate Intensity
(Max ISR= .75)
PUD-1 P S-PUD S-PUD
High Intensity
(ISR over .75)
PUD-1 PUD-1 S-PUD S-PUD
Note: The following office uses are permissible in the zone
Districts indicated above with the zoning certificate specified
for the applicable level of intensity (except as noted below*):
1.) Accounting Services
2.) Architectural Services
3.) Banking or Financial Institution
4.) Banking with Drive-in or Drive-through Facility
5.) Dental Laboratories
6.) Funeral Home or Mortuary
7.) Legal Services
8.) Medical Laboratories
9.) Medical Office or Clinics
 10.) Optical Laboratories
 11.) Professional Consulting Services
 12.) Psychological Counseling
 13.) Real Estate and Securities Brokering
 14.) Tax Preparation Services
 15.) Art Gallery or Interior Decorating Service
 16.) General Office Uses, with no onsite sale of a commodity
 17.) Insurance Sales and Consultation
Retail
Low Intensity
(Max ISR= .60)
P S-PUD S-PUD
Moderate Intensity
(Max ISR= .75)
PUD-1 S-PUD S-PUD
High Intensity
(ISR over .75)
PUD-2 S-PUD S-PUD
Dance/Concert Clubs
(Occupancy greater than 100) C
Note: The following retail business uses are permissible in
the zone districts indicated above with the zoning certificate
specified for the applicable level of intensity:
1.) Amusement Park
2.) Art Gallery, Antique Store, Interior Decorator
Service
3.) Automobile and Truck Rental
4.) Automobile Part Sales
5.) Automobile, Motorcycle, Truck, Recreational
Vehicle and Trailer Sales, Rental Service
6.) Batting Cage
7.) Barber Shops & Beauty Salons
8.) Billiard Parlor or Pool Room
9.) Bowling Alley
 10.) Building Materials, Sales & Distribution
 11.) Car Wash - full service
 12.) Convenience Store (with or without gas pumps)
 13.) Delicatessens, Bakeries, Produce/Meat Markets
 14.) Drive in or Drive through Facility

 15.) Durable Goods (furniture, appliance, ect,) sales & service
16.) Dry Cleaning
17.) Gasoline Service Station (with repair)
18.) General Retail- soft goods (clothing, fabric, gifts, jewelry)
19.) Grocery & Drug Stores
20.) Health & Fitness Clubs/Swimming & racquet clubs open to
the public for a fee
21.) Machinery & Equipment sales, rental and service
22.) Miniature Golf Course
23.) Photo Lab, Camera sales or service, Media studio
24.) Restaurant/Bar with or without drive in
25.) Service Establishments: (Dry Cleaning or Laundry Pick
Up, Stations, Print Shops, Tailoring, Shoes or Hat Repair)
26.) Shopping Center (mixed-use retail)
27.) Skating Facility
28.) Studio: Art, Dance, Gymnastics, Music
29.) Theater, Movie or Live Performance Space
30.) Themed Special Purpose Venue
31.) Dance Club/Concert Club occupancy less than 100
32.) Mechanical and Home Improvement Contractor
Adult Entertainment Establishment
Low Intensity
( Max ISR= .60)
PUD-2
Moderate Intensity
(Max ISR= .75)
High Intensity
(ISR over .75)
(Table Continued Next Page) 
Page 3-8 Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution
Zoning District A-C O D DD OO
Recreation, Community Facility – Private
(nonprofit or privately owned and operated country clubs, swim and tennis facilities/clubs & YMCA’s);
athletic fields & golf courses
Low Intensity
(Max ISR= .60)
C P P S-PUD S-PUD
Moderate Intensity
(Max ISR=.75)
C PUD-1 PUD-1 S-PUD S-PUD
High Intensity
(ISR over .75)
C PUD-2 PUD-1 S-PUD S-PUD
Campground or Summer
Camp
(Public or Private)
C
Recreation Center, Internal
(Public or Private)
C
Recreation, Community Facility – Public
(public owned or operated athletic fields, golf courses, swim/tennis facilities, parks, playgrounds, wildlife
reserves, forests, senior centers, recreation centers, cultural and entertainment facilities)
All Intensities P P P S-PUD S-PUD
Cultural and Entertainment Facility
(museum, outdoor drama theater (not drive-in), botanical garden and zoo)
Low Intensity (max ISR=.60) C P P S-PUD S-PUD
Moderate Intensity (max
ISR=.75)
C PUD-1 PUD-1 S-PUD S-PUD
High Intensity (ISR over .75) C PUD-2 PUD-2 S-PUD S-PUD
Agricultural Uses
Rural Agriculture on Lots
greater than 5 acres
EXEMPT IN ALL DISTRICTS
Suburban Agriculture
Minimum lot size 1-acre
P P P P P
Note: The following suburban agriculture uses
are permitted as-of-right in the zone districts
indicated above with a Permitted Use Zoning
Certificate subject to compliance with the
regulations for Agricultural Uses in Chapter 3:
1) Aquaculture & Fishing Lakes
2) Floriculture
3) Horticulture
4) Ornamental Horticulture
5) Olericulture
6) Pomiculture
7) Viticulture & Winemaking
8) Private Compost Piles
9) Farm Markets (Accessory Use)
10) Beekeeping
11) Keeping of Household Pets
12) Kennel (private)
13) Club Activities
14) Future Farmers of America Activities
Farming of Trees, Mushrooms, Sod, Tobacco & Field
Crops
Other Agriculture Uses
(lots greater than 5 acres)
Greenhouses C P P
Farm Markets
(Principal Use)
P
Keeping Of Exotic Wildlife
Commercial Kennel P P P S-PUD S-PUD
(Table Continued Next Page) 
Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution Page 3-9
Zoning Categories A-C O D DD OO
Kennel (Commercial)
Lots greater than 1 acre P P S-PUD
Lots 1 acre or less
Riding Stables
Lots greater than 1 acre P P P
Lots 1 acre or less
Veterinary Facility (without outside run)
Lots greater than 1 acre P P
Lots 1 acre or less P
Veterinary Facility (with outside run)
Lots greater than 1 acre PUD-1 P
Lots 1 acre or less PUD-1
Institutional and Public Service Uses
Institutional
Low Intensity
( Max ISR= .60)
C P P S-PUD S-PUD
Moderate Intensity
(Max ISR= .75)
C PUD-1 PUD-1 S-PUD S-PUD
High Intensity
(ISR over .75)
C PUD-2 PUD-2 S-PUD S-PUD
Note: The following institutional uses are permissible in the zone districts indicated above with the zoning
certificate specified for the applicable level of intensity (except as noted below):
1) Day Care Center, Child
2) Hospital
3) Continuing Care Retirement Facility
Cemetery C P P S-PUD S-PUD
Correctional Facility
Halfway House
Church
Low Intensity
(Max ISR= .50)
P P P S-PUD S-PUD
Moderate Intensity (Max
ISR= .75)
PUD-1 P P S-PUD S-PUD
High Intensity up to 90%
ISR @ existing Building/Site
> .75 ISR
P
Nursing and Convalescent Home
Low Intensity
(Max ISR= .60)
P P S-PUD S-PUD
Moderate Intensity (Max
ISR= .75)
PUD-1 PUD-1 S-PUD S-PUD
High Intensity (Max ISR
over .75)
PUD-2 PUD-2 S-PUD S-PUD
(Table Continued Next Page) 
Page 3-10 Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution
Permissible Uses (Cont.)
Zoning Categories A-C O D DD OO
Schools
(pre-school, elementary, junior high, middle, high, vocational & professional)
Low Intensity
(Max ISR= .60)
C P P S-PUD S-PUD
Moderate Intensity (Max
ISR= .75)
C PUD-1 PUD-1 S-PUD S-PUD
High Intensity (Max ISR
over .75)
C PUD-1 PUD-1 S-PUD S-PUD
University or College
Low Intensity
(Max ISR= .60)
C P P S-PUD S-PUD
Moderate Intensity (Max
ISR= .75)
C PUD-1 PUD-1 S-PUD S-PUD
High Intensity (Max ISR
over .75)
C PUD-2 PUD-2 S-PUD S-PUD
Public Service Uses
Low Intensity
(Max ISR= .60)
P P P S-PUD S-PUD
Moderate Intensity (Max
ISR= .75)
P P P S-PUD S-PUD
High Intensity (Max ISR
over .75)
PUD-1 PUD-1 PUD-1 S-PUD S-PUD
Note: The following public service (government owned or operated) uses are permissible in the zone
districts indicated above with the zoning certificate specified for the applicable level of intensity:
1) Government Facility
2) Government Storage Yard
3) Library
4) Park and Ride Facility
5) Police and Fire Station
Remainder of Page Left Intentionally Blank 

Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution Page 4-1
4 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
4-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
4-1.1 Statement of Intent.
The Residential Districts are intended to provide a range of housing choices to meet the needs of Green
Township’s residents, and, to offer a balance of housing types and densities, while promoting harmonious
development of residential communities in the Township and to help implement housing policies and other
plans adopted by the Township.
4-1.2 Accessory Uses and Structures.
Accessory uses and structures shall be permitted in the “A”, “B”, “C” Districts subject to the provisions of
Chapter 10.
4-1.3 Conditional Uses.
Conditional uses in Residential Districts are listed in Table 3-10. Further information on the criteria,
standards, and procedures for conditional uses are contained in Chapter 17.
4-1.4 Signs.
Signs that are permitted in the “A”, “B”, and “C” Districts are subject to the provisions of Chapter 13.
4-1.5 Lot Area, Lot Width, Building Height and Yard Standards.
All uses and structures permitted in the “A”, “B”, and “C”, Districts shall comply with the following
provisions and the lot area, lot width, building height and yard requirements set forth in the Tables in
Section 4-4 and 4-5 found at the end of this Chapter.
a. Front Yard Setback Alignment with Adjacent Lots. Alignment setbacks and/or front yard depths are
not required to exceed the average minimum depths of the existing front yards on the lots adjacent to
them on each side, if the lots are within the same block and within one hundred (100) feet of each
other.
b. Front Yard Requirements on Corner Lots. Lots that have a double frontage are required to have a front
yard on one (1) street side of the corner lot, and a side yard on the other street side not less than double
the side yard requirement. No accessory building shall project beyond the front yard line on either
street.
Additional height and yard requirements and exceptions are contained in Section 3-5.
4-1.6 Parking Standards.
All uses and structures permitted in the “A”, “B”, and “C”, Districts shall comply with the parking
requirements set forth in Chapter 12.
4-1.7 Buffer Yards and Resource Protection.
All uses and structures in the “A”, “B”, and “C”, Districts shall comply with the provisions of Chapters 14,
15 and any other appropriate Chapter.
C H A P T E R
4
Page 4-2 Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution
4-1.8 Redevelopment Standards.
Redevelopment approved in accordance with Section 1-7 of this Zoning Resolution is exempt from the
provisions identified in Section 1-7.2 and any provision of Section 4-3 (Multi-family Residential District)
that is inconsistent with the Standards for Redevelopment established in Chapter 9.
4-2 THE A, B AND C RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.
4-2.1 Purpose.
The purpose of the “A”, “B”, and “C” Districts established by Section 3-1 is to protect and support the
development of single-family housing in conjunction with appropriate accessory uses and public and
institutional uses. The standards of these districts are intended to maintain a suitable environment for
family living at various densities and in various types of housing, including single-family detached and
clustered housing under specified conditions which provides flexibility in the organization of site elements
and building location.
4-2.2 Permitted Uses.
The uses specified as Permitted ("P") Uses in the Table of Permissible Uses found in the Table in Section
3-2 are permitted as of right in the “A”, “B”, and “C” Districts with a Permitted Use Zoning Certificate
provided they comply with all requirements of this Chapter and all other applicable requirements of this
Resolution.
4-2.3 Planned Unit Developments.
In addition to the uses specified as Planned Unit Developments ("PUD") in the Table of Permissible Uses
found in the Table in Chapter 3, the following densities are permitted in the A, B, and C Districts as PUD's
provided they are approved as PUD-1's by the Zoning Commission pursuant to the standards and
procedures for planned unit developments set forth in Chapters 4 and 18 and comply with all applicable
requirements of this Resolution. For calculation of density on preliminary plans where the actual location
of rights-of-way or easements for public streets is not yet determined, the net density shall be based on 82%
of the gross area.
a. “A” District: single-family detached dwellings at a maximum net density of 3.00 units per acre.
b. “B” District: single-f amily detached dwellings at a maximum net density of 4.25 units per acre.
c. “C” District: single-family detached dwellings at a maximum net density of 5.8 units per acre.
4-2.4 Maximum Height and Minimum Lot Area, Bulk and Yard Requirements.
The maximum height and minimum lot area, bulk and yard, and accessory building requirements for low
density residential uses in the “A”, “B”, and “C” Districts are set forth in the Table in Section 4-6 found at
the end of this Chapter.
4-2.5 Single Family Planned Unit Development (PUD) Standards for Zero-LotLine or Duplex Dwellings and Single-Family Detached, Clustered Dwellings
Subject to the provisions of Section 4-2.3, as applicable, developments of patio dwellings, zero-lot-line
dwellings, and duplex clustered dwellings shall comply with the density requirements for single-family
detached dwellings for residential district in which they are located and the minimum lot size, bulk and
other site development requirements set forth below. Minimum perimeter setbacks shall conform to district
setback requirements.
a. Zero-Lot-Line or Duplex Dwellings. Each dwelling shall be located on an individual lot which is set on
or within six (6) feet of the side lot line. No windows shall be located on the wall of the dwelling nearest
to the side lot line. Either a six (6) foot maintenance easement shall be provided on the neighboring
property or the dwelling may be set back six (6) feet from the line and a recreation, planting, and use
easement may be granted to the adjacent lot owner. The minimum stanadards for a zero-lot-line
dwelling are as follows:
Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution Page 4-3
Minimum Lot Area (sq. ft.): 5,000
Minimum Interior Yards
 Front (ft.):
 Rear (ft.):
 Side (ft.):
20
30
6
a
Minimum Building Spacing (ft.): 12b
Minimum Lot Width (ft.): 45
Minimum Setback from Interior Right-of-Way or access easement (ft.): 20
a
Standard applicable when units are set back from the lot line and a use/maintenance
easement is provided.
b
Standard applicable for two unit buildings when units are set back from the lot line and/or
a use/maintenance easement is provided.
EXAMPLE OF SITE PLAN
ZERO-LOT-LINE DWELLING
b. Clustered Dwellings. Each dwelling type consists of a single-family detached residence located on an
individual lot, which has private yards on all sides of the house. The minimum standards for singlefamily detached clustered dwellings other than the types specified in Sections 4-2.5(a) and (b) are:
Minimum Lot area (sq. ft.): 6,000
Minimum Interior Yards
 Front (ft.):
 Rear (ft.):
 Side (ft.):
25
30
6
Minimum Lot Width (ft.): 60
Minimum Setback from Interior Right-of-way or access
easement (ft.)
25
Page 4-4 Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution
EXAMPLE OF SITE PLAN
CLUSTERED DWELLINGS
4-3 D MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT/O MULTI FAMILY DISTRICT.
4-3.1 Purpose.
The purpose of the “D” Multi-Family District is to provide opportunities for low to high-density residential
development where sufficient infrastructure is available prior to development. This district permits a broad
range of housing types including single-family and multi-family dwellings as well as low-intensity uses
that retain a residential character.
4-3.2 Permitted Uses.
In addition to the uses specified as Permitted ("P") in the Table of Permissible Uses found in the Table in
Chapter 3, low intensity residential uses are permitted as of right in the “D” District (at net densities of 9.6
dwelling units or less per acre) with a Permitted Use Zoning Certificate provided that they comply with all
requirements of this Chapter and all other applicable requirements of this Resolution.
4-3.3 Planned Unit Developments.
In addition to the uses specified as Planned Unit Developments ("PUD") in the Table of Permissible Uses
found in Chapter 3 the following types of residential developments are permitted in the “D” District at
intensities listed in Chapter 3 as Planned Unit Developments provided they are approved as PUD-1's by the
Township Zoning Commission, or as PUD-2's by the Board of Township Trustees if the proposed
development exceeds any of the moderate land use intensity standards enabling PUD-1 approval. PUD's
are subject to the standards and procedures set forth in Chapter 18 provided they comply with all other
applicable requirements of this Resolution:
a. Single-Family Detached Dwellings in PUD's.
b. Multi-Family dwellings
1. Apartment style
2. Two Family
3. Three Family
Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution Page 4-5
4. Townhouse
4-3.4 Minimum Lot Area, Lot Width and Yard Requirements.
The minimum lot area, lot width, bulk and yard requirements for low intensity residential and office uses in
the “D” District are found in the Table in Section 4-5.
4-3.5 Maximum Building Height.
The maximum building height permitted in the “D” District, exclusive of developments approved through
the PUD procedure, for principal buildings, is as per Section 4-6. Maximum height for accessory structures
shall be one story or 15 feet, whichever is less.
4-3.6 Standards for Townhouse Dwellings.
Rows of attached townhouses shall be no more than 4eight (8) units each. The minimum standards for a
townhouse dwelling are as follows:
Minimum Lot Area: (sq. ft. per unit) 2,400
Minimum Lot Width (ft.): 18
Minimum Yards (per structure)
 Front (ft.):
 Rear (ft.):
20
30
Minimum Setback from Interior Right-of-way or access easement
(ft.)
20
EXAMPLE OF SITE PLAN
TOWNHOUSE DWELLINGS
Page 4-6 Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution
TABLE 4-4 LOT AREA STANDARDS
LOT AREA, LOT WIDTH, MAXIMUM HEIGHT AND YARD REQUIREMENTS FOR LOW DENSITY
USES PERMITTED AS OF RIGHT IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
DIMENSIONS DISTRICTS
A B C D O
MAXIMUM HEIGHT
I. Principal Building
A. Stories (whichever is less) 2.5 2.5 2.5 3.5 3.5
B. Feet (whichever is less) 35 35 35 45 45
LOT REQUIREMENTS
I. Minimum Lot Size Per Unit
A. Single-family detached (sq. ft.) 15,000@ 8,000@ 6,000@ 6,000 6,000
B. Multi-Family
1. Apartment style (sq. ft.) NA NA NA 6,000 6,000
2. Two-Family (sq. ft.) NA NA NA 6,000 6,000
3. Three-Family (sq. ft.) NA NA NA 6,000 6,000
4. Townhouse (sq. ft.) NA NA NA 6,000 6,000
II. Minimum Lot Width
A. Single-family detached (ft.) 80 60 50 50 50
B. Multi-Family
1. Apartment style (ft.) NA NA NA 100 100
2. Two-Family (ft.) NA NA NA 50 50
3. Three-Family (ft.) NA NA NA 80 80
4. Townhouse (ft.) NA NA NA 18 18
MINIMUM YARD REQUIREMENTS
I. Front Yard
A. Single-family detached (ft.) 40 40 35 35 35
B Multi-Family*
1. Apartment style (ft.) NA NA NA 30 30
2. Two-Family (ft.) NA NA NA 30 30
3. Three-Family (ft.) NA NA NA 30 30
4. Townhouse (ft.) NA NA NA 20 30
II. Side Yards (each)
A. Single-family detached (ft.) 10a 8 6 6 6
1. Total (30a)
2. Minimum (8a)
B. Multi-Family*
1. Apartment style (ft.) NA NA NA 10 10
2. Two-Family (ft.) NA NA NA 15 15
3. Three-Family (ft.) NA NA NA 15 15
4. Townhouse (ft.) NA NA NA 15 15
III. Rear Yard
A. Single-family detached (ft.) 45 30 30 30 30
B. Multi-Family*
1. Apartment style (ft.) NA NA NA 40 40
2. Two-Family (ft.) NA NA NA 30 30
3. Three-Family (ft.) NA NA NA 30 30
4. Townhouse (ft.) NA NA NA 25 25
NOTE: @ Minimum lot sizes in all residential districts require public sewer service at issuance of a Zoning Compliance
Certificate, without sewer service, the minimum lot size shall be one-acre (43,560 Sq. Ft.)
* Subject to the standards contained in Chapter 4.
a 8’ reduced side yard setback permitted with a combined total of 30’
Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution Page 4-7
TABLE 4-5
LOT AREA, LOT WIDTH, MAXIMUM HEIGHT AND YARD REQUIREMENTS FOR SINGLE FAMILY
DETACHED DWELLINGS IN PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS (PUD’S)
DISTRICTS
DIMENSIONS A B C D O
MAXIMUM HEIGHT
Principal Building
Stories (whichever is less) 2.5 2.5 2.5 3.5 3.5
Feet (whichever is less) 35 35 35 45 45
Minimum Lot Size Per Unit
Zero-lot-line (sq. ft.) 5,000 5,000 5,000 5,000 5,000
Duplex (sq. ft.) 5,000 5,000 5,000 5,000 5,000
Clustered (sq. ft.) 6,000 6,000 6,000 6,000 6,000
Minimum Lot Width
Zero-lot-line (ft.) 45 45 45 45 45
Zero-lot-line (ft.) 38 38 38 38 38
Clustered (ft.) 50 50 50 50 50
[ B A L A N C E O F T H I S P A G E I N T E N T I O N A L L Y L E F T B L A N K ]
Page 4-8 Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution
[ T H I S P A G E I N T E N T I O N A L L Y L E F T B L A N K ]

Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution Page 5-1
5 COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
5-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
5-1.1 Statement of Intent.
The D-Retail Commercial District, is intended to provide controlled and harmonious settings for office,
multi-family and business/commercial developments, to enhance employment opportunities, to encourage
the efficient use of land, to enhance property values and the tax base, to encourage high quality of design in
multi-family, office and business/commercial developments, and to help implement land use plans,
thoroughfare plans and corridor studies adopted by the Township.
5-1.2 Impact Controls and General Restrictions.
a. Mechanical Equipment to be Screened. All ground level and roof top mechanical equipment visible
from public streets and residential districts or any districts with permitted residential uses shall be
screened.
b. Refuse Control. Temporary storage of refuse materials shall be limited to that produced on the
premises. Refuse containers must be covered and shall be stored within completely enclosed buildings
or placed in corrals providing complete screening from public streets and residential districts or any
districts with permitted uses in accordance with Chapter 10.
c. Sensory and Nuisance Impacts. Processes, equipment, and goods for sale shall be limited to those that
are not objectionable to the enjoyment and use of adjoining and adjacent zoning lots which are within
600 feet, because of odor, dust, smoke, gases, vapors, noise, light, vibration, refuse matter or watercarried waste.
Noise levels must be controlled to prevent sound levels beyond the property line, at locations zoned or used
for residential purposes, so as not to exceed 62 decibels (dBA) between the hours of 7:00 AM to 10:00 PM
and 52 decibels (dBA) between the hours of 10:00 PM and 7:00 AM.
Any use or dissemination of sensory or fire, explosive, or radioactive material in a manner or quantity that
endangers the public health, safety, comfort or welfare is hereby declared a public nuisance and shall be
unlawful.
No outdoor speakers or paging systems may be located within 100’ of any residential property line,
d. Lighting. On site lighting shall be located, directed or designed in such a manner as to contain and
direct light and glare only to the property on which it is located in accordance with Chapter 12.
e. Permanent Outdoor Storage or Display.
1. The outdoor storage or display of merchandise materials or inventory shall not encroach into areas
used for pedestrian circulation or required parking.
2. The outdoor storage or display of materials, merchandise, or inventory shall not be located in any
required pervious surface area including buffers or streetscape areas within the lot.
3. The outdoor storage or display of materials, merchandise, or inventory shall not include the use of
banners, pennants, point of sale displays or strings of pennants.
4. Outdoor storage areas shall be required to be fully screened with opaque fencing not to exceed
eight (8) feet in height.
5. No commercial construction equipment (such as; skid-stear loaders, rollers, compactors,
bulldozers, excavators, dump-trucks, crains, portable generators, project lighting or similar
equipment or vehicles may be stored outside in any commercial district.
C H A P T E R
5
Page 5-2 Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution
5-1.3 Accessory Uses and Structures.
Accessory uses and structures shall be permitted in the D District subject to the provisions of Chapter 10.
5-1.4 Conditional Uses.
Conditional uses in the Commercial Districts are listed in Chapter 3. Further information on the criteria,
standards, and procedures for conditional uses is contained in Chapter 17.
5-1.5 Planned Unit Developments.
The uses specified as Planned Unit Developments, PUD-1’s in the Table of Permissible Uses found in
Section 3-2 require approval by the Northeast Green Township Zoning Commission pursuant to the
standards and procedures for Planned Unit Developments set forth in Chapter 18 and all other applicable
requirements of this Resolution. Proposed office and retail uses whose intensity exceeds the maximums
indicated in Table 3-10 for PUD-1’s require PUD-2 approval by the Board of Township Trustees pursuant
to Chapter 18.
5-1.6 Signs.
On premises signs are permitted in the “D” District subject to the provisions of Chapter 13.
5-1.7 Lot Area, Bulk and Yard Standards.
All uses and structures permitted in the D District shall comply with the lot area, bulk and yard
requirements set forth in Table 5-3 found at the end of this Chapter. Additional bulk and yard requirements
and exceptions are contained in Section 3-5.
5-1.8 Parking Standards.
All uses and structures permitted in the D District shall comply with the parking requirements set forth in
Chapter 12.
5-1.9 Buffer Yards and Resource Protection.
All uses and structures permitted in the D District shall comply with the provisions of Chapters 14 and 15.
5-1.10 Redevelopment Standards.
Redevelopment approved in accordance with the applicable sections of Chapter 1 of this Zoning Resolution
shall be exempt from provision of this Chapter that is inconsistent with Standards for Redevelopment as
defined in Chapter 9.
5-2.1 Permitted Uses.
The uses defined as low intensity commercial uses in the Table of Permissible Uses found in Table 3-10 are
permitted as of right in the “D” District with a Permitted Use Zoning Certificate provided they comply with
all requirements of this Chapter and all other applicable requirements of this Resolution.
[ B a l a n c e o f T h i s P a g e I n t e n t i o n a l l y L e f t B l a n k ]
Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution Page 5-3
TABLE 5-3
LOT AREA, BULK AND YARD REQUIREMENTS IN COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS FOR LOW
INTENSITY USES PERMITTED AS OF RIGHT
REQUIREMENT 2
D
RETAIL BUSINESS Multi-Family
DISTRICT
A. MAXIMUM HEIGHT
1. Principal Building
A. Height (ft.) 35
B. LOT REQUIREMENTS
1. Minimum Lot Area (sq. ft.) 10,000
2. Minimum Lot Width (ft.) 75
C. MINIMUM YARD REQUIREMENTS 1
1. Front Yard (ft.) 30
2. Side Yards (ft. each) 5
3. Rear Yard (ft.) 20
D. MAXIMUM IMPERVIOUS SURFACE RATIO2
.60
NOTES:
1 Also see buffer yard requirements in Chapter 14.
2 These standards may be exceeded up to the maximums specified in Chapter 3 if approved as a PUD-1 with appropriate
modifications in the above standards pursuant to Chapter 18. Proposed commercial uses that exceed PUD-1 standards in
Section 3-2 shall require PUD-2 approval by the Board of Township Trustees with appropriate modifications on the above
standards pursuant to Chapter 18.
[ B A L A N C E O F T H I S P A G E I N T E N T I O N A L L Y L E F T B L A N K ]
Page 5-4 Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution
[ T H I S P A G E I N T E N T I O N A L L Y L E F T B L A N K ]

Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution Page 6-1
6 INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS
OFFICE DISTRICTS
6-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
6-1.1 Statement of Intent.
The O-Office District is intended to provide controlled and harmonious settings for office development and
multi-family developments to enhance employment opportunities, to encourage the efficient use of land, to
enhance property values and the tax base, to encourage high quality of design in office and, to help
implement land use plans, thoroughfare plans and corridor studies adopted by the Township.
6-1.2 Impact Controls and General Restrictions.
a. Mechanical Equipment to be Screened. All ground level and roof top mechanical equipment visible
from public streets and residential districts or any districts with permitted residential uses shall be
screened.
b. Refuse Control. Temporary storage of refuse materials shall be limited to that produced on the
premises. Refuse containers must be covered and shall be stored within completely enclosed buildings
or placed in corrals providing complete screening from public streets and residential districts or any
districts with permitted uses in accordance with Chapter 10.
c. Sensory and Nuisance Impacts. Processes, equipment, and goods for sale shall be limited to those that
are not objectionable to the enjoyment and use of adjoining and adjacent zoning lots which are within
600 feet, because of odor, dust, smoke, gases, vapors, noise, light, vibration, refuse matter or watercarried waste.
Noise levels must be controlled to prevent sound levels beyond the property line, at locations zoned or used
for residential purposes, so as not to exceed 62 decibels (dBA) between the hours of 7:00 AM to 10:00 PM
and 52 decibels (dBA) between the hours of 10:00 PM and 7:00 AM.
Any use or dissemination of sensory or fire, explosive, or radioactive material in a manner or quantity that
endangers the public health, safety, comfort or welfare is hereby declared a public nuisance and shall be
unlawful.
d. Lighting. On site lighting shall be located, directed or designed in such a manner as to contain and
direct light and glare only to the property on which it is located in accordance with Chapter 12.
6-1.3 Accessory Uses and Structures.
Accessory uses and structures shall be permitted in the “O” District are subject to the provisions of
Chapter 10.
6-1.4 Conditional Uses.
Conditional uses in the Commercial Districts are listed in Chapter 3. Further information on the criteria,
standards, and procedures for conditional uses is contained in Chapter 17.
6-1.5 Planned Unit Developments.
The uses specified as Planned Unit Developments, PUD-1’s in the Table of Permissible Uses found in
Chapter 3 require approval by the Northeast Green Township Zoning Commission pursuant to the
standards and procedures for Planned Unit Developments set forth in Chapter 18 and all other applicable
requirements of this Resolution. Proposed office and retail uses whose intensity exceeds the maximums
C H A P T E R
6
Page 6-2 Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution
indicated in Chapter 3 for PUD-1’s, will require PUD-2 approval by the Board of Township Trustees
pursuant to Chapter 18.
6-1.6 Signs.
On premises signs are permitted in the “O” District subject to the provisions of Chapter 13.
6-1.7 Lot Area, Bulk and Yard Standards.
All uses and structures permitted in the “O” District shall comply with the lot area, bulk and yard
requirements set forth in the Table found at the end of this Chapter. Additional bulk and yard requirements
and exceptions are contained in Chapter 3.
6-1.8 Parking Standards.
All uses and structures permitted in the “O” District shall comply with the parking requirements set forth in
Chapter 12.
6-1.9 Buffer Yards and Resource Protection.
All uses and structures permitted in the “O” District shall comply with the provisions of Chapters 14 and
15.
6-1.10 Redevelopment Standards.
Redevelopment approved in accordance with the applicable sections of Chapter 1 of this Zoning Resolution
shall be exempt from provision of this Chapter that are inconsistent with Standards for Redevelopment as
defined in Chapter 9.
6-2 PERMITTED USES
The purpose of the “O” District established in Chapter 3, is to provide locations that are suitable for the
establishment and operation of professional, institutional and governmental office uses.
6-2.1 Purpose.
The uses defined as low intensity office uses in the Table of Permissible Uses found in Chapter 3 are
permitted as of right in the “O” District with a Permitted Use Zoning Certificate provided they comply with
all requirements of this Chapter and all other applicable requirements of this Resolution.
[ B A L A N C E O F T H I S P A G E I N T E N T I O N A L L Y L E F T B L A N K ]
Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution Page 6-3
TABLE 6-3
LOT AREA, BULK AND YARD REQUIREMENTS IN COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS FOR LOW
INTENSITY USES PERMITTED AS OF RIGHT
REQUIREMENT 2
O
OFFICE-Multi Family
DISTRICT
A. MAXIMUM HEIGHT
1. Principal Building
A. Height (ft.) 35
B. LOT REQUIREMENTS
1. Minimum Lot Area (sq. ft.) 7.500
2. Minimum Lot Width (ft.) 75
C. MINIMUM YARD REQUIREMENTS 1
1. Front Yard (ft.) 30
2. Side Yards (ft. each) 10
3. Rear Yard (ft.) 20
D. MAXIMUM IMPERVIOUS SURFACE RATIO2
.60
NOTES:
1 Also See buffer yard requirements in Chapter 14.
2 These standards may be exceeded up to the maximums specified in Chapter 3 if approved as a PUD-1 with appropriate
modifications in the above standards pursuant to Chapter 18. Proposed commercial uses that exceed PUD-1 standards in
Chapter 3 shall require PUD-2 approval by the Board of Township Trustees with appropriate modifications on the above
standards pursuant to Chapter 18.
[ B A L A N C E O F T H I S P A G E I N T E N T I O N A L L Y L E F T B L A N K ]
Page 6-4 Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution
[ T H I S P A G E I N T E N T I O N A L L Y L E F T B L A N K ]

Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution Page 7-1
7 SPECIAL PURPOSE AND SPECIFIC PLAN DISTRICTS
SPECIFIC PLAN DISTRICTS
(“DOUBLE LETTER DISTRICTS”)
7-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
Specific Plan Districts are intended to promote the general public welfare, encourage the efficient use of
land and resources, promote greater efficiency in providing public and utility services, and encourage
innovation in the planning and building of all types of development. Within a Specific Plan District, the
township zoning, subdivision, and platting regulations need not be uniform, but may vary in order to
accommodate unified development and to promote the purposes of Specific Plan Districts.
7-2 SPECIFIC PLAN DISTRICTS (“DOUBLE LETTER” DISTRICTS)
7-2.1 Purpose.
The purpose of Specific Plan Districts is to encourage innovative design and efficiency in the use of land,
resources and utilities on sites where, at the election of the property owner, a legally binding and unified
plan for the specific use and specific development of the tract assures a harmonious relationship with
existing and potential development of the surrounding property. The Specific Plan Districts enable
property to be developed under flexible standards based on public review and legislative approval of a
comprehensive site plan without the need to conform to uniform zoning requirements of traditional zoning
districts.
7-2.2 Classification.
Specific Plan Districts shall be classified by categories, according to the provisions as described herein, and
each adopted Specific Plan District shall be shown on the official Zoning Map. The six categories of
Specific Plan Districts include:
a. CUP Community Unit Plan Overlay Districts (single-family)
b. DD Planned Retail/Multiple Residence Districts
c. OO Planned Office/Multiple Residence Districts
7-2.3 Procedure for District Designation
a. Applicant. The owner or owners of a tract of land, in accordance with the zone amendment procedures
in Chapter 16, shall submit a PUD Plan for the use and development of such tract for the purposes of,
and meeting the requirements set forth in, this chapter.
b. Approval Criteria. In determining whether a Specific Plan District shall be approved or recommended
for approval, the Administrative Officer, Regional Planning Commission, Northeast Green Township
Zoning Commission and Green Township Board of Trustees should consider the Standards for
Amendments (Chapter 16), the Standards for PUD Plans (Chapter 18) and the guidelines for each
Specific Plan District in the Appendix.
b. Property Owner Acceptance, Recording and Certification of Compliance. The PUD Plan and
supplemental regulations contained in the Resolution of approval by the Green Township Board of
Trustees shall be incorporated in the Amendment to the Zoning Resolution as an integral part of the
zoning regulations applicable to the real estate in accordance with the following procedure:
c. Within ten days after the close of the public hearing by the Green Township Board of Trustees, the
property owner shall submit a PUD plan, to the Administrative Official, incorporating the following on
the plan:
C H A P T E R
7
Page 7-2 Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution
d. all revisions to the proposed PUD Plan and all conditions, covenants and related revisions as may be
required by the recommendations of the Rural Zoning Commission and as modified by majority vote
of the Board of Trustees, and
e. a Deed of Acceptance of the PUD Plan and the Amendment executed by the owner of the real estate.
f. Within ten days after receipt of the revised PUD Plan and executed Deed of Acceptance, the Board of
Trustees shall act on the proposed Amendment pursuant to the recuirements outlined in Chapter 16.
g. After the effective date of the zoning amendment, the clerk of the Board of Trustees shall cause such
Amendment to be recorded in the land records applicable to the real estate in the office of the Recorder
of Hamilton County.
h. Zoning Compliance Plan. After the zoning amendment is recorded, the property owner may submit a
Zoning Compliance Plan pursuant to the procedures set forth in Chapter 18 for obtaining a Zoning
Certificate.
7-2.4 Permissible Uses.
The uses specified in the Table of Permissible Uses found in the Table in Chapter 3 may be permitted in
Specific Plan Districts provided that the district shall be laid out and developed as a unit according to a
PUD (planned unit development) Plan, as defined in Chapter 2, approved for the specific use or uses and
which complies with all other applicable requirements of this Resolution.
7-2.5 Lot Area, Bulk, Height, and Yard Requirements.
Except as modified by the Board of Trustees’ Resolution of approval for any Specific Plan District, the
maximum height and bulk, and the minimum lot area and yard requirements shall be as follows:
a. The requirements for the “CUP” Overlay District shall be the same as the underlying single-family
Residence District in Chapter 4. Nothing in this section shall be deemed to enable modification of the
maximum net density for single family districts pursuant to Chapter 4.
a. The requirements for the “DD” District is setforth in Chapter 7 except that the maximum density for
each Planned Multiple Residence District shall be set forth in the Board of Township Trustees’
Resolution of approval.
b. The requirements for the “OO” District is setforth in Chapter 7 except that the maximum density for
each Planned Multiple Residence District shall be set forth in the Board of Trustees’ Resolution of
approval. .
7-2.6 Supplemental Regulations.
The standards for each Specific Plan District adopted by the Board of Trustees may further restrict the
regulations for land use and may relax or further restrict the regulations for lot area, coverage, density, floor
area, setback, parking, height, fencing, landscaping or other specific development standards for each
Specific Plan District upon finding that conditions peculiar to a specific site and the achievement of the
Standards for Amendments (Chapter 16) and Standards for PUD Plans (Chapter 18) require supplemental
regulations. Any such supplemental regulations shall be set forth in the Resolution establishing such
Specific Plan District or in an amendment thereto.
7-2.7 Violation of Supplemental Regulations and PUD Plan.
The supplemental regulations, including conditions, covenants and the PUD Plan, for each Specific Plan
District approved in accordance with this Chapter shall be an integral part of the Zoning Resolution and any
departure or any modification, except when specifically approved in accordance with Chapter 18, shall be a
violation of the Zoning Resolution and shall be subject to the provisions and penalties prescribed therefor
in Chapter 24.
7-2.8 Adjustments to Zoning Compliance Plans and PUD Plans.
Adjustments to Zoning Compliance Plans and PUD Plans pertaining to Specific Plan Districts shall be filed
and processed pursuant to the procedures set forth in Chapter 18.
Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution Page 7-3
7-2.9 Appeals.
The appeal of administrative decisions pertaining to Specific Plan Districts shall be filed and processed
pursuant to the procedures set forth in Chapter 18.
TABLE 7-3
LOT AREA, BULK AND YARD REQUIREMENTS IN DOUBLE LETTER COMMERCIAL/MULTIPLE
RESIDENCE DISTRICTS
REQUIREMENT 2
“OO”
DISTRICT
“DD”
DISTRICT
A. MAXIMUM HEIGHT
1. Principal Building
A. Height (ft.) 45 45
B. LOT REQUIREMENTS
1. Minimum Lot Area (sq. ft.) 20,000 20,000
2. Minimum Lot Width (ft.) 100 100
C. MINIMUM YARD REQUIREMENTS 1
1. Front Yard (ft.) 25 25
2. Side Yards (ft. each) Yard setback shall
equal the height of
Building adjacent to
closest property line–
minimum 20
Yard setback shall
equal the height of
Building adjacent to
closest property line–
minimum 20
3. Rear Yard (ft.) Yard setback shall
equal the height of
Building adjacent to
closest property line–
minimum 40
Yard setback shall
equal the height of
Building adjacent to
closest property line–
minimum 40
D. MAXIMUM IMPERVIOUS SURFACE RATIO2
.75 .75
NOTES:
1 Also See buffer yard requirements in Chapter 14.
2 These standards may be exceeded up to the maximums specified in Chapter 3.
[ B A L A N C E O F T H I S P A G E I N T E N T I O N A L L Y L E F T B L A N K ]
Page 7-4 Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution
[ T H I S P A G E I N T E N T I O N A L L Y L E F T B L A N K ]

Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution Page 8-1
8 SPECIAL PUBLIC INTEREST (SPI) OVERLAY DISTRICTS
SPECIAL PUBLIC INTEREST(SPI) OVERLAY
DISTRICTS
8-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
8-1.1 Statement of Intent.
An overlay district is intended to provide supplemental regulations or standards pertaining to specific
geographic features or land uses, wherever these are located, in addition to, but not necessarily more
restrictive than the "base" or underlying zoning district regulations applicable within a designated area.
Whenever there is a conflict between the regulations of a base zoning district and those of an overlay
district, the overlay district regulations control.
8-1.2 Definition.
A Special Public Interest (SPI) District is defined as a geographic area exhibiting or planned to contain
special and distinctive characteristics that are of significant value or importance to the public. These
characteristics include natural phenomena such as unique geologic strata, soil formations, slopes,
vegetation, water flow, significant scenic views or other similar natural features, or have physical
development features such as substantial public investment in public improvements or community plans
that coordinate public and private investment, or have characteristics that include institutional uses or
neighborhood support services in residential neighborhoods or village developments in suburban
metropolitan areas. An SPI district shall be classified according to an SPI category type, and the
characteristics of each SPI district shall be in accord with the characteristics of its type as described in this
Chapter.
8-1.3 Purposes.
The purposes of SPI regulations are to assist the development of land and structures to be compatible with a
larger planning area beyond the immediate vicinity of the site and to protect or improve the quality of the
environment in those locations where the characteristics of the environment or the amount of public
investment are of significant public interest and are vulnerable to damage or loss of public opportunity by
the cumulative effect of development in such planning areas permitted under conventional zoning
regulations. SPI regulations are required to protect the public and property owners in the district:
a. From blighting influences that might be incrementally caused, extended or worsened by the application
of conventional land use regulations to properties and areas of sensitive and special public interest;
b. From significant damage to neighborhoods that contain large institutional and other nonresidential uses
or support services;
c. From significant damage or destruction of prominent wetlands, floodplains, hillsides and/or valleys or
other natural resources caused by improper development thereof;
d. From significant damage to the economic value and efficiency of operation of existing properties
and/or new developments due to the interdependence of their visual and functional relationships;
e. From soil erosion, stream situation and development on unstable land;
f. From the loss or destruction of mature and/or valuable trees and other natural resources;
g. From the detrimental cumulative effects of incremental development decisions in suburban centers,
corridors, neighborhoods and villages on:
1. conservation and correction of the character, integrity, safety, access and circulation;
2. preservation and enhancement of pedestrian safety and views from the public right-of-way;
3. balance of convenience and compatibility between residential and nonresidential areas;
C H A P T E R
8
Page 8-2 Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution
4. coordination of useful and attractive signage and streetscape elements; and
5. minimization of traffic congestion and coordination of land use intensity with local capacities and
goals.
8-1.4 Identification.
The location of all SPI districts shall be shown on the Zoning Map as an overlay zone superimposed in
specific areas over existing zoning district areas.
8-1.5 Applicability.
Except as otherwise provided herein and in other sections of this Zoning Resolution, all regulations of the
underlying zoning districts shall apply to and control property in the SPI district. However, in the case of
conflict between the provisions of an underlying zoning district and an SPI district, the provisions of the
SPI district shall prevail. The adoption of an SPI district shall not have any affect on a previously approved
zoning certificate or PUD Plan during the period of validity of such approval.
8-1.6 Creation.
The Board of Township Trustees may, from time to time, create SPI districts as defined and containing the
characteristics, as set forth in Sections 8-2 through 8-5 of this Chapter.
8-1.7 Procedure.
The establishment or adoption of SPI districts shall be in accordance with the following procedures.
a. Adoption of Special Public Interest Strategy. Prior to the submittal of an application for initiation of a
zoning amendment or supplement for a Special Public Interest (SPI) Overlay District, an SPI strategy
shall be duly adopted by the Regional Planning Commission. The strategy shall contain:
? a boundary map for the proposed overlay district,
? justification for establishment of the proposed overlay district standards and boundaries including
development goals and policies for the area within the proposed boundary, and
? the specific supplemental standards proposed for achieving the SPI strategy.
The strategy shall describe in words and/or illustrations the special and distinctive characteristics of public
interest that are to be protected, improved or achieved and the related specific and measurable standards or
development features that will be required for coordinated implementation of the plan. The SPI Strategy may
contain goals, policies and standards for the following physical elements: location of buildings; architectural
character of buildings; signage; public spaces; streetscape; building and land use mix; diversity and unifying
elements; perimeter buffers; provision of utilities such as sewage disposal; pedestrian and vehicular
circulation; parking; open space, landscaping and other elements essential to the achievement of adopted
community goals. Prior to the adoption of any SPI Strategy copies thereof shall be forwarded for review and
comment to the appropriate citizen or township groups and township trustees representing the community
within the SPI boundary.
b. Adoption of Zoning Text and Map Amendment. The Board of Township Trustees, pursuant to
procedures for zoning amendments in Chapter 16, shall approve, deny or modify such standards and
boundary recommended in the SPI strategy and incorporate same in the resolution establishing any
specific SPI district as a supplement to this Chapter. In the SPI District the adopted specific standards
shall serve as supplemental requirements to the regulations of the underlying district in reviewing all
requests for zoning certificates within the Overlay District boundary.
8-1.8 Supplemental SPI District Regulations.
SPI district standards adopted by the Board of Township Trustees may relax or further restrict the
underlying zoning districts regulations for land use, lot area, coverage, density, floor area, setback, parking,
height, fencing, landscaping or other specific development standards for specific SPI districts upon finding
that conditions peculiar to such district and the achievement of adopted community plans require 
Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution Page 8-3
supplemental regulations. Any such supplemental regulations shall be set forth in the resolution
establishing such SPI district or in an amendment thereto.
8-1.9 Classification.
SPI districts shall be classified by categories, according to the provisions and qualifications as described
herein, and each adopted SPI district shall be shown on the official Zoning Map. The two categories of SPI
overlay districts include:
a. Neighborhood Quality (SPI-NQ)
b. Suburban Center / Corridor (SPI-SC)
8-2 SPECIAL PUBLIC INTEREST - NEIGHBORHOOD QUALITY DISTRICTS.
Special Public Interest (SPI) Neighborhood Quality Districts shall be identified as SPI-NQ Overlay Districts.
8-2.1 Legislative Findings and Specific Purpose.
Balancing the benefits of growth and development of institutions and neighborhood support services with
the livability of adjacent residential neighborhoods requires protection over and above the protection
provided by conventional zoning regulations as follows:
a. To support convenience to services and quality of environment by providing sufficient land for public
and private services and educational and research institutions;
b. To promote the orderly growth and expansion of such institutions and support services located in
residential neighborhoods;
c. To require the development and maintenance of buffer yards on institutional and other nonresidential
properties to protect adjoining residential neighborhoods from the noise, glare and congestion
associated with the intensity of diverse land uses;
d. To promote compatibility between nonresidential uses and surrounding residential uses, and
e. To plan for unusual intensity or density of development.
8-2.2 Characteristics.
SPI-NQ districts shall be limited to geographic areas included in an SPI-Neighborhood Quality Strategy (as
defined in Section 8-1.7) adopted by the Regional Planning Commission and which contain or are planned
to contain all of the following characteristics:
a. Land uses including or adjacent to neighborhood retail and support services (for example hospitals,
clinics, educational facilities, and research facilities) or other institutional uses;
b. Close proximity of diverse land uses to a residential neighborhood.
8-2.3 Designation.
The SPI-Neighborhood Quality Districts, which meet the characteristics, contained in Section 8-2.2 is listed
below and is illustrated on the official zoning map. The adopted specific standards for each Neighborhood
Quality District listed below are included in this Zoning Resolution as a supplement to Chapter 8.
[NEIGHBORHOOD QUALITY DISTRICTS TO BE INSERTED WHEN ADOPTED BY BOARD OF TOWNSHIP TRUSTEES]
[LIST BY SPI NUMBER, TOWNSHIP AND TITLE OF SPECIFIC OVERLAY DISTRICT]
8-3 SPECIAL PUBLIC INTEREST-SUBURBAN CENTER/CORRIDOR DISTRICTS.
Special Public Interest (SPI) Suburban Center or Suburban Corridor Districts shall be identified as SPI-SC Overlay
Districts.
Page 8-4 Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution
8-3.1 Legislative Findings and Specific Purpose.
Business districts and corridors are recognized as principal focal points of community activity providing an
economic resource and a center for community orientation. It is in the interest of the Township to protect
and enhance the features of public interest in such business districts by:
a. Preventing the deterioration of property and the extension of blighting conditions;
b. Encouraging and protecting private investment which improves and stimulates the economic vitality
and social character of the area;
c. Preventing the creation of influences adverse to the physical character of the area.
8-3.2 Characteristics.
SPI-SC districts shall be limited to geographic areas included in a SPI-Suburban Center or SPI-Suburban
Corridor Strategy (as defined in Section 8-1.7) adopted by the Regional Planning Commission and which
contain or are planned to contain the following characteristics:
a. A concentration of retail and service oriented commercial establishments serving as a principal
business activity center for a sociogeographic neighborhood, community, or region;
b. An area that has received or been approved for substantial public investment.
c. An area that is planned for unusual intensity or density of development.
8-3.3 Designation.
The SPI-Suburban Center Districts and Suburban Corridor District which meet the characteristics contained
in Section 8-2.2 is listed below and is illustrated on the official zoning map. The adopted specific standards
for each Suburban Center/Corridor District listed below are included in this Zoning Resolution as a
supplement to Chapter 8.
[SUBURBAN CENTER/CORRIDOR QUALITY DISTRICTS TO BE INSERTED WHEN ADOPTED BY BOARD OF TOWNSHIP
TRUSTEES LIST BY SPI NUMBER, TOWNSHIP AND TITLE OF SPECIFIC OVERLAY DISTRICT]
8-4 DEVELOPMENT AUTHORIZATION
8-4.1 Applications; Contents.
Applications for zoning certificates in SPI districts shall be made to the Administrative Official Inspector
pursuant to Chapter 20. Said applications shall be made on such form or forms as may be provided. The
information required for submission shall demonstrate the compliance of the proposed improvement,
construction or development with the specific standards for the SPI district as well as all requirements of
the underlying district not in conflict with the SPI standards.
8-4.2 Modification Procedure.
Any supplemental regulations adopted pursuant to this Chapter may be modified as provided in Section 8-
6.3 after public hearing upon a finding by the Zoning Commission that the modifications will result in
public benefit through substantial improvements related to any of the following conditions:
a. Provision will be made for substantial usable open space where the slope does not exceed 10 percent
for the use of the occupants of the area;
b. Usable open space will be created for the public by the dedication of public areas or space;
c. The restoration of plant materials will be accomplished by the planting of trees, shrubs, and ground
covers;
d. Utility and other service distribution lines will be placed underground;
e. An improvement in public safety will result;
Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution Page 8-5
f. An improvement in energy conservation will result;
g. The use of creative site planning and design in order to provide for efficient use of land and an
improved environment will result.
8-4.3 Modification Limits.
Upon having made the findings set forth in Section 8-4.2 the regulations set forth therein may be modified
by the Zoning Commission up to the following limits:
a. The gross dwelling unit density and floor area limitations of any area proposed for development shall
remain unchanged and conform to the basic overall density and floor area limitations of the
supplemental regulations in the SPI District. However, lot dimensions, building height, building
setbacks, parking requirements, front, side, and rear yard requirements or other specific development
standards may be modified to provide for a more functional and desirable use of the property.
b. Height limitations may be removed, provided such additional stories to dwelling structures:
1. Shall not increase gross dwelling unit densities or floor area as set forth in the approved
development plan;
2. Shall result in appropriate reduction in building coverage and adherence to the objectives set forth
in this chapter; and
3. Shall not adversely affect surrounding structures.
[ B A L A N C E O F T H I S P A G E I N T E N T I O N A L L Y L E F T B L A N K ]
Page 8-6 Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution
[ T H I S P A G E I N T E N T I O N A L L Y L E F T B L A N K ]

Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution Page 9-1
9 NONCONFORMITIES AND REDEVELOPMENT EXCEPTIONS
NONCONFORMITIES AND
REDEVELOPMENT EXCEPTIONS
9-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
9-1.1 Purpose.
This Chapter regulates the continued existence of uses, structures and lots lawfully established prior to the
effective date of this Resolution that do not conform to the regulations of this Resolution applicable in the
zoning districts in which such uses, structures and lots are located. The continued existence of
nonconforming uses is frequently inconsistent with the purposes for which such regulations are established.
Thus their gradual elimination is generally desirable. The regulations of this Chapter generally permit such
nonconformities to continue without specific limitation of time but are generally intended to restrict further
investments in such uses that would make them more permanent or less desirable. The regulations also
restrict further investment in noncomplying structures and lots of record that would increase the degree of
noncompliance.
This Chapter recognizes, through provisions for compatible nonconforming uses, that the improvement of a
nonconforming use may be desirable in unique circumstances to achieve additional protection of adjacent
property and benefit the surrounding neighborhood.
This Chapter also recognizes, through provisions for Redevelopment Exceptions, that new standards for
landscape, buffers, height and setback requirements may conflict with the investment backed expectations
of owners of developments that existed prior to the adoption of these regulations and therefore allows
limited exception from such regulations to minimize the affect of these standards on existing property
rights.
9-1.2 General Scope of Regulations.
These regulations apply to the following categories of nonconformities:
a. Nonconforming uses of land and of complying structures;
b. Noncomplying structures;
c. Noncomplying lots of record.
Development that is approved in accordance with the Redevelopment Exception provisions of Chapter 1
shall not be classified as any category of nonconformity.
Development that was approved as-of-right prior to 02/01/02 and only permissible as a PUD or Conditional
Use by this Resolution shall not be classified as a nonconforming use.
9-1.3 Exception for Repairs Pursuant to Public Order.
Nothing in this Chapter shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening or restoration to a safe condition of a
nonconforming structure in accordance with an order of a public official charged with protecting the public
safety that declares such structure to be unsafe and orders its restoration to a safe condition. This is
provided such restoration is not otherwise in violation of the various provisions of this Chapter prohibiting
the repair or restoration of partial structures or signs.
9-1.4 Nonconforming Accessory Uses and Structures.
No use, structure or sign that is accessory to a principal nonconforming use or structure shall continue after
such principal use or structure has been voluntarily discontinued for two (2) years or more, unless it shall
thereafter conform to all the regulations of the zoning district in which it is located.
C H A P T E R
9
Page 9-2 Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution
9-1.5 Burden of Establishing Legality of Nonconformity.
The burden of establishing that any nonconforming use lawfully exists under the provisions of this
Resolution shall, in all cases, be upon the owner of such nonconformity and not upon the Township.
9-1.6 Inventory and Notice of Nonconforming Uses.
Within two (2) years after the effective date of this Resolution, or any amendment thereto creating new
nonconformities, or such longer period as may be required, the Township Zoning Inspector shall inventory
all nonconforming uses and determine the names and addresses of the owners of record thereof. For each
such nonconformity inventoried, the Zoning Inspector shall determine the nature and extent of the
nonconformity.
Upon making such determination, the Zoning Inspector shall notify the aforesaid owner or lessee in writing
by registered mail of his determination. Such inventory and notices shall be kept on file by the Zoning
Inspector and shall be a matter of public record.
The determinations of the Zoning Inspector made pursuant to this section shall be subject to appeal to the
Board of Zoning Appeals pursuant to Chapter 22 in the same manner as other rulings and interpretations.
This Section does not relieve the burden establishing the legality of the nonconforming use from the
property owner. It also does not relinquish the establishment of a nonconforming use if the inventory is not
performed or completed.
9-1.7 Zoning Certificate for Legal Nonconformity.
The owner of any nonconforming use may at any time apply to the Administrative Official for a
Nonconforming Use Zoning Certificate to establish the legality of such nonconformity as of a specified
date. Such application shall be filed and processed pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 20.
Any person receiving a notice pursuant to Section 9-1.6 above shall be required, within sixty (60) days of
the receipt of such notice, to apply to the Zoning Inspector for a Nonconforming Use Zoning Certificate
with respect to the identified nonconformity. Unless an appeal from the determination of the Zoning
Inspector has been filed, such application shall be accompanied by an affidavit acknowledging the Zoning
Inspector's determination. This affidavit shall be kept on file by the Zoning Inspector and shall be a matter
of public record.
If, upon reviewing an application for a Nonconforming Use Zoning Certificate for a nonconformity, the
Zoning Inspector determines that the use in question was lawfully existing at the time of the adoption of the
provision creating the nonconformity in question, and remains lawfully existing subject only to such
nonconformity at the time of such application, and that any required affidavit is in order, the Zoning
Inspector shall issue a Nonconforming Use Zoning Certificate evidencing such facts and setting forth the
nature and extent of the nonconformity. Otherwise, the Zoning Inspector shall decline to issue such
certificate and shall declare such use of land or structure to be in violation of this Resolution.
9-2 NONCONFORMING USES OF LAND AND STRUCTURES.
9-2.1 Authority to Continue.
Any lawfully existing use of land or of any structure, which becomes nonconforming through an
amendment of this Resolution or the Zoning Map, may be continued. So long as no structural alterations
are made, it may be changed to another nonconforming use or a more restricted use permitted as-of-right in
the zoning district in which it is located.
9-2.2 Nonconforming Use Discontinued.
If a lawfully existing nonconforming use of land or of any structure is voluntarily discontinued for two (2)
years or more, any future use shall conform to all the regulations of the zoning district in which it is
located, unless approved by the Board of Zoning Appeals according to the provisions of Section 9-5.
Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution Page 9-3
9-2.3 Ordinary Repair and Maintenance of Structures.
Normal maintenance and incidental repair, replacement and installation or relocation of non-bearing walls,
non-bearing partitions, fixtures, wiring or plumbing may be performed on any structure that is devoted in
whole or in part to a nonconforming use or that is accessory to a nonconforming use of land.
9-2.4 Structural Alteration.
Except as authorized by the Board of Zoning Appeals no structure that is devoted in whole or in part to a
nonconforming use, or that is accessory to a nonconforming use of land, shall be structurally altered unless
the use thereof shall thereafter conform to the use regulations of the zoning district in which it is located.
No such alteration shall create a new parking, loading, bulk, yard, space or other nonconformity or increase
the degree of any existing parking, loading, bulk, yard, space or other nonconformity of such structure.
9-2.5 Enlargement of Structure.
Except as authorized by the Board of Zoning Appeals no structure that is devoted in whole or in part to a
nonconforming use or that is accessory to a nonconforming use of land, shall be enlarged or added to in any
manner, including the interior addition of floor area, unless the use of such structure shall thereafter
conform to the use regulations of the district in which it is located. Except as authorized by the Board of
Zoning Appeals, no such enlargement shall create any new parking, loading, bulk, yard, space or other
nonconformity or increase the degree of any existing parking, loading, bulk, yard, space or other
nonconformity of such structure.
9-2.6 Extension of Use Prohibited.
Except as authorized by the Board of Zoning Appeals, a nonconforming use of land or of a structure shall
not be extended. Such prohibited activity, unless otherwise authorized by the Board, shall include:
a. An extension of such use, including its accessory uses, to any structure or land area other than that
occupied by such nonconforming use on the effective date of this Resolution or any amendment
thereto that causes such use to become nonconforming;
b. An extension of such use, including its accessory uses, within a building or other structure to any
portion of the floor area that was not occupied by such nonconforming use on the effective date of this
Resolution or any amendment hereto that causes such use to become nonconforming; and
c. An extension of the hours of operation of such use beyond the normal hours of operation on the
effective date of this Resolution, or any amendment hereto that causes such use to become
nonconforming.
9-2.7 Moving.
No nonconforming use of land shall be moved in whole or in part, for any distance whatsoever, to any other
location on the same or any other lot, unless such use shall thereafter conform to all regulations of the
zoning district in which it is located after being so moved. No structure that is accessory to a
nonconforming use of land, and is devoted in whole or in part to a nonconforming use shall be moved in
whole or in part, for any distance whatsoever, to any location on the same or any other lot, unless the entire
structure and the use thereof shall thereafter conform to all regulations of the zoning district in which it is
located after being so moved.
9-2.8 Damage or Destruction.
If a structure, housing a nonconforming use, is completely destroyed, by any means, the structure shall not
be restored and the nonconforming use shall not be resumed without authorization by the Board of Zoning
Appeals following a public hearing. The restored nonconforming use shall be accomplished without
increasing the degree of any parking, loading, bulk, yard, space or other nonconformity existing prior to
such damage or destruction.
Page 9-4 Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution
9-3 NONCOMPLYING STRUCTURES
9-3.1 Authority to Continue.
Any noncomplying structure that is devoted to a use that is permitted in the zoning district in which it is
located may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the restrictions of this Chapter.
9-3.2 Repair, Maintenance, and Alterations.
Any noncomplying structure may be repaired, maintained or altered (including expansion); provided,
however, that any such repair, maintenance or alteration shall not create any new nonconformity nor
increase the degree of the existing nonconformity of all or any part of such structure.
9-3.3 Moving.
No noncomplying structure shall be moved in whole or in part, for any distance whatsoever, to any other
location on the same or any other lot unless the entire structure shall thereafter conform to the regulations
of the zoning district in which it is located after being moved.
9-3.4 Damage or Destruction.
Any noncomplying structure that is damaged or destroyed by any means not within the control of the owner
thereof to the extent of more than sixty percent (60%) of the cost of replacement of such structure new shall
not be restored unless its restoration has been authorized by the Board of Zoning Appeals following a
public hearing. However, no repairs or restorations shall be made unless restoration pursuant to the Zoning
Certificate is actually begun within one (1) year after the date of such partial damage or destruction and is
diligently pursued to completion. The determination of the extent of damage or destruction under this
Section shall be based on the ratio of the estimated cost of restoring the structure to its condition before the
damage or destruction to the estimated cost of duplicating the entire structure as it existed prior to the
damage or destruction. The Zoning Inspector shall make the estimate for this purpose.
This Section shall not apply to any residential dwellings, to any structures accessory to such dwellings, or
to any signs as provided in Chapter 13.
9-4 NONCOMPLYING LOTS OF RECORD.
9-4.1 Authority to Utilize for Dwellings.
In any district in which dwellings are a permitted use, notwithstanding the regulations imposed by any
other provisions of this Resolution, a dwelling of the type permitted in the district in which the lot is
located and that complies with all minimum setback requirements may be erected on a legal nonconforming
lot.
9-4.2 Regulations for Single Family Use of Noncomplying Lots.
Any lot of record on the initial effective date of this Resolution may be used for any single family dwelling
when such use is permitted in the district, irrespective of the width or area of said lot in compliance with
Section 9-4.1.
9-4.3 Other Uses of Nonconforming Lots.
In any district in which dwellings are not permitted as-of-right, a legal nonconforming lot of record may be
used for any use permissible in the district in which it is located if, but only if, the development of such lot
meets all requirements of the district in which it is located, including impervious surface ratio and yard
requirements, except lot area, width and depth requirements.
Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution Page 9-5
9-5 STANDARDS FOR REDEVELOPMENT EXCEPTIONS
9-5.1 Dimensional Standards.
Redevelopment approved in accordance with the exception provisions of Chapter 1 shall comply with the
following standards instead of the dimensional requirements provided elsewhere in this Resolution for
yard, height, lot area, lot width or impervious surface ratio.
NON-RESIDENTIAL
REQUIREMENT D/O
Multi-Family
Residence
O
Office
D
Retail Business
MAXIMUM HEIGHT 45 45 45
Adjacent to residential
Adjacent to non-residential
MAXIMUM STORIES 3 3 3
MINIMUM LOT WIDTH
Residential Use (Ft.) 50
Non-residential Use (Ft.) 60 60
MINIMUM LOT AREA (Sq. Ft.)
Single-Family Dwelling (Sq. Ft.) 5,000 5,000 5,000
Other Residential (Sq. Ft. per unit) 5,000 5,000 5,000
Non-Residential uses (Sq. Ft.) 5,000 5,000 5,000
MINIMUM FRONT YARD (Ft) 30 30 30
Minimum Side Yard (Ft.)
Adjacent to residential (Ft.) 5
2.5 Story (Ft.) 20 20 20
3 Story (Ft.) 25 25 25
Adjacent to non-residential (Ft.) 10 10 10
MINIMUM REAR YARD
2.5 Story (Ft.) 25 25 25
3 Story (Ft.) 35 35 35
Adjacent to residential (Ft.) 25 35 35
Adjacent to non-residential (Ft.) 25 35 25
MAX. IMPERVIOUS SURFACE RATIO None None None
9-5.2 Landscaping and Screening Standards.
Development that is approved in accordance with the exception provisions of Chapter 1 shall comply with
the following standards.
Off-street parking areas for ten (10) vehicles or more shall be effectively screened on each side, which
adjoins or faces premises either used for residential purposes or located in any Residence District. Such
screening shall consist of a solid masonry wall or solid fence not less than four and not more than six feet in
height, or a tight screen of hardy evergreen shrubbery not less than four (4) feet in height may be used.
Any such screen shall be maintained in good condition. The space between such screen and the adjoining
side or front lot line shall be landscaped with grass, hardy shrubs, or evergreen ground cover and
maintained in good condition.
Page 9-6 Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution
9-5.3 Buffer Yards.
No part of a parking area for five (5) vehicles or more shall be closer than ten (10) feet to the side or rear
lot line(s) of any lot used for residential purposes or located in a residential district. In no case shall any
parking area be closer than five (5) feet to the established right-of-way line of any street. The area within
such setback shall be landscaped with grass, hardy shrubs or evergreen ground cover and maintained in
good condition. No entrance to or exit from a parking area of five (5) vehicles or more shall be closer than
fifty (50) feet to the right-of-way line of an intersecting street.
9-5.4 Parking In Required Front Yard.
Off-street parking spaces shall be prohibited in the required front yard in the “O” Office District but may be
permitted in the side or rear yard subject to the other provisions in Section 9-5.4.
9-5.5 Loading Standards.
Development that is approved in accordance with the exception provisions of Chapter 1 shall comply with
the following standards for Off-Street Loading Requirements.
Size: 10 feet wide x 25 feet long x 14 feet high.
One loading space is required for the following uses: institutional and public service buildings; recreation,
cultural, and entertainment uses, retail/commercial buildings 15,000 sqft, and shopping centers. One
additional loading space for each additional 50,000 sq. ft., or major fraction thereof.
[ B A L A N C E O F T H I S P A G E I N T E N T I O N A L L Y L E F T B L A N K ]

Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution Page 10-1
10 ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES
ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES
10-1 GENERAL AUTHORIZATION.
Except as otherwise expressly provided or limited in this Chapter, accessory uses and structures are permitted in any
zoning district in connection with any principal use lawfully existing within such district provided such uses and
structures conform to all applicable requirements of this Resolution. Any accessory use or structure may be
approved in conjunction with the approval of the principal use.
10-2 ZONING CERTIFICATES.
No accessory use or structure shall be established or constructed unless a Zoning Certificate evidencing compliance
of the proposed use or structure with the provisions of this Chapter and all other applicable regulations of this
Resolution has first been issued in accordance with Chapter 20 unless otherwise stated below.
A satellite dish antenna as stipulated in Section 10-6 shall be exempt from all zoning regulations and shall not
require a zoning certificate. Other accessory uses not requiring Zoning Certificates but subject to the minimum yard
requirements of this chapter include ornamental landscape structures (Section 10-3.4), swing sets, jungle gyms and
other play devices not requiring a building permit (Section 10-3.5), dumpsters and trash handling areas (Section 10-
5) and automobile rental (Section 10-10).
10-3 USE LIMITATIONS.
In addition to the applicable use limitations of the district in which it is located, no accessory use or structure shall
be permitted unless it complies with the following restrictions:
10-3.1 Principal Structure Permit Required.
No accessory use or structure shall be approved, established or constructed before the principal use is
approved in accordance with these regulations. Accessory buildings that are to be used for storage
materials necessary for the construction of the principal structure may be erected upon a lot prior to the
construction of that structure but only after a permit for the principal structure has been issued.
10-3.2 Signs Prohibited.
No sign, except as expressly authorized by this Chapter, Chapter 13, or Chapter 17 shall be maintained in
connection with an accessory use or structure.
10-3.3 Location.
No accessory use or structure shall be located in the front or side yard and the total combined area of all
accessory structures shall not occupy more than thirty (30%) percent of the required area of the rear yard.
Where the principal structure is at least two hundred (200) feet from the right-of-way, an accessory
structure may be located within the front or side yard but must be at least one hundred (100) feet from the
right-of-way, and all district setback requirements shall be maintained. In the case of panhandle lots, the
area of the panhandle shall not be used for calculating the lot area or be counted towards setback from the
right-of-way line or edge of easement.
10-3.4 Decorative Features in Front and Side Yards.
Ornamental landscape structures such as fountains, ponds, and other decorative features shall not occupy
more than thirty (30) percent of the front or side yard area and shall not exceed five (5) feet in height.
C H A P T E R
10
Page 10-2 Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution
10-3.5 Play Devices in Rear Yards.
Swing sets, jungle gyms, and other play devices excluding those accessory uses specified in Section 10-13
shall be located in the side or rear yard and must maintain a minimum setback of ten (10) feet from every
property line. No permitted play device shall exceed ten (ten) feet in height.
10-4 HOME OCCUPATIONS.
A home occupation shall be permitted in any zoning district as an accessory use to any permitted dwelling unit in
accordance with the following standards.
10-4.1 General Standards.
a. Maximum Area. The home occupation shall be conducted only within the closed living area of the
dwelling unit or existing accessory structure, and shall not occupy more than twenty percent (20%) of
the total floor area of the dwelling unit;
b. Use of Accessory Structures. If the home occupation is conducted within an existing accessory
structure, then that structure shall also serve as the garage or storage structure for the residents of the
dwelling unit;
c. Outside Appearance. There shall be no change in the outside appearance of the dwelling unit or
accessory structure, or other visible evidence of the home occupation other than one sign not exceeding
(2) two square feet in area, non-illuminated which shall be mounted flat against the wall of the
structure.
d. Commodity and Stock Prohibited. No commodity or stock in trade shall be,displayed or stored outside
or inside the premises;
e. Nuisance Prohibited. The home occupation shall not utilize mechanical, electrical, or other equipment
which produces noise, electrical or magnetic interference, causes fluctuation in line voltage, vibration,
heat, glare or other nuisances outside the dwelling unit or accessory structure in which it is located.
f. Employees Prohibited. No persons shall be employed other than members of the immediate family
residing on the premises.
g. Additional Traffic Generation Prohibited. No traffic shall be generated by such home occupation in
greater volumes than would normally be expected in a residential neighborhood.
h. Essential Residential Character. The permission for home occupations as provided herein is intended
to secure flexibility in the application of the requirements of this Resolution, but such permission is not
intended to allow the essential residential character of residential districts, in terms of use and
appearance to be changed by the occurrence of non-residential activities.
10-4.2 Uses Prohibited as Home Occupations.
Home occupations shall not, under any circumstance, be deemed to include the following activities nor any
other activities similar in kind or intensity of use: nursing homes; funeral homes, mortuaries and
embalming establishments; restaurants; bed and breakfast establishments; clinics, hospitals or the general
practice of medicine or dentistry; clubs, including fraternities and sororities; instruction of persons; day
care centers or type A day care home; retail or wholesale business; warehousing; beauty shop; barbershop;
tailoring shops; shoe or hat repair; drop-off or pick-up station. On-premise consultation, sales or
transaction shall be limited and incidental to Home Occupation activity in conformance with Section 10-
4.1.
10-5 DUMPSTERS AND TRASH HANDLING AREAS FOR NON-SINGLE-FAMILY
DISTRICTS.
The following requirements shall apply to all dumpsters, trash handling areas, and related service entrances:
Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution Page 10-3
10-5.1 Setbacks
Dumpsters, trash handling areas and related screening, shall be located in compliance with the same
minimum setbacks as a main building as determined by the zone district in which such structure is
constructed.
10-5.2 Location of Screen
Any such accessory use or structure shall be screened on three sides by a fence or wall from the view from
public streets and any abutting properties located in a residential, office, or commercial district.
10-5.3 Height and Construction of Screen
Any fence or wall required under this Section shall have a height no greater than seven (7) feet and no less
than five feet (5'). Any wall shall be constructed in a durable fashion of brick, stone, or other masonry
materials with no greater than twenty-five percent (25%) of the wall surface left open. Any fence shall be
constructed in a durable fashion of wood posts and/or planks with minimum diameter or width of three
inches (3") and with no greater than twenty-five percent (25%) of the fence surface left open between posts
and/or planks.
10-5.4 Required Landscaping
In addition to fencing and screening required in 10-5.3, and buffering requirements of Chapter 14 all
dumpster and trash handling areas located within 25 feet of a residential district or use shall be located in
such a manner that one or more sides facing or visible to adjacent residential uses shall be screened with an
additional evergreen landscape buffer not less than 10 feet in width planted with a minimum of one
evergreen shrub per 2.5 feet of fence or wall surrounding the dumpster or trash handling area.
10-6 SATELLITE DISH ANTENNAS.
A satellite dish antenna, as defined in Chapter 2, restricted to the sole purpose of receiving and amplifying
microwave signals, for television reception shall be permitted in all Districts subject to the following conditions and
restrictions:
10-6.1 Applicability
The following Categories of satellite dish antennas shall be exempt from all zoning requirements and shall
not require a zoning certificate:
a. An earth station (ground mounted) antenna that is two meters (78.74 inches) or less in diameter and
located or proposed to be located in a commercial or industrial zoning district.
b. An earth station (ground mounted) antenna that is one meter (39.37 inches) or less in diameter and
located in any zoning district.
10-6.2 Site Plan.
A plan for a wall or roof mounted satellite dish or a ground mounted satellite dish antenna that is not
exempted under 10-6.0 shall be submitted to the Administrative Official indicating the proposed height,
diameter, location, setbacks. Foundation details, landscaping, and screening shall also be required in the
case of a ground mounted satellite dish antenna.
10-6.3 Standards.
a. Approval of a wall or roof mounted satellite antenna, over 36 inches in diameter and attached to the
main building shall be subject to the following standards.
1. Location. In all zone districts wall or roof mounted satellite dish antennas shall be prohibited on
the front elevation of the building.
Page 10-4 Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution
2. Setbacks. In all zone Districts wall or roof mounted satellite dish antennas shall not be permitted
to project into any required side or rear yard area.
b. Approval of a ground mounted satellite dish antenna shall be subject to the following standards:
1. Location.
? In the “A”, “B”, & “C” Districts satellite dish antennas shall be located in the rear of the property
beyond the rear building line.
? In all other zone Districts, ground mounted satellite dish antennas shall also be permitted in the
interior side yard.
2. Setbacks. Ground mounted satellite dish antennas shall provide the following minimum setbacks:
? In all zone Districts, fifteen (15) feet from the rear and side yard lot lines.
? Front Yard. In no case shall a ground mounted satellite dish antenna be located closer to the front or
side street of a lot or building site than the main or principal building unless otherwise authorized by
Section 10-3.3.
? Setback from Power Lines. Satellite dish antennas or any appurtenances thereto, shall be located at
least eight (8) feet from any power line over two hundred-fifty (250) volts.
3. Landscaping. Ground-mounted antennas shall be screened from ground view from the street and
adjacent property owners by landscaping as shall be approved by the Administrative Official. In
order to reduce the height of the required plant material, berms may be employed in conjunction
with the landscaping plan.
4. Diameter. The diameter of such antenna shall not exceed the following:
? In the “A”, “B”, & “C” Districts, six (6) feet.
? In the all other Districts, ten (10) feet.
5. Height. Ground-mounted antennas shall be limited to a maximum height of twelve (12) feet
above grade in the Districts, and a maximum height of fifteen (15) feet above grade in all other
Districts.
6. Ground Coverage. The ground coverage of satellite dish antennas shall be counted in computing
the ground coverage for auxiliary and accessory use structures located upon the building site.
7. Number Permitted. Only one satellite dish antenna shall be allowed for each principal building.
8. Installation. The installation or modification of a satellite dish antenna shall be in accordance with
all applicable construction and safety codes and procedures and shall meet the requirements of the
Hamilton County Township Building Code.
9. Maintenance. Satellite dish antennas, appurtenances, landscaping, and screening shall be kept and
maintained in good condition.
10-7 FENCES AND WALLS.
The restrictions set forth below shall apply to all fences and walls located in all Districts, except for fences and walls
surrounding public utility structures or radio, television, or microwave transmission or relay towers. See Section 14-
6 for additional fence and wall standards.
10-7.1 Height and Open Face Area in Front Yard.
No fence or wall located in the front yard shall be built to a height greater than three feet, six inches (42“)
and shall have an open face area of no less that 50 percent or when constructed to a height of not more than
four feet (4') above grade, shall have an open face area of no less than 75 percent. Fences and walls as
provided in Sections 10-5.3 and 10-7.4 shall be exempt from these height and openness requirements.
Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution Page 10-5
10-7.2 Height in Side and Rear Yard.
Privacy fences or walls located in the side or rear yard may be built to a height of six feet (6') above the
average grade between vertical structural components as measured at the base of the vertical structural
component. Trim or structural support elements may project above the main body of the fence by up to six
inches provided any such projections are uniformly distributed throughout the length of the fence and are
not installed in an attempt to increase the overall height of the fence. Fences and walls as provided in
Sections 10-5.3 and 10-7.4 shall be exempt from these height requirements. Such fences or walls may be
solid in construction. Any privacy fence shall be constructed to be durable, of wood, metal, PVC or
wrought iron. Fence posts shall be structurally stable. The finished side of the fence shall face out from the
installing property and shall face the adjacent property or street.
10-7.3 Entrance Walls in Front Yard.
An entrance wall or one set of entrance walls constructed on opposite sides of the entrance street or drive
shall be allowed in a front yard in accordance with the following requirements:
a. It is part of a single family development containing at least ten (10) dwelling units or a multi-family,
commercial or industrial development having a minimum of 500 ft. of lot frontage.
b. It is constructed at a maximum height of six (6) feet above grade and does not extend into the sight
distance triangle.
c. Signage on such entrance wall shall be subject to size and illumination standards contained in Chapter
13.
10-7.4 Retaining Walls.
All retaining walls shall be setback from adjoining property lines a minimum of two (2) feet in all zoning
districts. Walls over forty-eight inches (48”) in height shall be setback an additional one foot for every foot
of height over forty-eight inches (48”). In no case shall the resulting setback be greater than the yard
setback requirement of the underlying district.
10-8 DAY CARE CENTERS AS ACCESSORY TO NON-RESIDENTIAL USE.
A day care center receiving state certification pursuant to the Ohio Revised Code shall be permitted as accessory to
any non-residential use in accordance with the following requirements:
10-8.1 Area of Outdoor Play Space.
At least fifty (50) square feet of outdoor play space per child shall be provided on the lot, exclusive of
driveways, off-street parking and service areas, said play area may be located within the required rear yard.
The minimum outdoor play area shall be 250 square feet in size.
10-8.2 Location and Enclosure of Outdoor Play Space.
All outdoor play space shall be located in the rear yard and fenced or otherwise enclosed on all sides to a
height of no less than three feet (3') and no greater than six feet (6').
10-8.3 Parking Standards.
Parking standards for accessory uses shall be in addition to, and calculated the same as, permitted uses as
specified in Chapter 12.
10-9 DRIVE-IN OR DRIVE-THROUGH SERVICE WINDOWS.
A drive-in service window, ATM (automatic teller machine), photo drop off or other similar type facility shall be
permitted only as an accessory use in the “O” and “D” Districts (except as provided in Chapter 1), in accordance
with the following requirements:
Page 10-6 Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution
10-9.1 Principal Use.
The principal use shall be a retail establishment, office, or restaurant located on the same lot.
10-9.2 Setbacks.
Any freestanding drive-in service window shall be located in compliance with the same minimum setbacks
as a main building as determined by the zone district in which such structure is constructed.
10-9.3 Circulation and Stacking Space.
The amount of stacking space and circulation patterns on the lot shall be at least five (5) spaces per window
lane, calculated from the first customer contact point, and shall be adequate to keep traffic from backing up
into the street.
10-9.4 Parking Standards
Parking standards for accessory uses shall be in addition to, and calculated the same as, permitted uses as
specified in Chapter 12.
10-10 AUTOMOBILE RENTAL. CAR SALES LOTS
Automobile rental shall be permitted as an accessory use only where the principal use is a retail automobile
dealership, tool rental or hotel or motel. Where the principal use is a hotel or motel, automobile rental shall be
permitted as an accessory use only in accordance with the following requirements:
10-10.1 Signs.
No sign advertising the rental of automobiles shall be located outside the hotel or motel building; and
10-10.2 Parking.
No more than ten (10) automobiles that are not currently leased to customers shall be parked on the same
property as the hotel or motel.
10-10.3 Parking Standards
Parking standards for accessory uses shall be in addition to, and calculated the same as, permitted uses as
specified in Chapter 12.
10-11 HELIPORTS.
A heliport shall be permitted as an accessory use only in any non-residential district provided it complies with all
applicable Federal Aviation Administration regulations and guidelines.
10-12 DETACHED GARAGE, STORAGE STRUCTURES AND OTHER DETACHED
STRUCTURES AS ACCESSORY TO RESIDENTIAL USES ONLY.
Detached private garages, storage barns, and other detached structures shall be permitted as an accessory use in all
Residential Districts or any district with permitted residential uses, in accordance with the following requirements:
10-12.1 Area and Height.
No more than 1,032 square feet in area and 19.5 feet in height.
Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution Page 10-7
10-12.2 Setback.
No detached garage or storage barn requiring the issuance of a Building Permit from the Hamilton County
Building Department shall be closer than five feet (5') from any property line.
Storage barns or sheds that do not require a building permit shall be located no closer than three feet (3’)
from any property line.
10-12.3 Location.
No detached garage or storage barn shall be located in the front or side yard except as otherwise stipulated
in Sections 10-3.1 and 10-3.3.
10-13 PRIVATE SWIMMING POOLS, TENNIS COURTS, BASKETBALL COURTS.
Swimming pools (measured from the edge of water), tennis courts and independent basketball courts and similar
active recreation areas shall be permitted as an accessory use in all Residential Districts or any district with
permitted residential uses provided they are located behind the rear line of the principal structure and at least ten feet
(10') from all property lines. Fixed lighting for these uses shall be located, screened, or shielded so that any adjacent
residential lots are not directly illuminated.
10-14 PRE-SCHOOL AND ELEMENTARY SCHOOLS AS ACCESSORY TO
EXISTING CHURCHES.
10-14.1 Building Location
All buildings shall be setback from any property line the minimum distance that is required in the District
in which it is located. An additional two (2) feet shall be added to the setback requirement for each foot of
building height which exceeds the maximum height permitted (not to exceed 45 feet in height).
10-14.2 Building Type
All accessory structures shall be designed to reflect the main building and the use of temporary, portable or
modular structures shall be prohibited.
10-14.3 Location and Enclosure of Outdoor Play Space
All outdoor play space shall be located in the rear yard and fenced or otherwise enclosed on all sides to a
height of no less than three feet (3’) and no greater than six feet (6’).
10-15 FESTIVALS AND ANY OTHER FUNDRAISERS AS ACCESSORY TO
EXISTING CHURCHES.
10-15.1 Festivals, Bingo or any other Fund Raising Activity
All fund raising activities shall follow the regulations set forth in Chapter 11 Temporary Uses.
10-15.2 Temporary Tents used at Festival and other Fundraiser Activities
All temporary tents used at festivals or other Fundraisers shall be regulated by Chapter 11 Temporary Uses,
specifically 11-4.7 - Tents.
10-15.3 Temporary Signs
All temporary signs shall follow the regulations in Chapter 13 – Signs.
Page 10-8 Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution
10-16 ON- SITE STORAGE or REFUSE CONTAINERS AND STRUCTURES
Storage containers (such as PODS) or similar items and refuse containers (dumpsters) for personal and/or private
use that are not permanently installed on the property shall be considered temporary uses regulated by Chapter 11,
Temporary Uses specifically 11-4.8.
10-17 PRIVATE AND RESIDENTIAL WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEMS
AND SOLAR PANELS
10-17.1 Private Wind Energy Conversion Systems and Freestanding Solar
 Panel Installation Location
Private Wind Energy Conversion Systems and Freestanding Solar Panel Arrays are permitted to be located
within the required rear yard in compliance with Section 10-3. Without a specific variance granted by the
Northeast Green Township Board of Zoning Appeals no such structure or device shall be located within
twenty five feet (25’) of a property line, or a setback equal to at least half the overall height of the structure
whichever is greater.
10-17.2 Height Limitations for Private Wind Energy Conversion Systems and
 Freestanding Solar Panel Installations
No private Wind Energy Conversion System or Freestanding Solar Panel Array may exceed eighty five feet
(85’) in height as measured from the base at ground level to the maximum operating height without prior
approval from the Green Township Board of Zoning Appeals.
10-17.3 Building Mounted Wind Energy Conversion Systems and Freestanding
 Solar Panel Installations and Zoning Certificate Exemptions
No private Wind Energy Conversion System shall be mounted on or attached to any structure without
specific approval from the Green Township Board of Zoning Appeals. Any Solar Panel attached or located
on the roof or wall of any single-family residential structure or accessory structure installed in such a
manner that it does not project more than three feet from the surface to which it is attached shall be exempt
from the issuance of a Zoning Certificate. Any Solar Panel attached to any commercial structure in such a
manner that it does not project more than five feet (5’) from the surface to which it is attached shall be
exempt from the issuance of a Zoning Compliance Certificate. Installations exceeding these limits shall
require approval by the Green Township Board of Zoning Appeals.
10-17.4 Noise Restrictions for Wind Energy Conversion Systems
Noise levels shall be controlled to prevent sound levels beyond the property line. Noise levels generated
from any Wind Energy Conversion System shall not exceed 65 decibels (dBA) between the hours of 7:00
AM to 10:00 PM and 55 decibels between the hours of 10:00 PM and 7:00 AM as measured at the property
line.
[ B A L A N C E O F T H I S P A G E I N T E N T I O N A L L Y L E F T B L A N K ]
Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution Page 10-9
[ T H I S P A G E I N T E N T I O N A L L Y L E F T B L A N K ]

Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution Page 11-1
11 TEMPORARY USES
TEMPORARY USES
11-1 AUTHORIZATION.
Temporary uses as defined in Chapter 2 and as hereinafter-specified are permitted in accordance with the provisions
set forth in this Chapter.
11-2 ZONING CERTIFICATE REQUIRED; SPECIAL STANDARDS FOR ISSUANCE
AND REVOCATION.
11-2.1 Certificate Required.
Except as provided in Section 11-4.1, no temporary use shall be established or maintained unless a Zoning
Certificate evidencing the compliance of such use with the provisions of this Resolution shall have first
been issued in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 20.
11-3 USE LIMITATIONS.
11-3.1 General Limitations.
Every temporary use shall comply with the use limitations applicable in the district in which it is located as
well as with the limitations made applicable to specified temporary uses by Section 11-4. No temporary
use shall be permitted if it would have significant negative impact on any adjacent property or on the area
as a whole.
11-3.2 Hours and Days of Operation.
No temporary use shall be operated during any hours or on any days of the week except such as are
designated by the Administrative Official in the Zoning Certificate required by Section 11-2. This
determination shall be based on the nature of the temporary use and the character of the surrounding area.
11-3.3 Traffic.
No temporary use shall be permitted if the Administrative Official, upon review of the application, finds
that additional vehicular traffic reasonably expected to be generated by such temporary use would have
undue detrimental effects of surrounding streets and uses which cannot be adequately mitigated by the
applicant.
11-3.4 Conflicts with Other Temporary Uses.
No temporary use shall be permitted if such use would conflict with another previously authorized
temporary use.
11-3.5 Sign Limitations.
Signs shall be in accordance with regulations contained in Chapter 13.
11-3.6 Parking.
Before approving any temporary use, the Administrative Official shall make an assessment of the total
number of off-street parking spaces that will be reasonably required in connection with the proposed
temporary use. This shall be done on the basis of the particular use, its intensity, and the availability of
other parking facilities in the area. The Administrative Official shall approve such temporary use only if
C H A P T E R
11
Page 11-2 Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution
such off-street parking is provided. No temporary use shall be authorized that would, in the opinion of the
Administrative Official, unreasonably reduce the amount of off-street parking spaces available for use in
connection with permanent uses located on the zoning lot in question.
11-3.7 Additional Conditions.
Every temporary use shall, in addition, comply with any other conditions as the Administrative Official
may reasonably impose to achieve the purposes of this Resolution or to protect the public health, safety,
and welfare.
11-4 PERMITTED TEMPORARY USES.
Subject to the specific regulations and time limits that follow, and to the other applicable regulations of the district
in which the use is permitted, the following temporary uses, and no others, are permitted in the zoning districts
herein specified:
11-4.1 House, Apartment, Garage and Yard Sales.
House, apartment, garage, and yard sales are permitted in any Residential District, but only when limited to
the personal possessions of the owner-occupant of the dwelling unit at which such sale is being conducted.
Such use shall be limited to a period not to exceed three (3) consecutive days and no more than three (3)
such sales shall be conducted from the same residence in any twelve-(12) month period. No zoning
certificate shall be required for such use.
11-4.2 Outdoor Art, Craft and Plant Shows, Exhibits and Sales.
Outdoor art, craft and plant shows are permitted in any Office, Retail Business and Light Industrial
Districts; provided, however, that any such use shall require the specific prior approval of the
Administrative Official on the basis of the adequacy of the parcel size, parking provisions, traffic access
and the absence of undue adverse impact on other properties. Every such sale shall be limited to a period
not to exceed three (3) days.
11-4.3 Christmas Tree Sales.
Christmas tree sales are permitted in any Office or Retail Business districts. Such use shall be limited to a
period not to exceed thirty-five (35) days. In all residential districts tree sales are limited to not-for-profit,
religious, philanthropic or civic group or organizations on property owned or leased by such group or
organization. Display of Christmas trees need not comply with the yard requirements of this Resolution,
except that no tree shall be displayed so as to obstruct the sight triangles..
11-4.4 Contractor's Offices and Equipment Sheds.
Contractor's offices and equipment sheds are permitted in any district when accessory to a construction
project. No such use shall contain any sleeping accommodations. Such use shall be limited to a period not
to exceed the duration of the active construction phase of such project.
11-4.5 Model Units, Including Real Estate Offices.
Model units, including Real Estate offices, are permitted in any district when serving as an accessory use to
a new development. No such use shall contain any sleeping accommodations unless located in a model
dwelling unit. Such use shall be limited to the period of the active selling or leasing of units or space in
such development and to activities related to the development in which such office is located. No such
office shall be used as the general office or headquarters of any firm.
11-4.6 Festivals and Circuses.
Festivals and circuses are permitted in any district when sponsored by a not-for-profit religious,
philanthropic or civic group or organization on property owned or leased by such group or organization.
Commercial festivals and circuses are permitted in any Office or Retail Business District; provided,
however, that any such use shall require the specific prior approval of the Administrative Official on the 
Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution Page 11-3
basis of the adequacy of the parcel size, parking provisions, traffic access and the absence of undue adverse
impact on other properties. Such use shall be limited to a period not to exceed ten (10) days.
Such use need not comply with the yard requirements of this Resolution except that structures or equipment
that might block the view of operators of motor vehicles on any public or private street shall not be located
within the sight triangle defined in Chapter 14. Such use need not comply with the maximum height
requirements of this Resolution. The concessionaire responsible for the operation of any such carnival or
circus shall submit in advance of the event date a site layout displaying adequate ingress and egress routes
for emergency vehicles and no dead-end aisles.
In the event that a temporary use does not require the approval of the County Building Department the
applicant or concessionaire shall provide written approval of the Township Fire Department.
11-4.7 Tents.
Tents are permitted in all districts in connection with any permitted, accessory or temporary use. No tent
shall be allowed to remain for a period of more than two (2) days longer than the use with which it is
associated or, in the absence of any such period, ten (10) days. Unless waived in writing by the
Administrative Official, every tent shall comply with the bulk and yard requirements of the district in
which it is located.
11-4.8 On-Site Storage or Refuse Containers and Structures
Temporary storage containers (such as PODS), structures and refuse containers (dumpsters) for personal
and/or private use shall be permitted in all single-family districts for a period not to exceed 60 days during
any calendar year, without the issuance of a Zoning Certificate. For structures or containers installed to
store household goods during a specific improvement project on the principal structure on the property on
which the container is located the 60 day period may be extended for an additional 60 days provided a valid
Building Permit has been issued by the Hamilton County Building Department.
11-4.9 Parking in the Required Front Yard – Residential Districts
One private boat, watercraft or recreational vehicle is permitted to be parked in a required residential front
yard for a period not to exceed 21 days in any calendar year when actively marketed for sale as advertised
in a general circulation newspaper or dedicated internet sales web site. No such boat or recreational vehicle
parking shall be permitted on an unpaved surface.
One private passenger vehicle may be parked on unpaved portions of the required front yard for a period
not to exceed 14 days within any 90 day period, for the purpose of displaying the vehicle for sale, This
provision shall apply only to the sale of private passenger vehicles registered to the owner or occupant of
the property on which the vehicle is located, No other vehicle parking within the required front yard
parking shall be permitted on unpaved surfaces.

11-5 BULK AND YARD REGULATIONS.
Except as expressly provided otherwise in Section 11-3 above, every temporary use shall comply with the bulk and
yard requirements of the district in which such temporary use is located.
Page 11-4 Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution
[ T H I S P A G E I N T E N T I O N A L L Y L E F T B L A N K ]

Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution Page 12-1
12 VEHICULAR USE AREAS
VEHICULAR USE AREAS
12-1 PURPOSE.
The purpose of this Chapter is to prevent or alleviate the congestion of the public street, to minimize any detrimental
effects of vehicular use areas on adjacent properties, to enhance vehicular use areas with landscape elements for
improved traffic circulation and visual amenities and to promote the safety and welfare of the public. To accomplish
this purpose minimum requirements are established, while more landscaping may be included depending on sitespecific conditions.
12-2 APPLICABILITY.
12-2.1 New and Expanded Uses.
The off-street parking and loading requirements of this Chapter shall apply to any application for a permit
for the erection of a new building. The off-street parking and loading requirements of this Chapter shall
apply only to the area of the alteration, addition or change of use. For an alteration, addition or change of
use of an existing building; or for an alteration, development or change of land use that requires more
parking; or for changes of the capacity of an existing parking area or parking structure.
Vehicular use areas for redevelopment sites as specified in Chapter 1 are exempt from the requirements of
Section 12-6 (Landscaping for Vehicular Use Areas) and Section 12-8 (Off-Street Loading Requirements).
12-2.2 Existing Uses.
The off-street parking and loading requirements of this Chapter shall not apply to buildings and land uses
legally in existence on the effective date of amendment of this Resolution unless modified in the manner
stated in Section 12-2.1 and further provided that any parking or loading facilities now serving such
buildings or uses shall not in the future be reduced below these requirements.
12-2.3 Maintenance.
The duty to provide and maintain all parking areas shall be the joint responsibilities of the owner, operator
and lessee of the use for which vehicular use areas are required. All commercial parking areas required by
the Zoning Resolution shall be maintained with a uniformed paved surface free of major defects. All
required spaces shall be striped and all internal circulation and aisle markings clearly visible.
12-2.4 Plan Review.
For any off-street parking area required under this Chapter, and for any other proposed parking area for ten
(10) more vehicles, a plan shall be submitted with the application for a Zoning Certificate to the
Administrative Official for review for compliance with these regulations and for any other applicable
regulations. Any such parking plan shall show the number of parking spaces, the arrangement of parking
aisles, the location of driveway entrances, provisions for vehicular and pedestrian circulation, the location
or typical location of sidewalks, wheel stops, lighting and curbs on or adjacent to the property, the location
of utilities, barriers, shelters, and signs, the location of landscaped areas and the types and location of
vegetation to be planted in them, typical cross sections of pavement, stormwater drainage facilities, and any
other relevant information requested by the Administrative Official.
12-3 NUMBER OF OFF-STREET PARKING SPACES.
Except as otherwise provided in this Section, off-street parking spaces for each new principal use on a parcel shall
be provided according to the units of measurement indicated for that use in Table 12-9, Schedule of Off-Street
Parking Requirements, found at the end of this Chapter.
C H A P T E R
12
Page 12-2 Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution
12-3.1 Computation of Required Spaces.
The following provision shall govern the computation of the number of off-street parking spaces required.
a. Fractions. When determination of the number of required parking spaces results in the requirement of
a fractional space, any fraction ½ or less shall be disregarded and any fraction over ½ shall require one
(1) parking space.
b. Bench Seating Calculation. In stadiums, sports arenas, churches and other places of assembly in which
patrons or spectators occupy benches, pews or other similar seating facilities, each twenty inches (20")
of such seating facilities shall be counted as one (1) seat for the purpose of determining the
requirement for off-street parking facilities,
c. Use of Maximum. When parking spaces are required on the basis of the number of faculty, staff,
students or employees, the maximum number present at any one time shall govern.
d. Interpretation. For uses not expressly listed in Table 12-9, found at the end of this Chapter, parking
spaces shall be provided on the same basis as required for the most similar listed use as determined by
the Administrative Official.
12-3.2 Spaces for the Handicapped.
Parking spaces shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of the Ohio Basic Building Code.
12-3.3 Shared Parking.
Joint use of up to fifty percent (50%) of required parking spaces may be permitted for two or more uses
located on the same parcel or adjacent parcels provided that the developer can demonstrate to the
Administrative Official that the uses will not substantially overlap in hours of operation or in demand for
the shared spaces. This shall be guaranteed by a written agreement from the Owner or between the Owners
involved and which binding on all future owners or assigns which shall be submitted with the required
plan. Shared parking spaces shall be located no more than three hundred feet (300') from the uses they are
intended to serve.
For shopping centers, parking requirements may be located on adjoining parcels if the parking requirements
for the entire shopping center are met, the total number of required parking spaces are located within 300
feet from the uses they are intended to serve, and there is a recorded agreement from the Owner or between
the Owners involved and which is binding on all future owners or assigns which shall be submitted with the
required plan.
12-4 DESIGN OF PARKING SPACES AND AISLES.
Each required parking space shall meet the minimum dimensional requirements set out in Table 12-4 and illustrated
in Figure 12-4A.
12-4.1 Aisles.
Each required parking space shall have direct and unrestricted access to an aisle of the minimum width set
out in Table 12-4 and illustrated in Figure 12-4A.
12-4.2 Access.
All parking spaces shall be entered and exited along parking aisles arranged perpendicular to access drives
wherever possible. Parking shall be restricted along entry drives within ten (10) feet of the right-of-way or
easement line (and at greater distances as may be required by the Township Zoning Commission depending
on the traffic generation and parking lot size) or within eight (8) feet of the curb or pavement edge of such
restricted entry drive area. The parking setback areas along the entry drive, as required in this section, must
be a pervious surface consisting of grass or other landscaping material excluding pavement, gravel or other
rock material.
Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution Page 12-3
Illustration 12-4A
12-4.3 Maneuverability Areas.
In order to promote adequate maneuverability, the following provisions shall be followed:
a. Turn-Around Area. Where more than five (5) parking spaces are served by a single driveway, a turnaround area shall be provided, or other provision shall be made, to permit cars to exit the parking lot or
garage without backing onto any street or sidewalk.
b. Back-Up Area. Each parking space shall be provided with a sufficient back-up area to permit egress in
one maneuver, consisting of one backward and one forward movement.
12-4.4 Handicapped Parking Spaces.
The dimension of parking spaces serving handicapped persons shall conform to the requirements of the
Ohio Basic Building Code.
12-4.5 Surface and Drainage.
Every off-street parking lot shall be surfaced with an asphaltic or Portland cement binder pavement
providing an all-weather, durable, and dustless surface. Individual stalls shall be graded to drain so as to
dispose of all surface water within the parking area in accordance with the regulations of the Hamilton
County Department of Public Works. No surface water from parking areas shall accumulate or drain over a
public sidewalk. Interior landscaped areas may be used for surface drainage.
12-4.6 Lighting.
Fixed lighting shall comply with the provisions contained in Section 12-7 and be so arranged to prevent
direct glare of beams onto any public or private property or street.
Page 12-4 Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution
TABLE 12-4
PARKING STALL AND AISLE DIMENSIONS
A B C D E F
PARKING
ANGLE
STALL
WIDTH
LENGTH
OF STALL
AISLE
WIDTH
WIDTH OF
ACCESS
DRIVE
BAY WIDTH
(CENTER TO CENTER WIDTH
OF TWO ROW BAY WITH
AISLE BETWEEN)
ONE
WAY
TWO
WAY
ONE
WAY
TWO
WAY
0 o
9 ft. 23 ft. 12 ft. 18 ft. 20 ft. 24 ft. 30 ft.
30 o
– 53 o
9 ft. 18 ft. 13 ft. 20 ft. 20 ft. 42 ft. 49 ft.
54 o
– 75 o
9 ft. 19 ft. 18 ft. 22 ft. 20 ft. 52 ft. 56 ft.
76 o
– 90 o
9 ft. 19 ft. 22 ft. 24 ft. 20 ft. 60 ft. 62 ft.
FIGURE 12-4A
PARKING STALL AND AISLE LAYOUT
Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution Page 12-5
FIGURE 12-4B
WHEEL STOP PLACEMENT
12-4.7 Wheel Stops and Continuous Curbs.
Wheel stops or continuous curbs shall be provided, located, and designed to protect required screening
devices and landscaping and pedestrian ways from damage or encroachment of vehicles and to provide
necessary traffic control in the parking area.
a. Wheel Stops. Each wheel stop shall be a singular block of reinforced concrete, stone, or other durable
material six inches (6") in height, six inches (6") in width, and eight feet (8') in length. Wheel stops
shall be placed as shown in Figure 12-4B and securely attached to the ground and may be used only at
the end of parking stalls.
b. Continuous Curbs. Continuous curbs shall be made of asphalt, concrete, or stone, and shall be a
minimum of six inches (6") in height and six inches (6") in width. They shall form a non-interrupted
edge around all landscaped areas adjacent to parking and turn-around areas which are not protected by
wheel stops.
c. Placement. The wheel stop or continuous curb shall be located a minimum of four feet (4') from any
structures, buildings, walls, or plant material, excluding groundcover (as shown in Figure 12-4C) to
prevent a vehicle from driving onto the landscape area or hitting any structure or plant material at the
edge of the parking area. The mature size of the plant material shall be specified to determine if the
landscape meets the setback requirements.
d. Stall Dimensions. Where continuous curbs are used, the paved area of the parking stall length required
in Table 12-4 and illustrated in Figure 12-4A (Dimension 'C') may be reduced by two and one-half feet
(2½') as shown in Figure 12-4D provided that the vehicle overhang will not encroach on pedestrian
circulation or the required setback for desirable plant growth. Where wheel stops are used, the paved
area of the parking stall length required in Table 12-4 and illustrated in Figure 12-4A (Dimension 'C')
shall not be reduced. If the wheel stop or continuous curb is located adjacent to a sidewalk, the
sidewalk shall be constructed to a minimum dimension of 5 1/2 feet to provide a clear sidewalk area of
not less than three feet (3') for pedestrian access. 
Page 12-6 Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution
12-4.8 Slope.
No area of any parking lot, excluding entry drives, shall have a slope in excess of seven percent (7%).
Entry drives or drives that connect parking areas shall not have a slope in excess of eleven percent (11%).
FIGURE 12-4C
STRUCTURE AND PLANTING SETBACK REQUIREMENTS
Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution Page 12-7
FIGURE 12-4D
PAVEMENT AREA ADJUSTMENT WITH CONTINUOUS CURB USAGE
12-5 LOCATION OF REQUIRED PARKING SPACES.
12-5.1 Off-Street Parking.
Required off-street parking spaces for any use shall be located on the same parcel as the use they are
intended to serve, except where these regulations allow shared parking between uses on different lots
pursuant to Section 12-3.3.
12-5.2 Residential Parking.
All driveways and parking areas must be surfaced with asphalt, Portland cement, block paver stones, or
similar treatment providing an all-weather, durable and dustless surface. This requirement shall apply to
any residential parking space and the first 100 ft. of the drive, as measured from the edge of pavement of a
public or private street. All parking areas must comply with the drainage requirements of the Hamilton
County Department of Public Works and design requirements of the County Engineer's Office. Parking on
unpaved or unimproved surfaces in a residential district is prohibited except as provided in Section 11-4.9.
No residential parking area or garage, in a residential district or on a parcel being used for residential
purposes, shall be utilized for more than one (1) commercial car, pickup truck, van or other commercial 
Page 12-8 Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution
vehicle owned or normally operated by a resident of the premises. The outdoor parking or storage of
commercial vehicles that exceed twenty-one feet (21’) in length, seven and one half feet (7.5’) in height, or
have permanent external commercial markings or signs exceeding a total of eight (8) square feet shall be
prohibited in all residential districts.
The outdoor storage or parking of a single commercial utility trailer, equipment transport trailer or similar
non-motorized accessory vehicle with a bed length not exceeding eight feet (8’) in length is permitted on
paved surfaces in the side or rear yard only, provided no boat, trailer, R.V. or Mobile Home is parked or
stored on the same property. The outdoor parking of commercial utility trailers, equipment transport
trailers and similar non-motorized accessory vehicles exceeding an eight foot (8’) bed length is prohibited
in all residential districts.
12-5.3 Parking of Boat, Trailer, R.V. or Mobile Home.
In any Residential District the outdoor storage of a boat, trailer, or mobile home shall be prohibited, except
one (1) trailer as defined in Chapter 2 or one (1) boat may be parked or stored in the rear or side yard. No
occupancy for human habitation shall be maintained or business conducted therein while such trailer or
boat is so parked or stored. The wheels or any similar transporting devices of any such trailer permitted
within any Residential District shall not be removed, nor shall any trailer be temporarily or permanently
affixed to the ground or attached to something having a temporary or permanent location on the ground.
12-5.4 Parking of Inoperable or Abandoned Vehicles.
The parking or storage of inoperable or abandoned vehicles is prohibited outdoors in all districts. The
location and duration or temporary parking or storage of an unlicensed operable vehicle may be approved
by the Township Zoning Inspector through the issuance of a Temporary Zoning Certificate on the basis of
the adequacy of the parcel size, condition of the vehicle, visibility from other properties and absence of
undue adverse impact on adjacent property or on the area as a whole.
12-5.5 Traffic Patterns.
All parking garages and lots shall be located and designed to encourage minimal routing of traffic along
public rights-of-way contiguous to blocks that contain primary education facilities or recreation sites
designed for children or which have over fifty percent (50%) of their frontage developed with single-or
two-family dwellings.
12-6 LANDSCAPING FOR VEHICULAR USE AREAS.
12-6.1 Applicability.
a. Scope. The application of the landscape regulations established by this Section shall be limited to the
same scope as defined in Sections 12-2.1 and 12-2.2 of this Chapter.
b. Exception. Vehicular use areas containing less than twenty (20) parking spaces or classified as a
redevelopment exception in accordance with Section 1-7 shall be exempt from the requirements of this
Section 12-6.
c. Total Parking. Total parking provided is located in more than one location on a site and each location
contains less than twenty (20) parking spaces, each such area shall be exempt from Section 12-6 if
separated on all sides by at least twenty feet (20') of non-paved area.
d. Alteration or expansion. Where an existing vehicular use area containing less than twenty (20)
contiguous parking spaces is expanded and thereby contains twenty (20) or more contiguous parking
spaces, landscaping for the entire area shall be provided and not merely to the extent of its expansion.
12-6.2 Total Landscaping Required.
The total landscaping required in vehicular use areas is 22 sq. ft. per parking and stacking space. Interior
and streetscape landscaping count toward the minimum square feet of landscaping required per parking
space.
Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution Page 12-9
12-6.3 Interior Landscaping Standards.
Interior landscaping shall comply with the following standards:
a. Design. Landscape areas shall be peninsular or island types. This shall include landscaped parking
islands or peninsulas, natural or landscaped detention basins located in the front or side yards, and the
required streetscape landscaping area.
b. Location. All parking spaces must be at least within 125 feet of a landscaped area.
c. Minimum Area. The minimum landscape area shall be one hundred (100) square feet.
d. Surface. Any landscape area provided under this Section shall not contain bare soil. Any ground area
shall be covered with stones, mulch, vegetative ground cover, or other surface permeable by water.
e. Retention Basins. Natural or landscaped detention basins may count toward minimum square footage
landscaping requirements when the basins are in the front or side yards.
f. Traffic Visibility. No landscaping shall obscure visibility at vehicular intersections with the parking
area or other areas where clear visibility is necessary to assure safe circulation. Where safe visibility is
impaired, canopy trees shall have branches removed from the trunk at least five feet (5') above the
ground and shrubs or groundcover shall not exceed two feet (2') in height. Evergreen trees and
understory trees that would impair visibility for safe circulation shall not be planted in these areas.
g. Minimum Width. No interior landscaping area shall be less than ten feet (10') by ten feet (10').
12-6.4 Determination of Interior Landscape Requirements.
The Landscape Requirements shall apply to all parking lots requiring twenty spaces or more. The landscape
requirements shall be computed as follows:
a. Interior Landscape Area Requirement. To determine the landscape area, multiply the Landscape Area
Requirement of 22 sq. ft. per parking and stacking space (Sec. 12-6.2) by the total number of parking
spaces on the lot. (Reminder: Applicability only required as outlined in Section 12-2.1)
b. Planting Requirements. To determine the minimum number of canopy trees, use the rate of one (1)
canopy tree for each ten (10) parking spaces for retail uses and two (2) canopy trees for each 10
parking spaces for non-retail uses. Any fractional number of trees should be calculated to the next
highest whole number.
c. To determine the total number of required shrubs, multiply the total number of required canopy trees
by three (3). One canopy tree may substitute for 3 shrubs. Trees and shrubs do not have to be equally
spaced, but may be grouped.
12-6.5 Overlap.
When any portion of the parcel is subject to more than one set of landscape or buffer requirements as set
forth in this or any other Chapter, the most stringent requirement shall control. The most stringent
requirements shall be defined as those which require the highest fence, wall or screen or, if no fence, wall
or screen is required, the requirements with the greatest quantity of landscaping.
12-6.6 Credit.
Existing trees and shrubs, fences, walls or berms on a parcel may be used to meet the requirements if they
meet the standards established in this Chapter and in Chapter 15 Credit for Existing Landscape Materials.
12-6.7 Plant Installation and Maintenance Standards.
All new plant material as part of the requirements for this Chapter shall be in accordance with Chapter 15,
General Landscape Material Standards.
Page 12-10 Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution
12-6.8 Modifications.
In the event that the unusual topography or elevation of a development site, the size of the parcel to be
developed, the extent of expansion or redevelopment of the site or parking area is deemed to be
insignificant, or the presence of existing buffers on adjacent developed property would make strict
adherence to the requirements of this Chapter serve no meaningful purpose or would make it physically
impossible to install and maintain the required landscaping, the Zoning Commission or the Board of
Zoning Appeals (per Section 12-6.9) may, upon proper application by the property owner, and upon
making findings of fact, modify the requirements of this Chapter provided the existing or resulting
landscape features of the development site comply with the spirit and intent of this Chapter, Chapter 14 and
other related Chapters.
12-6.9 Authority
The authority to approve landscape modifications resides with the Commission or Board that approves each
specific type of zoning request.
12-7 OUTDOOR LIGHTING.
The following restrictions shall apply to any outdoor lighting located in any district on parcels where there are
parking spaces for ten (10) or more vehicles.
12-7.1 Height
All outdoor lighting shall be designed, located, and mounted at heights no greater than sixteen feet (16')
above grade for non-cutoff lights and thirty-two feet (32') above grade for cutoff lights. A greater height
may be authorized in any district by a Variance approved pursuant to, Chapter 21.
Cutoff and non-cutoff lights are illustrated below:
NON CUT-OFF LIGHT & CUT-OFF LIGHT
12-7.2 Illumination
All outdoor lighting shall be designed and located with a maximum illumination of 0.5 foot-candles at the
property line.
12-7.3 Shielding
All outdoor lighting for non-residential uses shall be located, screened, or shielded so that adjacent lots
located in residential districts are not directly illuminated.
Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution Page 12-11
12-7.4 Color and Glare
No outdoor lighting shall be of such an intensity or color distortion as to cause glare or to impair the vision
of drivers or pedestrians.
12-7.5 Luminaire Type
Outdoor light lamps shall be of types recommended by the Administrative Official.
12-7.6 Factors for Evaluation
The following factors shall be considered in the evaluation of lighting plans:
a. Pole Height
b. Type of Luminaire
c. Site Coverage - average maintained
d. Uniformity: (1) Maximum:Minimum (2) Average:Minimum
e. Intensity at Property Line
12-7.7 Location
Outdoor lighting need not comply with the yard requirements of this Resolution, except that no such light
shall obstruct sight triangles as defined in Section 14-9.
12-8 OFF-STREET LOADING REQUIREMENTS.
12-8.1 Scope of Application.
The application of the loading regulations established by this Section shall be limited to the same scope as
defined in Sections 12-2.1 and 12-2.2 of this Chapter.
12-8.2 Number of Off-Street Loading Spaces Required.
Off-street loading spaces shall be provided for retail commercial, uses in accordance with the schedule set
forth below. Loading spaces shall not conflict with or overlap with the area used for parking.
SCHEDULE OF REQUIRED OFF-STREET LOADING
SPACES
Gross Floor Area of Structure
(square feet)
Number of
Required
Loading Spaces
 0 – 14,999
15,000 - 50,000
50,001 - 100,000
100,001 - 200,000
200,001 - 400,000
Each additional 200,000
0
1
2
3
4
1
12-8.3 General Standards.
Every loading space shall be designed, constructed, and maintained in accordance with the standards and
requirements set forth below.
a. Location of Required Loading Spaces. Loading spaces shall be located on the same lot as the building
or structure to which they are accessory. No loading space shall be located in any required front yard,
nor shall it permit any vehicle to extend into any front yard or across any lot line of a more restrictive
district while being loaded or unloaded.
Page 12-12 Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution
b. Dimensions. No required loading space shall be less than twelve feet (12') in width or thirty-five (35')
feet in length or have a vertical clearance of less than fourteen feet (14').
c. Access. Loading spaces shall be designed and arranged to provide access to a street or alley in a
manner that will create the least possible interference with traffic movement and parking lot
circulation. Access to and from loading spaces shall be approved by the Administrative Official.
d. Surface and Drainage. Every loading space shall meet the surface and drainage requirements of
Section 12-4.5.
e. Screening. All operations, material, and vehicles within any loading space that are visible from public
streets or from residential uses shall be screened. The screening material shall be at least six feet (6') in
height, 100 percent opaque, and shall meet the requirements for screening as set forth in Chapter 15,
Section 15-4.
12-9 VEHICULAR STORAGE YARD REQUIREMENTS.
12-9.1 Minimum Setbacks.
Any vehicular storage yard shall be located behind the minimum building and yard setback limits for the
site.
12-9.2 Screening.
All vehicular storage yards that are visible from public roads or Residential Districts shall be screened. The
screening material shall be at least six (6) feet in height, and shall meet the requirements for screening as
set forth in Chapter 15, Section 15-4.
TABLE 12-10
SCHEDULE OF OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS
RESIDENTIAL USES FORMULA
Accessory Apartment Two spaces for apartment + two for single-family house
Apartments/Attached condominium units Two spaces for each efficiency or one-bedroom unit; two spaces
for each unit with two bedrooms, 2.5 spaces for units with three
or more bedrooms
Day Care, Child, Type A + Adult One space per four children of licensed capacity + one space per
employee. Adult Day Care – one space per 5 of capacity + 1.5
spaces per employee
Granny Cottage One space per bedroom
Group Home One space per employee on shift of max. employment + two
visitors spaces or one space per employee plus one space per two
residents where residents can own vehicles
Single-Family, Two-Family Two garage spaces for each unit
Townhouse, Three-Family, Mulit-family Two spaces for each efficiency, one-bedroom & two bedroom
unit; and 2.5 spaces for units with three or more bedrooms
COMMERCIAL USES FORMULA
Amphitheater, Arena, Auditorium,
Banquet, Exhibition or Meeting Halls,
Stadium
One space for each three seats or one space per 50 sq. ft. of net
floor area where fixed seating is not available
Amusement Park One space for each three persons at capacity
Art Gallery, Antique Store, Interior
Decorator Service
One space per 300 sq. ft. of net floor area
Automobile and Truck Rental One space per 400 sq. ft. of net floor area
Automobile Sales (Accessory Service) One space per 400 sq. ft. of net floor area of sales, shop or
garage + one space per employee
Automobile Service Two spaces per service bay (excluding the bay)+ one space per
employee and one space per vehicle used in operation of the
service
Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution Page 12-13
TABLE 12-10
SCHEDULE OF OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS
Banking / Financial Institution
(Drive-in Service Window - Sec. 10-9)
One space per 400 sq. ft. of net floor area + stacking space for
drive-in service lane (Sec 10-9)
Batting Cage One space per cage + one space per employee
Barber Shops & Beauty Salon One space per 100 square feet of net floor area
Billiard Parlor or Pool Room One space per 100 square feet of net floor area
Bowling Alley Six spaces per lane
Building Materials, Sales and
Distribution
One space per 400 sq. ft. of net floor area
COMMERCIAL USES, cont. FORMULA
Car Wash, Self Service Four stacking spaces for each stall + two drying spaces for each
stall
Carpet, Furniture and Appliances, Sales
& Rental
One space per 400 sq. ft. of net floor area
Convenience Store (with gas pumps) One space per 200 sq. ft. of net floor area + one space per pump
+ one space per employee
Dance Club or Concert Club Three spaces per each four permitted occupants based on total
occupancy per the Fire Marshal & one space for each on duty
employee
Delicatessens, Bakery Goods, Meat, Fruit
& Vegetable Markets
One space per 150 sq. ft. of net floor area.
Drag Strips, Raceways One space for each three seats
Drive-In or Drive-Through Facility Five stacking spaces per lane + one space per employee if
entirely drive-through
Funeral Home or Mortuary One space per 75 sq. ft. of parlor or chapel space or one per five
seats, whichever is greater, but not less than 20 spaces
Health & Fitness Facility One space per 200 sq. ft. net floor area
Gasoline Service Station (with repair) One space per pump + one space per employee + two spaces per
service bay (excluding the bay space) and one space per vehicle
used in operation of the service
Golf Driving Range One space for each driving tee + one per employee
Grocery Store, One space per 167 sq. ft. of net floor area
Gun Firing Range One space for each station + one per employee
Heliport One space for each four seats in waiting area + one space for
each two employees on maximum shift
Machinery, Boat, Truck, Farm &
Construction Equipment Sales, Rental &
Service
One space per 1000 sq. ft of net floor area + one space per 2,500
sq. ft. of outdoor display area + one space per employee.
Mechanical and Home Improvement
Contractors office, or showroom
warehouse (electric, HVAC, plumbing
and kitchen/bath related uses)
Three parking spaces for the first 1,000 sq. ft. or fraction thereof,
plus one space per 400 sq. ft. of net floor area in excess of 1,000
sq. ft. for office uses. Inventory, showroom and storage space
one space per 500 sq. ft.
Miniature Golf Course Two spaces per hole + one space for each 100 sq. ft. of net floor
area for other indoor game activities
Motorcycle, Sales & Service One space per 400 sq. ft. of net floor area
Office (excluding medical) Three parking spaces for the first 1,000 sq. ft. or fraction there
of, plus one space per 400 sq. ft. of net floor area in excess of
1,000 sq. ft.
Office, Medical / Clinic Six spaces +One space per 200 sq. ft. of net floor space in
excess of 1000 sq. ft.
Photo Lab, Picture, TV or Sound Studio One space per one and one-half employees + one space per
facility vehicle
Recycling Drop-off Facility One space per drop-off and five stacking spaces per lane + one
space per employee
Page 12-14 Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution
TABLE 12-10
SCHEDULE OF OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS
Bar One space per 75 sq. ft. of gross floor area + one space for each
2 employees
Restaurant/Bar One space for each table, or booth in dining area plus one space
for each 50 sq.ft of interior and/or exterior net square footage
dedicated to liquor sales, plus one space for each 2 employees
Restaurant One space per 100 sq. ft gross floor area plus one space for each
2 employees
Restaurant Drive-In Five stacking spaces per lane
Retail, Sales and Service One space per 200 sq. ft. of net floor area
Service Establishments: Dry Cleaning or
Laundry Pick-Up Stations, Print Shops,
Tailoring, Shoe or Hat Repair
One space per 300 sq. ft. of net floor area
Shopping Center One space per 222 sq. ft of net floor area of general retail space
+ additional spaces, as required herein, for associated offices,
theaters, and restaurants
Skating Facility One space per 250 square feet of net floor area
Studio: Art, Dance, Gymnastics, Music Five spaces, plus one space for each 150 sq. ft. of net floor area
in excess of 500 sq. ft.
Swimming Pools, Tennis or Racquet
Clubs, and Similar Recreation Facilities
Open To The Public For A Fee
One parking space for each 50 square feet of pool area; eight
spaces for each indoor tennis court; five spaces for each outdoor
tennis court; five spaces for each racquet ball and/or handball
court
Theater, Motion Picture or Live
Performance
One space per three seats
Themed Special Purpose Venue On-site parking at a rate of one space per employee on duty or
performing plus 1 space per 2 permitted total occupancy or
equivalent by agreement provided off-site.
INSTITUTIONAL USES FORMULA
Cemetery One space per employee
Church or Temples without school or
community facility.
One space per five seats or bench seating in the main assembly
room, plus added spaces for accessory uses if applicable
Correctional Facility One space per employee + one space per 25 inmates
Day Care Center, Child, Pre-School One space per employee + one space for each facility vehicle
stored on the lot + one parking space for each six children
Halfway House One space per bed + one per employee
Hospital One parking space per bed
Nursing, Convalescent Home, &
Continuing Care Facility
One space per six residents + one space per employee
School, Elementary (K-6) One space for each three seats in any auditorium, or one space
for each classroom, whichever is greater
School, Junior High/Middle School One space for each three seats in any auditorium, or one space
for each classroom, whichever is greater
School, Senior High One space per employee + twelve visitor spaces, plus one space
per six students
School, Vocational / Professional One space per employee + one space per two registered student
capacity
University or College One space per two employees + one space per four students
PUBLIC SERVICE USES FORMULA
Government Buildings One space per 250 sq. ft. of net floor area or one space per four
patrons, whichever is greater
Government Storage Yard One space per employee on maximum shift + one space per
facility vehicle + one space per 250 sq. ft. net floor area
Library One space per 400 sq. ft. of net floor area
Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution Page 12-15
TABLE 12-10
SCHEDULE OF OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS
Police & Fire Stations Two (2) spaces per employee on maximum shift + one space per
facility vehicle
Telecommunication Towers One space
RECREATIONAL, CULTURAL &
ENTERTAINMENT USES FORMULA
Athletic/Play Field Ten spaces per acre
Botanical Garden Four spaces per acre of grounds
Campground One space per campsite + one space per employee
Club, Private One space for each 50 square feet of net floor area used for
assembly, game room, dancing or dining, plus one for each
sleeping room
Community (recreation) Center One space per 200 sq. ft. of net floor area
Golf Course Four spaces for each hole + one space for 100 sq. ft. of net floor
area in any cocktail lounge, bar, or similar facility.
Museum One space per 400 sq. ft. of net floor area
Outdoor drama theater (not drive-in) One space for each three seats
Parks, Playgrounds Four spaces per acre
Tennis or Racquet Clubs, and Similar
Recreation Facilities
Eight spaces for each indoor tennis court; five spaces for each
outdoor tennis court; five spaces for each racquet ball and/or
handball court
Recreation center, Internal One space per 250 sq. ft. of net floor area
Summer Camp One space per employee + one space per each camp vehicle +
one space per five users at maximum capacity
Swim Facility One parking space for each 50 square feet of pool area + one per
employee
Zoo One space per 2000 sq. ft. of land area
AGRICULTURAL USES FORMULA
Farm Market One space per 150 sq. ft. of net floor area
Fishing Lake One space per 150 sq. ft. of net floor area + five spaces per acre
of lake
Kennel, Commercial One space per 1000 sq. ft. of net floor area + one space per
employee + one drop-off space per twenty kennel spaces.
Nursery, Greenhouse One space per 250 sq. ft. of indoor net floor area + one space
per 1000 sq. ft. of net outdoor sales / display areas + one space
for each 1.5 employees
Stable One space per 4 stalls + one space per employee
Veterinarian Facility Three parking spaces for the first 750 sq. feet or fraction thereof,
plus one space for each 300 square feet of net floor area in
excess of 750 square feet
Page 12-16 Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution
[ T H I S P A G E I N T E N T I O N A L L Y L E F T B L A N K ]

Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution Page 13-1
13 SIGNS
SIGNS
13-1 PURPOSE.
The purpose of this Chapter is to regulate and encourage the orderly development of signs so as to protect the public
health, safety welfare of the Township while recognizing the need for adequate business identification,
informational and advertising communication and the value of visual attractiveness.
13-2 SCOPE.
The regulations of this Chapter shall govern and control the erection, enlargement, expansion, alteration, operation,
maintenance and relocation of any sign that is visible from any street, sidewalk or public or private common open
space. These regulations shall also govern the removal of signs determined to be physically unsafe or which create a
safety hazard to the public. The regulations of this Chapter dictate the types, location and physical standards of
signs that are permissible for specified uses, subject to the sign permit procedures of this Chapter. The regulations of
this Chapter shall be in addition to any provisions of Chapter 5516 of the Ohio Revised Code and the Ohio Basic
Building Code (OBBC) applicable to the construction and maintenance of signs.
13-3 DEFINITION OF TERMS.
Words, terms, or phrases, not otherwise defined in this section, shall have, for the purpose of this Resolution, the
meaning or meanings attributed to them in English usage current at the time of adoption of this Resolution, and
words used in the present tense shall include the future. The word "shall" is mandatory and not permissive. For the
purposes of this Chapter, signs and their features and characteristics shall be defined and classified as follows:
A. FREESTANDING SIGNS
Pole Sign A permanent freestanding sign supported by one (1) or more uprights, poles or braces placed in or
upon the ground surface and not attached to any building. Such sign may also be commonly known
as a pylon sign.
Ground Sign A permanent freestanding sign other than a pole or pylon sign, not attached to a building, which is
placed upon or supported by the ground independently of any other structure. Such sign may also
be known as a monument sign.
B. BUILDING SIGNS
Awning / Canopy
Sign
A building sign that is mounted or painted on or attached to an awning or canopy and does not
project vertically above or horizontally beyond the physical dimensions of such awning or canopy.
Marquee Sign A building sign attached to a marquee, canopy or awning projecting from or supported by the
building at main entrances.
Projecting Sign A building sign which projects more than 18 inches from and is supported by a wall of a building
and does not extend beyond the minimum required setback line or into and over street right-of-way,
and not less than 8.5 feet at its lowest point, above sidewalk or ground level.
Wall Sign (Facia
Sign)
A building sign which is attached directly to a building wall and which does not extend more than
eighteen (18) inches therefrom nor above the roof line or beyond the limits of the outside wall, with
the exposed face of the sign in a plane parallel to the building wall.
Window Sign A building sign permanently affixed to, in contact with, or inside a window; installed for purposes
of viewing from outside the premises. This does not include merchandise located in a window.
C. TEMPORARY SIGNS
Temporary Sign A sign which is neither permanently anchored to the ground nor permanently affixed to a structure,
nor mounted on a chassis, and intended to be removed after a limited period of display.
Balloon Sign A temporary sign on an inflated nonporous object filled with air or other gas.
Banner Sign A temporary sign in the nature of a flag, pennant, streamer or ribbon
Construction Sign A temporary sign located on premises, which provides information pertaining to the builder, owner,
project, or the contractor constructing the development.
C H A P T E R
13
Page 13-2 Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution
C. TEMPORARY SIGNS, CONT.
Development or
Business, New
A temporary sign used to identify a business or development that begins commercial activity at a
new location or that changes its name. Such sign shall be removed following the construction of the
tenant’s permanent sign.
Event Sign,
Commercial
A temporary sign used to display a commercial message related to a special event, offer, service or
other similar advertisement.
Event Sign, NonCommercial
A temporary sign used to display a non-commercial message such as: Now Hiring, Now Placing,
etc.
Festival Banner Sign A temporary sign on a banner related to public festivals installed on public property or in the public
right-of-way.
Festival Device Signs A temporary sign on balloons, umbrellas and similar devices.
Flag, Pennant or
Other Moving or
Animated Sign
Any temporary sign or part of such sign that changes physical position by any movement or rotation
of that gives the visual impression of such movement or rotation.
Political Campaign
Sign
A temporary sign advertising candidates or soliciting votes in support of or against any proposition
or issue at any general, primary, special, school or any other election.
Public Event Banner
Sign
A temporary sign on a banner, which provides information on current or upcoming public events,
attached to a facility owned or controlled by the County or any agency thereof and which is not be
installed more than 2 weeks before the event.
Real Estate Sign A temporary sign located on premises containing land or buildings for sale, rent or lease, or
buildings under construction and intended for sale, rent or lease.
D. MISCELLANEOUS SIGN TERMS
Abandoned Sign Any outdoor advertising sign left in place after a business has ceased to operate at the location. A
sign may be considered abandoned 45 days after the identified business has vacated the premises
Bench Sign/Billboard Any outdoor advertising sign attached to a bench, chair, table, bus shelter or similar item.
Billboard (Outdoor
Advertising Sign)
A type of off-premises sign, classified as a business use, generally but not limited to a rigidly
assembled sign, display, or device, usually free standing, that is affixed to the ground or to a
building, the primary purpose of which is to display advertising posters. Such signs commonly
referred to as “billboards” or “poster panels” are generally designed so that the copy or poster on the
sign can be changed and the advertising space may be leased.
Billboard, Bulletin
(Outdoor Advertising
Sign)
A standardized advertising sign with a face area not exceeding 672 sq. ft. (14 ft. x 48 ft.), excluding
temporary embellishments, cut outs or extensions as herein defined.
Billboard, Junior
Poster Panel
(Outdoor Advertising
Sign)
A standardized advertising sign with a face area not exceeding 72 sq. ft. (6 ft. x 12 ft. ), excluding
temporary embellishments, cut-outs, or extensions as herein defined. Also called an Eight-Sheet
poster.
Billboard, Poster
Panel (Outdoor
Advertising Sign)
A standardized advertising sign with a face area not exceeding 300-sq. ft. (12 ft. x 25 ft.), excluding
temporary embellishments cut-outs or extensions as herein defined. Also called a 30-sheet poster.
Billboard Cut-out A treatment employed to enhance the quality of a sign by removal, deletion, or omission of any
portion of the sign.
Billboard
Embellishment
A temporary treatment employed to enhance the quality of a sign that reflects a community design
theme, an historic period or artistic style.
Billboard Extension A treatment employed to enhance the quality of a sign by addition of a sign face area or projection
thereof.
Bulletin Board,
Institutional
A sign located on the property owned or operated by a public, religious, institutional, school,
library, community center or similar institution that is used to identify the name of the institution or
organization and the announcement of its services or activities.
Canopy See Awning / Canopy Sign Definition
Changeable Copy
Sign
An sign designed so that the characters, letters or illustrations can be changed or rearranged without
altering the face or the surface of the sign; also known as a reader board.
Clear Sight Distance
Triangle
The triangular area formed by a diagonal line connecting two points located on intersecting lines of
a right-of-way, easement of access, or pavement edge of an access drive, each point being 20 feet
from the intersecting lines. See Chapter 14, Section 14-9, Figure 14D.
Clearance (of a Sign) The smallest vertical distance between the grade of the adjacent street, highway, or street curb and
the lowest point of any sign, including framework and embellishments, extending over that grade.
(Compare “Height”)
Directional or
Informational Sign
An on-premises sign designed to guide vehicular and/or pedestrian traffic by using such words as
“Entrance”, “Exit”, “Parking”, “One-Way”, or similar directional instruction, and which may
include the identification of the building or use but does not include any advertising message.
Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution Page 13-3
Facade That portion of an enclosed building facing the street or that wall of a building through which there
is primary access for customers. Where more than one business occupies the same building the
facade for each business shall be that portion of the building occupied by the business which faces
the street or which provides the primary access.
Face Change The removal or replacement of an existing surface display panel where the remaining structural
frame is not changed. The changing of the copy or poster on bulletin boards and billboards is not
considered a face change.
Flashing Sign A sign that uses an intermittent, moving or flashing light source to attract attention.
Frontage, Building Total lineal feet of enclosed building length along the facade that fronts the principal dedicated
street, or the facade that contains the main entrance to the building.
Frontage, Street or
Lot
Total lineal feet of right-of-way or easement of access along the front yard of a lot.
Frontage, Principal The street which the developer selects to be the main entrance.
Frontage, Secondary The street which the developer selects to be the secondary access to the development.
Gas Pump Signs Informational matter appearing on gasoline pumps as purchased or installed.
Government Sign Any temporary or permanent sign erected and maintained for any official governmental purpose.
Height (of a Sign) The vertical distance measured from the highest point of the sign, excluding decorative
embellishments, to the grade of the adjacent street or the surface grade. (Compare: “Clearance”)
When base of the sign structure is below grade of street, measure height from grade of street. When
base of the sign structure is above grade level of street, measure height from ground grade.
Historical Marker A type of memorial sign limited in content to the identification of an historical building or structure
or the site of an historical event.
Identification Sign A sign giving the name, trademark of other readily recognized symbol or address, or any
combination thereof, of a building, business, development or establishment on the premises where it
is located.
Illuminated Sign A sign either internally or externally illuminated.
Joint Identification
Sign
A sign which serves as common or collective identification for a group of businesses operating on
the same building lot. Such signs may name the businesses included but carry no other advertising.
Logo A business trademark or symbol.
Maintenance The cleaning, painting, repair, or replacement of defective parts of a sign in a manner that does not
alter the basic copy, design or structure of the sign.
Marquee Any fixed hood (other than a canopy or awning), which is supported solely by the building to which
it is attached, consisting of metal or other incombustible material and which included a sign or
advertising announcement. The location of marquees shall be restricted to the main entrance to a
building.
Memorial Plaque A plaque designating names of buildings and/or date of erection and other items such as architect,
contractor, or others involved in the building’s creation, cut into or attached to a building surface.
Nonconforming Sign Any sign which was lawfully erected in compliance with applicable regulations of the Township
and maintained prior to the effective date of this Zoning Resolution, and which fails to conform to
all applicable standards and restrictions of this Resolution.
Off-Premises
Directional Sign
A sign designed to guide vehicular and/or pedestrian traffic to places of worship, to businesses, to
places that provide commodities, services, entertainment or attractions at a location other than the
premises on which the sign is erected.
Off-Premises (OffSite) Advertising
Sign
An advertising sign, whose message relates to a business, service, commodity, or profession being
conducted, sold or offered at a location other than the premises on which the sign is erected.
Official Flag or
Emblem
A flag or emblem of a government or of a membership organization.
On-Premises (OnSite) Sign
A sign which directs attention to a business, commodity, service, entertainment or attraction sold or
offered on the premises on which the sign is erected.
Portable Sign or
Moveable Sign
A sign not permanently anchored or secured to either a building or the ground, but usually anchored
or secured to a trailer, vehicle (where the primary purpose is to advertise) or frame capable of being
moved from place to place.
Premises Any tract or tracts of land which comprise a single, integrated development or use of such land.
For the purpose of this Chapter 13, an outparcel along the perimeter of a shopping center or similar
multi-tenant use, that contains a freestanding building and a parking area separate from the shopping
center as indicated on an approved site plan shall be considered a premises separate from the
premises of the shopping center.
Roof Sign A sign that is mounted or painted on the roof of a building, or that is wholly dependent upon a
building for support and that projects above the highest point of a building with a flat roof, the eave
line of a building with gambrel, gable or hip roof or the deck line of a building with a mansard roof.
Page 13-4 Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution
Public Service Sign
or Device
A sign or device displaying only the time, temperature, stock market quotations or civic messages
by means of a lampbank.
D. MISCELLANEOUS SIGN TERMS, CONT.
Sign Any object, device, or structure, or part thereof, situated outdoors or indoors and intended to be
visible from the exterior of the structure which is used to advertise, identify, display, direct, or
attract attention to an object, person, institution, organization, business, product, service, event or
location by any means, including words, letters, figures, designs, symbols, fixtures, colors,
illumination, or projected images. Signs do not include the flag or emblem on any nation,
organization or nations, state, county, city, or any fraternal, religious or civic organizations; works
of art which in no way identify a product or business logo.
Sign Graphics Any lettering, numerals, figures, designs, symbols or other drawing or images used to create a sign.
Sign Structure or
Support
Any structure that supports or is capable of supporting a sign, including decorative cover.
Snipe Sign A sign for which a permit has not been obtained which is attached to a public utility pole, light pole,
service pole or supports for another sign.
Surface Display Area All solid surface areas of a sign, excluding air space. Structural members bearing no sign copy shall
not be included
T-Frame Sign A sign whose structure or frame is in the form of a “T” upon which one or more sign faces may be
hung or otherwise attached.
Variable Message
Sign
A sign containing a computer generated message such as a public service, time, temperature or date,
where different copy changes of a public service or commercial nature are shown. on the same
lampbank or message facility.
Vending Machine
Sign
Any sign fastened to or painted on a vending machine which directly relates to the product
contained in the machine.
Vehicular Sign Signs on parked vehicles or boats visible from the public right-of-way or shoreline where the
primary purpose of the vehicle or boat is to advertise a product or to direct people to a business or
activity located on the same or nearby property. For the purpose of this ordinance vehicular signs
shall not include business logos, identification or advertising on vehicles primarily used for other
business purposes.
Visible Capable of being seen, whether or not legible, without visual aid by a person of normal acuity.
Warning Sign A sign limited in content to messages conveying warning, caution or danger.
13-4 ZONING CERTIFICATE AND PERMITS.
13-4.1 Zoning Certificate Required.
Unless expressly exempted in Section 13-4.2, no sign shall be erected, enlarged, expanded, altered
(including face changes), relocated or reconstructed on private or public property unless a Sign Zoning
Certificate evidencing the compliance of such sign with the provisions of this Chapter 13 shall have first
been issued by the Zoning Inspector.
13-4.2 Exemptions.
The following signs and sign-related activities shall be exempt from the provisions of this Chapter 13 and
shall not require a zoning certificate:
a. Routine Maintenance. Routine sign maintenance including cleaning re-painting, replacing lamps and
ballast and electrical components and changing of lettering or parts of signs designed to be regularly
changed.
b. Signs Permitted in all Districts. Signs permitted in all districts as listed in Section 13-9.
c. Poster Changes. Outdoor advertising signs shall be allowed changes in the poster advertisement or
reader board. Further modifications may be subject to the provisions of Sec. 13-4.3.
d. Copy Changes. The change of a message relating to on site or off site changeable copy signs such as
those displaying gasoline prices, sale items, special events or lottery information.
Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution Page 13-5
13-4.3 Nonconforming or Noncomplying Signs.
Signs existing on or before the effective date of this resolution shall be allowed face changes provided that
a zoning certificate shall be obtained except as specified in Sec. 13-4.2 (c). If the size of an existing sign
face or the size of the overall structure is increased, the structure is relocated, the structure is replaced, or
the structure is damaged to an extent greater than 70% of its estimated replacement value (unless damage
was caused by vandalism, an act of God, or automobile or similar accident) then said sign shall be ordered
removed by the Zoning Inspector.
13-5 GENERAL STANDARDS.
Unless expressly exempted by Section 13-4.2 above, all signs within the Township shall conform to the following
general standards.
13-5.1 Illumination.
a. Location and Design of Light Source. Whenever an external artificial light source is used to illuminate
a sign, such source shall be so designed, located, shielded and directed so as not to be directly visible
from any public street or residence. If ground lighting is used to illuminate a sign, the receptacle or
device should not protrude more than twelve (12) inches and must be fully screened from view by
landscaping material.
b. Level of Illumination. In no event shall the illumination of any off-site advertising sign exceed 70 foot
candles at the sign face.
c. Flashing Lights Prohibited. Except when expressly permitted by this Chapter, no flashing, moving,
laser generated, strobe, blinking or intermittent lights shall be permitted on or as part of any sign. This
does not pertain to electronic message signs unless they negatively affect traffic safety.
d. Changeable Copy Message signs or boards shall be permitted in accordance with all size restrictions per
Chapter 13. No message shall shall blink, flash or contain animated movment at interval cycles of less
than 90 seconds
13-5.2 Height
a. Height of Building Signs.
1. Building Signs shall be located within the limits of the outside wall of the building.
b. Height of Freestanding Signs.
1. Freestanding signs in the Residential districts are permitted at a maximum height of five (5) feet.
2. Freestanding signs in the Office districts are permitted at a maximum height of twelve (12) feet.
3. Freestanding signs in the Retail districts are permitted at a maximum height of twenty-eight (28)
feet.
4. Freestanding signs are permitted within the Clear Sight DistanceTriangle at a maximum height of
three (3) feet or as provided in section 13-5.5.
13-5.3 Minimum Setback.
All signs, or any part thereof, shall be setback a minimum of 10 feet (5 feet for directional signs) from the
right-of-way, easement of access, or edge of pavement, whichever is the greater setback, and 5 feet from all
other property lines. A side yard setback adjoining a residential district shall be the same as that specified
for the adjoining residential district.
13-5.4 Obstruction of Accessways.
No sign or sign structure shall obstruct free ingress to or egress from a fire escape, door, window or other
required accessway.
Page 13-6 Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution
13-5.5 Traffic Safety.
a. Confusion with Traffic Signals. No sign shall be maintained at any location where by reason of its
position, size, shape, content, color, or illumination it may obstruct, impair, obscure, interfere with the
view of, or be confused with, any traffic control sign, sign or device, or where it may interfere with,
mislead or confuse traffic regardless whether or not it meets other size, location and setback
requirements of this Section 13-5.
b. Obstruction of Clear Sight Distance Triangles Prohibited. No freestanding sign, nor any part of a
freestanding sign other than supporting poles or braces shall be located with clearance lower than nine
(9) feet from grade unless the entire sign is three (3) feet or less from grade within the area of any sight
distance triangle as defined in Section 13-3.
13-5.6 Signs in Rights-of-Way.
Except as otherwise authorized by the County Engineer or the State of Ohio, no sign except government
signs authorized by this Chapter shall be placed in or extend into or over any public property or right-ofway.
13-5.7 Sign Identification.
All signs shall be plainly marked with the name of the person, firm or corporation hanging or erecting the
sign.
13-5.8 Sign Maintenance.
The owner of an on-site or off-site sign shall be liable to maintain such sign, including its illumination
sources, in compliance with this Chapter and all applicable laws, in a safe and secure condition, and in a
neat and orderly condition and good-working order at all times, and to prevent the development of any rust,
corrosion, rotting or other deterioration in the physical appearance or safety of such sign.
13-5.9 Sign Allotment, Maximum Size and Location.
Signs shall be located along the street frontage or building frontage from which the allotment is computed.
13-6 SIGN MEASUREMENT
(See diagrams in Figure 13-6A)
13-6.1 Area of a Freestanding Sign.
The area of a freestanding sign shall be determined by computing the visible surface display area, i.e. all
solid surface areas excluding air space and architectural features. If the angle separating two faces of a Vshaped sign is more than 45 degrees or 24 feet, the sign faces visible from one point are added cumulatively
as one sign face.
13-6.2 Area of Building Signs.
The area of a building sign shall be determined by computing all visible surface display area, that is the
words, numbers, and/or graphics that are totally enclosed by a frame or graphic design. In the case of
words containing lower case letters mounted individually to the wall of the building, the area of the sign is
the square footage area that is measured by taking the height of the lower case letters multiplied by the total
word length.
13-6.3 Exceptions.
In a residential development where the sign identifying the name of the development is attached to a wall
or fence, the area of the sign shall be calculated as a building sign per Section 13-6.2.
Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution Page 13-7
FIGURE 13-6A: SIGN FACE AREA MEASUREMENT
(VISIBLE SURFACE DISPLAY AREA)
POLE OR PYLON SIGN POLE OR PYLON SIGN
(SINGLE OR MULTIPLE SUPPORT)
SIGN FACE AREA = (L) X (H) SIGN FACE AREA = 3.14 R
2
V-SHAPED SIGN
SIGN FACE AREA = (L) X (H) SIGN FACE AREA = (L1 + L2) X H
(considered as one face)
Page 13-8 Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution
FIGURE 13-6A (CONTINUED):
SIGN FACE AREA MEASUREMENT
GROUND SIGN GROUND MONUMENT SIGN
SIGN FACE AREA = (L) X (H) SIGN FACE AREA = (L) X (H)
STACKED OR DECKED SIGNAGE
SIGN FACE AREA = (L) X (H1 + H2) SIGN FACE AREA = (L) X (H)
Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution Page 13-9
FIGURE 13-6A (CONTINUED)
SIGN FACE AREA MEASUREMENT
WALL SIGN
(with frame or graphic enclosure)
AWNING SIGN
SIGN FACE AREA = (L) X (H) SIGN FACE AREA = (L) X (H)
WALL SIGNS
(LETTERS MOUNTED INDIVIDUALLY WITHOUT ANY FRAME OR GRAPHIC ENCLOSURE)
SIGN FACE AREA = (L) X (H)
Page 13-10 Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution
13-7 SIGNS SPECIFICALLY PROHIBITED IN ALL ZONING DISTRICTS.
The following signs, in addition to all other signs not expressly permitted by this Chapter 13, are prohibited in all
zoning districts and shall not be erected, or maintained:
a. Roof Signs.
b. Signs that move or give the appearance of moving, including pennants, streamers, flags in excess of sixty (60) square
feet, other than government flags and other signs, unless otherwise approved as part of Localized Alternative Sign
Regulations pursuant to Section 13-15. (This section does not prohibit variable message signs or signs designed with
periodic rotation).
c. Flashing Signs. Signs containing any flashing or running lights or lights creating an illusion of movement, excluding
holiday decorations and time and temperature devices which display time and temperature messages only.
d. Signs which imitate or are easily confused with official traffic signs and use words such as "stop", "look", "danger", "go
slow", "caution", or "warning," except where such words are part of the name of a business or are accessory to parking
lots.
e. Signs which are structurally unsafe or hazardous.
f. Portable signs, except as permitted temporarily in Section 13-12.2
g. Snipe signs.
h. Bench signs except as may be authorized by a Conditional Use in the “D” Retail District.
i. Vehicular signs.
j. Abandoned signs
13-8 PERMITTED SIGNS.
No Sign Zoning Certificate shall be issued unless the type of proposed sign is permitted in the zoning district in
which the sign is to be located as indicated in this chapter, the sign meets the general standards in Section 13-5, the
standards for off-site advertising signs set forth in Section 13-15 and the sign does not, by itself or cumulatively with
other existing or planned signs, exceed these regulations.
13-9 SIGNS PERMITTED IN ALL ZONING DISTRICTS
13-9.1 Sign Permitted in all Zoning Districts Exempt from Zoning Certificates
The following signs are permitted in all zoning districts without a fee and without issuance of a zoning certificate
subject to the requirements stated herein. All signs in this section, unless otherwise stated below, shall be setback a
minimum of 10 feet from the right-of-way, easement of access, or edge of pavement, whichever is the greater
setback, and 5 feet from all other property lines.
a. Identification signs including house numbers legible from the street, and nameplates (fraternal, social,
apartment and professional) identifying the occupant or address of a parcel of land, and not exceeding two (2)
square feet in display surface area.
b. Nameplates and identification signs attached to the building for churches and fraternal organizations, and not
exceeding twelve (12) square feet.
c. Memorial plaques and historic markers, including those containing the names of buildings and dates of
construction and not exceeding two (2) square feet in display surface area.
d. For sale signs attached to vehicles.
e. Flags bearing the official design of a nation, state, county, municipality, institution or organization and not
exceeding 60 square feet.
f. Traffic, or other government signs, also private traffic control signs which conform to the requirements of the
Ohio Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices.
g. Public Park and playground signs.
Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution Page 13-11
h. Non-illuminated signs proclaiming religious or other noncommercial messages not exceeding twelve (12)
square feet in surface display area in any residential district nor thirty-two (32) square feet in any other zoning
district.
Exception: Political campaign signs shall be exempt from the provisions of the Zoning Resolution.
i. Non-illuminated real estate signs advertising the sale or lease of property or building where the sign is located,
not exceeding one per street frontage and twelve (12) square feet of surface display area in any residential
district nor thirty-two (32) square feet in any other zoning district.
j. One temporary event (not portable or moveable) sign per public street frontage subject to the following:
1. Signs installed must be related to festivals or other seasonal events occurring on the institutional property.
2. Total surface display area shall not exceed twelve (24) square feet in Residential Districts and thirty-two
(32) square feet in all other Districts.
3. Sign height shall not exceed eight (8) feet unless attached to the wall of the building.
4. Placement shall be wholly within the property boundaries to which the sign pertains.
5. The sign shall be located on the property for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days.
6. Signs in Residential Districts shall not be illuminated.
k. One temporary (not portable or moveable) construction sign as defined in Section 13-3, per public street
frontage subject to the following:
1. Total surface display area shall not exceed sixteen (16) square feet in a Residential District and thirty-two
(32) square feet in all other Districts.
2. Sign height shall not exceed eight (8) feet.
3. Placement shall be wholly within the property boundaries to which the sign pertains.
4. The sign shall not be erected prior to issuance of a building permit for the proposed construction, and shall
be removed upon issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy.
l. One temporary (not portable or moveable) construction sign related to improvement occurring on the site such
as windows, siding, painting, etc. subject to the following:
1. Total surface display area shall not exceed six (6) square feet.
2. Sign height shall not exceed three (3) feet.
3. The sign shall not be erected prior to beginning the start of the project and shall be removed within seven
(7) days following completion.
m. Trespassing, safety or caution signs, not exceeding two (2) square feet in area.
n. On-Premises directional and informational signs not exceeding four (4) square feet and forty-two (42) inches in
height, for pedestrians and vehicles using such words as "Entrance," "Exit," "Parking," "One-Way" but not
including any advertising message or corporate logo.
o. Gasoline pump signs appearing on legally installed pumps identifying the brand of fuel or the business selling
fuel.
p. On-premises yard sale or garage sale signs not exceeding six (6) square feet provided they are erected no more
than seven (7) days prior to the sale nor displayed for more than seven (7) consecutive days.
q. Searchlights may be used on a commercial property to advertise a Grand Opening Event only, but shall not be
utilized for more than 18 hours.
13-9.2 Sign Permitted in all Zoning Districts Requiring a Zoning Certificate
The following signs are permitted in all zoning districts with the issuance of a zoning compliance certificate subject
to the requirements stated herein.
a. Institutional bulletin boards or identification signs located on the premises of the institution to which the sign
pertains and not exceeding forty eight (48) square feet in surface display area per side, maximum of 2 sides with
a maximum height of eight (8) feet, if the signs are located at least twenty (20) feet for the property line.
Page 13-12 Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution
b. Portable signs on institutional property identifying special events, when the sign pertains to a specific event
occurring on the subject property, subject to the following:
1. The use of portable signs is limited to 30 days per use certificate, for no more than four (4) uses per year
2. An application for a use certificate must be filed prior to the placement of the sign; said application shall
clearly state the type of event planned, dates of the event and the specific dates the sign will be on site.
13-10 SIGNS PERMITTED IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.
The following regulations apply to those properties located in the “A”, “B”, & “C” Residential Districts. Any sign
not expressly permitted by Section 13-9 or by these district regulations is prohibited. Unless otherwise stated each of
the following sign type shall be constructed for on premise advertising purposes only.
13-10.1 Building and Freestanding Signs.
a. Home Occupation. One (1) non-illuminated name plate not exceeding two (2) square feet in surface
display area and attached flat against a building wall shall be permitted.
b. Multi-Family Residential Uses and Other Permissible Uses:
1. Building Signs. One identification wall sign not exceeding eight (8) square feet of sign surface
area for each fifty (50) feet of building frontage shall be permitted provided the total surface area
of building signs and freestanding signs as measured collectively, shall not exceed 32 square feet.
2. Freestanding Signs. Uses having less than 100 feet of lot frontage shall not have a freestanding
identification sign. Uses having at least 100 feet of lot frontage may have one freestanding sign
not to exceed 32 square feet of sign surface area provided the total surface area of building and
freestanding signs as measured collectively, shall not exceed 32 square feet. (See General
Standards Section 13-5 for height and setback requirments).
13-10.2 Outdoor Advertising Signs.
Outdoor Advertising Signs or Billboards are prohibited in all Residential Districts.
13-11 SIGNS PERMITTED IN THE “O” OFFICE DISTRICT.
These regulations apply to those properties located in the “O” Office District. Any sign not expressly permitted by
Section 13-9 or by these district regulations is prohibited. Unless otherwise stated each of the following signs shall
be constructed for on-premise advertising purposes only.
13-11.1 Temporary Signs & Outdoor Advertising Signs.
Temporary and portable signs are prohibited in the “O” Office-Residence District. Outdoor advertising
signs are prohibited in the “O” Office-Residence District.
13-11.2 Freestanding Signs.
An office park containing two or more buildings with more than one-hundred (100) feet of frontage shall be
permitted one joint identification sign for each principal entrance on a public street, with a limit of two (2)
signs per office park or parcel, neither of which may exceed twenty-eight (28) square feet of surface area.
In addition, each building or lot in such office park shall be permitted one building mounted sign with a
single face which may not exceed twenty-four (24) square feet of sign surface area per Section 13-11.4.
Office buildings occupying individual parcels with a minimum of seventy-five (75) feet of frontage on a
pubic roadway are permitted one ground-mounted identification sign not exceeding twenty-four square feet
in size and five (5) feet in height.
The placement of all freestanding signs in the “O” Office District shall comply with applicable general
requirements of Section 13-5. 
Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution Page 13-13
13-11.3 Tenant Identification Signs
Tenant identification signs, the content of which is related solely to the name and address of multiple
occupants of the premises are permitted when such signs are attached to the building or installed adjacent to
a driveway or within fifteen (15) feet of a principle entrance to the building, are illuminated by indirect
lighting and do not exceed twelve (12) square feet.
13-11.4 Building Signs.
One Sign identifying the building or the occupant(s) not exceeding twenty-four (24) square feet may be
mounted to the façade of the building that faces the principal dedicated street or internal driveway.
13-12 SIGNS PERMITTED IN D RETAIL
The following regulations shall apply to those properties located in the “D” Retail District. Any sign not expressly
permitted by Section 13-9 or by these district regulations is prohibited. Unless otherwise stated each of the following
signs shall be constructed for on-premise advertising purposes only.
13-12.1 Temporary Signs.
One temporary (not portable or moveable) sign for any of the following events shall be permitted for each
business. Such signs may have two faces with each sign face area as follows:
EVENT Maximum Size Maximum Time
Non-commercial Event 32 sq. ft. 30 consecutive days no more
than 2 times per year
Commercial Event 48 sq. ft. 30 consecutive days up to 4
times per calendar year

13-12.2 Portable or Movable Signs.
Any freestanding sign, including but not limited to "A" frame, or inverted "T" shaped structures, including
those signs mounted on wheeled trailers, shall be permitted for retail uses only in accordance with the
following provisions:
a. Portable signs are permitted for grand openings, advertising special events or sales, charitable or
community-related events. Being temporary in nature, such portable signs may be permitted for a
period not to exceed thirty (30) consecutive days up to four times per calandar year per establishment.
b. All illuminated portable signs shall comply with the requirements of Section 13-5.1 and the National
Electric Code.
c. No portable sign shall be located in the site triangle.
d. No portable sign shall exceed 48 square feet in surface display area.
e. Only one portable sign shall be permitted per property.
13-12.3 Freestanding Signs.
a. Businesses and other permitted uses having less than 60 feet of lot frontage shall not have a freestanding
sign unless approved by Conditional Use permit per Section 13-13.1.
b. Businesses and other permitted uses having street frontage between greater than 60 linear but not less
than 349 linear feet are permitted 1 free standing advertising or business sign not to exceed 80 square
feet, provided the sign employs no motion or intermittence of its illuminator. (See Section 13-5 for
height and setback standards).
Page 13-14 Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution
c. Businesses and other permitted uses having street frontage in excess of 350 linial feet shall be permitted
a second 80 square foot monument style advertising or business sign not to exceed 80 square feet and
12 feet in height, provided the sign employs no motion or intermittence of its illuminator and is located
in a dedicated landscape area at least twice the size of the sign.
d. Multi-Tenant Shopping Centers with more than 5 tenants and at least 50,000 square feet of contiguous
building square footage shall be permitted one 150 square foot monument style sign not to exceed 20
feet in height for the purpose of providing identification for the shopping center and/or individual
tenants, if placed in a dedicated landscaped area at least twice the size of the sign. Additional signage
shall be permitted in conformance with lot frontage standards of this section. Regardless of street
frontage a second monument style sign not to exceed 80 square feet in size and 12 feet in height shall be
permitted provided it is not located on the same street frontage as the primary sign and is not located
within within 150 feet of any other freestanding sign on the premises.
13-12.4 Building Signs.
a. Any business or other permissible use shall be permitted 1.5 square foot of Building Sign surface area
for each foot of Building Frontage as measured along the length of the building façade that fronts the
principal dedicated street, or the façade that contains the main entrance to the building. For other
Building Frontage, signs may not exceed .75 square foot of sign surface area per foot of building
frontage.
b. Where a building such as a shopping center contains multiple tenants, building signs may be calculated
by individual unit as measured from interior wall to interior wall of the tenant space. Each tenant shall
be permitted 1.5 square foot of Building Sign surface area for each foot of building frontage that fronts
the principal dedicated street, or the façade that contains the main entrance to the building. For tenant
space facing another street frontage, such as a secondary public street, private street or private access
drive, signs may not exceed .75 square foot of sign surface area per foot of building frontage occupied
by the tenant space.
c. Building sign square footage on corner lots with a secondary frontage may be transferred to a freestanding sign if approved through a conditional use permit as per Section 13-14.
d. No single building mounted wall sign shall exceed fifty square feet. Where the frontage calculations
permit, additional or secondary signage is permissable up to the total allowable square footage.
Where wall signage cannot be calculated in the manner indicated above, refer to 13-15 "Localized
Alternative Sign Regulations."
FIGURE 13-12A
SHOPPING CENTER SIGNAGE
Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution Page 13-15
13-12.5 Outdoor Advertising Signs.
Outdoor Advertising Signs are prohibited in all commercial districts.
13-13 SIGNS PERMITTED WITH CONDITIONAL USE ZONING CERTIFICATE.
A Conditional Use Zoning Certificate must be obtained as part of the application for a Sign Zoning Certificate,
pursuant to the procedures of Chapter 17, for signs identified in this Section.
13-13.1 Freestanding On Premise Advertising Signs in Retail Districts with Lot
Frontages of 60 Feet or Less as measured at the building setback line.
a. Not more than one freestanding sign per lot shall be permitted.
b. Minimum setback of 10 feet from the right-of-way, 5 feet from all other property lines.
c. Height shall not exceed 18 feet.
d. Minimum distance from grade shall be not less than 9 feet or maximum height of 3 feet when located in
a sight distance triangle. (See Figure 14D).
e. Maximum surface display area shall not exceed 24 square feet each face or side.
f. No sign shall be located within 20 feet of any existing freestanding on-premise sign located on any
property on the same side of the street.
13-14 LOCALIZED ALTERNATIVE SIGN REGULATIONS.
13-14.1 Submission of Regulations.
A shopping center, office park, or institutional campus, such as universities or medical centers, having
multiple tenants, entrances, or buildings, may establish localized alternative sign regulations pertaining
only to a particular center, district or campus, as an alternative to the sign regulations that would otherwise
be required under this Chapter 13, if approved as a PUD-1 pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 18. If, and
to the extent that localized alternative sign regulations are approved as a PUD-1, such local sign regulations
shall govern.
13-14.2 Conditions for Approval.
No localized alternative sign regulations shall be approved as a PUD-1 unless the regulations are binding
upon all real property and premises in the area (e.g., shopping center, medical center, university campus) to
which the regulations are intended to apply.
13-14.3 Application Procedures.
Persons desiring to obtain approval of localized alternative sign regulations pursuant to this Section shall
submit proposed regulations to the Administrative Official, together with any additional material requested
by the Administrative Official. The Administrative Official shall review the regulations and pursuant to the
provisions of Chapter 18, shall recommend to the Township Zoning Commission approval, approval with
modifications, or disapproval of such regulations.
13-14.4 Private Signage Agreements.
Nothing in this Chapter 13 shall prevent any persons from establishing, by deed restrictions or private
agreement, sign regulations which are more stringent than those set forth in this Chapter, said agreements
shall not be enforced by the Zoning Administrator without the adoption of a Localized Alternative Sign
Plan.
Page 13-16 Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution
13-14.5 Changes to Approved Localized Alternative Sign Regulations.
Alternative localized sign regulations which have been approved as a PUD-1 pursuant to Chapter 18 may
be amended or varied only pursuant to the procedures and standards in Chapter 18 for the original approval.
13-15 ENFORCEMENT.
13-15.1 Violations.
a. Failure to Obtain Required Zoning Certificate or Permits. Any person who erects, alters or moves any
sign for which a Zoning Certificate or permit is required after the effective date of this Chapter shall be
deemed a violation of this Zoning Resolution subject to the procedures and penalties described in
Chapter 24 of this Resolution.
b. Continuing Violations. Each day that a violation continues following the issuance of a citation shall be
deemed a separate offense.
13-15.2 Penalties for Violations.
Penalties shall be imposed pursuant to Chapter 24 of this Zoning Resolution.
13-15.3 Revocation of Zoning Certificate/Sign.
All rights and privileges acquired under the provisions of this Chapter 13 are mere licenses, revocable by
the Board of Zoning Appeals in accordance with the following procedure:
a. Time Limit and Options. A person or entity assessed of a penalty pursuant to Chapter 24 must select
one of the following options after receipt of the written notice of violation:
1. Abatement of the violation within thirty (30) days; or
2. Within twenty (20) days of receipt of the written notice, submit in writing to the Administrative
Official a request for an appeal to be heard before the Board of Zoning Appeals specifying the
factual or legal issues to be contested. The procedures for filing an appeal are outlined in Chapter
22. All administrative fees associated with the appeal shall be applicable, however, timely
submission of such appeal prior to the issuance of a citation shall abate the imposition of a citation
and any additional penalty associated therewith.
b. Effect of Board of Zoning Appeals Hearing. A final decision is made by the Board of Zoning Appeals
which may reverse the order of the Zoning Administrator or uphold such order resulting in the
assessment of a penalty pursuant to 13-15.3E. An appeal before the Board of Zoning Appeals shall be
conducted pursuant to the Rules of Procedure for the Board.
c. Citation. Following the expiration of the written notice of violation, if the violation has not been abated
or an appeal filed through the aforementioned procedure, a citation will be issued. Once such citation
has been issued the collection or appeal of such assessment shall be through the Municipal Court of
Hamilton County.
d. Appeal. Any person or entity who is aggrieved by a final decision of the Board of Zoning Appeals may
appeal to the Court of Common Pleas of Hamilton County.
e. Fee. A fee equal to double that required by Section 20-1.3 shall be charged for Zoning Certificates
issued pursuant to Section 13-4 following the location, construction, re-construction, enlargement,
structural alteration or changing the sign without obtaining a zoning certificate.
Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution Page 13-17
13-16 VARIANCES.
13-16.1 Variances.
Any party refused a zoning certificate for a sign application due to size, height or setback regulations, may
appeal the decision of the Administrative Officer to the Board of Zoning Appeals.
13-16.2 Procedures.
Appeals and variances to the Board of Zoning Appeals shall follow the procedures in Chapters 21;
Variances, and Chapter 22; Appeals to the Board of Zoning Appeals.
13-17 SIGN ADVISORY COUNCIL.
The Rural Zoning Commission and the Hamilton County Board of Commissioners has establish a Sign Advisory
Council for the purpose of periodically reviewing implementation of the provisions of the County Zoning
Resolution relating to all signage and code enforcement, new sign technology, or other issues which may relate to
signage.
When applicable the Green Township Board of Trustees may consider the recommendations of the Sign Advisory
Council and propose appropriate changes to the Zoning Code in conformance with Chapter 16 section 16.3.
[ B A L A N C E O F T H I S P A G E I N T E N T I O N A L L Y L E F T B L A N K ]
Page 13-18 Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution
[ T H I S P A G E I N T E N T I O N A L L Y L E F T B L A N K ]

Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution Page 14-1
 14 BUFFER YARDS AND RESOURCE PROTECTION
BUFFER YARDS AND RESOURCE PROTECTION
14-1 PURPOSE.
The purpose of this Chapter is to require buffering between non-compatible land uses, provide coordinated
streetscapes, protect sight triangles, and to protect, preserve and promote the character and value of surrounding
neighborhoods as well as, to promote the public health and safety through the reduction of noise pollution, air
pollution, visual pollution, air temperature, and artificial light glare by providing for the installation and
maintenance of buffer areas and landscaping in accordance with the standards and requirements set forth below.
14-2 APPLICABILITY.
No structure on land which abuts a right-of-way or boundary between two Land Use Classes as defined in
Table 14A shall be developed, or redeveloped, unless a buffer yard, if required as indicated in Table 14B, is
established in accordance with the requirements of this Chapter.
a. Redevelopment Exception. Redevelopment that is approved in accordance with the provisions of Section 1-7 shall be
exempt from the requirements of this Chapter.
14-3 TYPES OF BUFFER YARDS.
The following types of buffer yards shall be required, as applicable, in accordance with the provisions of this
Chapter or other related chapter.
14-3.1 Boundary Buffer.
The purpose of the boundary buffer is to separate adjacent non-compatible land uses and screen and soften
the detrimental impacts of such non-compatible uses upon one another and upon the surrounding
neighborhood. The boundary buffer, which is a linear area adjacent to the side and/or rear property line,
may vary in width depending on site conditions and on the level of screening required for line of sight,
noise suppression or other nuisance related purpose.
14-3.2 Streetscape Buffer.
A streetscape buffer is located in a linear area adjacent to the front property line extending from side lotline to side lot-line. The purpose of the streetscape buffer is to shield or enhance views into the parking lot,
establish coordination among diverse buildings, setbacks and uses, to define the street and access points, to
retain the quality of the environment by providing appropriate vertical mass in keeping with dimensions of
horizontal voids, and to diminish the presence of wires/poles.
14-4 PLAN REVIEW.
For any buffer required by this Chapter, a plan shall be submitted with the application for Zoning Certificate to the
Administrative Official to review for compliance with these regulations and any other applicable regulations. The
plan shall show:
a. the topography of the site;
b. the location of driveway entrances;
c. provisions for vehicular and pedestrian circulation;
d. the location of sidewalks on or adjacent to the property;
e. the location of utilities, barriers, shelters, and signs;
C H A P T E R
14
Page 14-2 Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution
f. the location of landscaped areas and the types, quantity, sizes and location of vegetation to be planted in the areas of
existing vegetation and existing and proposed topography and
g. any other relevant information requested by the Administrative Official.
14-5 MODIFICATIONS AND WAIVERS.
In the event that the unusual topography or elevation of a development site, the size of the parcel to be developed,
the extent of expansion or redevelopment of the site or parking area is deemed to be insignificant, or the presence of
existing buffers on adjacent developed property would make strict adherence to the requirements of this Chapter
serve no meaningful purpose or would make it physically impossible to install and maintain the required buffer, the
Zoning Commission or the Board of Zoning Appeals (per Section 14-5.1) may, upon proper application by the
property owner, and upon making findings of fact, modify and/or waive the requirements of this Chapter provided
the existing or resulting boundary features of the development site comply with the spirit and intent of this Chapter,
Chapter 12, Section 12-6 and other related chapters.
14-5.1 Authority
The authority to approve landscape modifications resides with the Commission or Board that approves each
specific type of zoning request.
14-6 GENERAL STANDARDS FOR BUFFER YARDS.
14-6.1 Responsibility for Installation of Buffer.
The boundary buffer area shall be provided by the person in charge of or in control of developing the
property whether as owner, lessee, tenant, occupant or otherwise (hereinafter referred to as "Owner").
14-6.2 Location.
Boundary buffers shall be located along the rear and side boundaries of a lot or parcel. On sloped areas the
boundary buffer should be located to maximize its screening effectiveness. Streetscape buffers shall be
located along the public right-of-way and may be required along private street easements.
14-6.3 Structures within Required Buffer.
No structure shall be permitted within a required buffer other than a wall, fence or berm, or a driveway in
the front yard connecting a parking area on the lot to the street or to a parking area on an abutting lot. A
driveway in the side yard that connects a paving area on the lot to the street shall not encroach into the
boundary buffer area.
14-6.4 Adjacent Parcels Owned by Same Owner.
When both parcels are owned and being developed by the same owner, the buffer may be placed on either
adjoining parcel or astride the boundary.
14-6.5 Adjacent Parcels Owned by Different Owners.
When adjoining parcels have different owners the buffer shall be placed on the parcel being developed.
However, a buffer that meets the requirement of both parcels may be placed astride the boundary if a
written agreement, signed by both owners, is filed with the Administrative Official, is recorded in the real
property records of the County and runs with the property.
14-6.6 Existing Fence, Wall, Berm or Landscaping on Adjacent Parcel.
When the adjoining parcel has an existing fence, wall, berm, or landscaping within ten feet (10') of a
developing parcel boundary that fulfills the buffer requirements of the developing parcel, the existing
landscape material on the adjacent lot may be used towards the requirement for the boundary buffer
required for that boundary edge only. All credits for existing landscape material must be in accordance 
Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution Page 14-3
with Section 15-6, and other related chapters. Any additional landscape material necessary to meet the
boundary buffer requirements shall be added.
14-6.7 Existing Development on Both Sides.
Where development already exists on both sides of a property line, a buffer shall be established as a
condition of any new development. The property owner shall provide the maximum buffer possible under
the standards of this Chapter given the location of existing buildings and driveways. If the width available
for the buffer is less than fifty percent (50%) of the minimum required buffer width, then a solid fence or
wall meeting the standards of Chapter 15, Section 15-2, shall be located at the side of the buffer facing the
proposed development.
14-7 BOUNDARY BUFFER.
To determine the type of boundary buffer required between two adjacent parcels, the following procedure and
standards shall be utilized:
14-7.1 Procedure.
a. Identify the Land Use Class of the Developing Parcel. Refer to Table 14A to determine the Land Use
Class of the proposed use and intensity.
b. Identify the Land Use Class of each Adjoining Parcel. Refer to Table 14A to determine the Land Use
Class of the adjoining use and intensity.
c. Determine the Boundary Buffer Requirement for each Edge of the Developing Parcel. Refer to
Table 14B and determine if the Boundary Buffer Requirement will be Buffer A, Buffer B or none.
Figures 14A and 14B indicate Landscape Material Requirements for Boundary Buffers A and B,
respectively.
d. Determine Width of Buffer. For each Boundary Buffer (A or B), alternative widths may be utilized.
The width of each buffer defines the Landscape Material Requirements. For each width range, options
for Landscape Material Requirements are given as minimum number of plants required per one
hundred (100) linear feet.
e. Determine Length of Buffer. Measure the length of the property boundary requiring the buffer and
subtract any length covered completely by a clear sight triangle under Section 14 -9.
f. Determine Landscape Material Requirements. Divide the length of the Required Boundary Buffer (the
result of 14-7.1(e) above) by one hundred (100). Multiply the result by the number of plants for the
required boundary buffer shown in Figures 14A or 14B for the selected width. Any fractional number
of plants (shrubs and trees) should be calculated to the next highest whole number.
g. Location and Placement of Landscape Material Requirements. All landscape material requirements
shall remain within the designated area and shall otherwise meet the standards of the Boundary Buffer.
Although landscape material requirements typically are located within each 100 foot increment, their
placement may vary in order to screen objectionable views.
h. Change of use or Expansion. Any change of use for a commercial property involving the expansion
of the building, change in parking requirements, or change in intensity of use shall require the
installation of a streetscape buffer and residential landscape buffer. 
Page 14-4 Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution
FIGURE 14A: ALTERNATIVES FOR BOUNDARY BUFFER A
Minimum
Landscape Material
Requirements
Width of
buffer
100 Linear Feet Canopy
Trees
Shrubs
10 ft. 3.3 10
15 ft. 2.8 8
20 ft. 2.3 6.5
25 ft. 1.9 5
FIGURE 14B: ALTERNATIVES FOR BOUNDARY BUFFER B
Minimum
Landscape Material
Requirements
Width of
buffer
100 Linear Feet Canopy
Trees
Shrubs
10 ft. 3.3 15
15 ft. 3.3 12.5
25 ft. 3.3 10
Notes:
1. 1.5 understory trees or 1 evergreen tree may be substituted for 1 canopy tree for up to 50% of the required canopy trees.
2. A fence, wall, or berm 6 ft. to 8 ft. in height may be used and can substitute for shrub requirements 
Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution Page 14-5
TABLE 14A
CLASSIFICATION OF LAND USES
LAND USE
LAND USE INTENSITY1
(See note below if intensity of
adjoining parcel is unknown)
 LAND
USE
RESIDENTIAL
Single/Two Family Detached and Detached in PUD’s Maximum 5.8 DU/A LOW I
Multi-Family Maximum 9.7 DU/A MOD II
GREATER THAN 9.7 DU/A HIGH II
COMMERCIAL
Office Maximum .60 ISR LOW II
Maximum .75 ISR MOD III
GREATER THAN .75 ISR HIGH IV
Retail Business (Sales and Service) Maximum .60 ISR LOW II
Maximum .75 ISR MOD III
GREATER THAN .75 ISR HIGH IV
 Retail Bar, Restaurant Dance/Concert Club Maximum .60 ISR LOW III
Maximum .75 ISR MOD III
GREATER THAN .75 ISR HIGH IV
INSTITUTIONAL; PUBLIC SERVICE; AND RECREATION, CULTURE & ENTERTAINMENT
Maximum .60 ISR LOW II
Maximum .75 ISR MOD III
GREATER THAN .75 ISR HIGH IV
AGRICULTURAL
Rural LOW I
Suburban LOW I
NOTES:
ISR = IMPERVIOUS SURFACE RATIO
DU/A = DWELLING UNITS PER ACRE
1The land use class of a developed adjoining parcel shall be classified as low intensity if the impervious surface (ISR) is
not known.
The land use class of a vacant adjoining parcel shall be classified as low intensity for the use typically permitted in the
existing zone district.
TABLE 14B
MINIMUM BUFFER YARDS FOR ADJOINING LAND USE
*
LAND USE CLASS OF
DEVELOPMENT PARCEL I II III IV Adjoining
R.O.W.
I --- --- --- --- C**
II A --- --- --- C
III B + 10 ft. B --- --- C
IV B + 20 ft. B + 15 ft. B + 10 ft. --- C
NOTES:
Each 20 foot increment required in Land Use Class IV can be substituted by an additional contiguous "B" Buffer strip.
Each 10 feet increment required in Land Use Class IV and Land Use Class V can be substituted by an additional contiguous "A"
Buffer strip.
When the land use of an adjoining parcel is a nonconforming use, the boundary buffer width should be based on the land use
intensity of the existing use or the underlying zoning, whichever is more restrictive.
*Greater boundary buffers may be required in approvals of Conditional Uses and PUD's when necessary to protect adjacent land
uses.
**Only required in Land Use Class I if parking area for 5 or more vehicles is within 50 feet of the R.O.W. 
Page 14-6 Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution
Buffer Yards:
A = Boundary buffer requirements in Figure 14A
B = Boundary buffer requirements in Figure 14B
C = Streetscape buffer requirements in Figure 14C
14-7.2 Overlap.
When any portion of the parcel is subject to more than one set of landscape requirements as set forth in this
Chapter, Chapter 12, and other related chapters, the most stringent requirement will control. The most
stringent requirements shall be defined as those which require the highest fence, wall or screen or, if no
fence, wall or screen is required, the requirements with the greatest quantity of landscaping.
14-7.3 Credit.
Existing vegetation, fences, walls or berms on a parcel may be counted toward the requirements for any
class of buffer provided that it meets the standards established in Chapter 15, Section 15-6, and Credit for
Existing Landscape Materials.
14-8 STREETSCAPE BUFFER.
All parcels with Land Use Classes II through IV, as defined in Table 14A, with frontage on a public road and all
parking areas in Class I for five (5) or more vehicles (in all Land Use Classes) within 50 feet of the right-of-way
shall provide a streetscape buffer along the property line abutting the right-of-way of the public road when
developed or redeveloped.
14-8.1 General Standards.
a. Location and Depth. The streetscape buffer shall have a depth of ten feet (10') or greater, shall be
located adjacent to the right-of-way and shall extend along the entire road frontage.
b. Parking Prohibited. No parking or pavement shall be allowed in the streetscape buffer except for
intersecting drives or required walkways.
c. Specifications. Landscape Material shall be required in accordance with Figure 14C and Chapter 15,
General Landscape Material Standards.
d. Sight Triangle. When in a sight triangle, all Landscape Material shall meet the standards set forth in
Section 14-9.
14-8.2 Determination of Streetscape Buffer Requirements.
To determine the required landscape materials the following procedure shall be followed:
a. Determine Width of Buffer. Although the width of the buffer is typically measured parallel to the
property line, design variations are allowed. The width of each streetscape buffer defines the landscape
material requirements and, for each width range, options for landscape material requirements are given
as minimum number of plants required per one hundred (100) linear feet.
b. Determine Length of Buffer. Measure the length along the street right-of-way which requires the
buffer and subtract any length covered by a clear sight triangle under Section 14-9.
c. Determine Landscape Material Requirements. Divide the length of the required boundary buffer (the
result of 14-8.2 (b) above) by one hundred (100). Multiply the result by the number of plants for the
required boundary buffer shown in Figure 14C for the selected width and type of use. Any fractional
number of plants (shrubs and trees) should be calculated to the next highest whole number.
d. Location and Placement of Landscape Material Requirements. All landscape material requirements
shall remain within the streetscape buffer area or in the vehicular use area where such area abuts the
streetscape strip and shall otherwise meet the standards of the streetscape buffer. Although landscape
material requirements typically are located within each 100 foot increment, their placement may vary
in order to screen objectionable views. 
Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution Page 14-7
FIGURE 14C: STREETSCAPE BUFFERS
ALTERNATIVES FOR COMMERCIAL STREETSCAPE BUFFERS
Minimum
Landscape Material
Requirements
width of
buffer
100 Linear Feet Canopy
Trees
Shrubs
10 ft. 3.3 10
15 ft. 2.8 8
20 ft. 2.3 6.5
25 ft. 1.9 5
ALTERNATIVES FOR OFFICE STREETSCAPE BUFFERS
Minimum
Landscape Material
Requirements
width of
buffer
100 Linear Feet Canopy
Trees
Shrubs
OPTION 1
10 ft. 2.5 20
OPTION 2
20 ft.
Average
(range 10 to
30 ft.)
5
(or existing
woodland
area) 
Page 14-8 Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution
ALTERNATIVES FOR RESIDENTIAL STREETSCAPE BUFFERS
Maximum
Landscape Material
Requirements
width of
buffer
100 Linear Feet Canopy
Trees
Shrubs
OPTION 1
10 ft. 1.5 20
OPTION 2
20 ft.
Average
(range 10 to
30 ft.)
2.5
(or existing
woodland
area)
Notes:
1. Berms shall be a minimum 3 ft. height.
2. A fence or wall, in compliance with Section 10-7.1, may be used and substituted for 50% of the shrub requirements.
3. All landscape material required for the buffer shall be confined to within the required landscape strip.
4. One canopy tree may substitute for 3 shrubs up to 50% of the shrub requirements.
14-9 CLEAR SIGHT DISTANCE AT STREET AND ACCESS DRIVE
INTERSECTIONS
14-9.1 Purpose.
To insure that landscape materials do not constitute a driving hazard, a "clear sight triangle" will be
observed at all street and access drive intersections.
14-9.2 Definition.
A clear sight triangle is the triangular area formed by a diagonal line connecting two points located on
intersecting lines of a right-of-way, easement of access, or pavement edge of an access drive, each point
being 20 feet from the intersecting lines. See Figure 14D.
14-9.3 Design.
The entire area of the clear sight triangle should be designed as illustrated in Figure 14D to provide the
driver of the vehicle entering the intersection with an unobstructed view to all points nine (9) feet above the
roadway along the centerline. The recommended distance depends upon the design speed of the higherorder street and therefore is greater for arterial streets than for collectors.
14-9.4 Restrictions within Clear Sight Triangles.
a. Within the sight triangle no landscape material with a mature height greater than twelve inches (12")
shall be permitted with the exception of trees which conform to the following standards. Trees shall be
permitted within the sight triangles as long as, except during early growth stages, only the tree trunk
(no limbs, leaves, etc.) is visible between the ground and nine (9) feet above the ground, or otherwise
does not present a traffic visibility hazard. Restrictions shall not apply to the following:
1. Existing natural grades which, by reason of natural topography, rise twelve (12) or more inches
above the level of the center of the adjacent intersection; 
Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution Page 14-9
2. Fire hydrants, public utility poles, street markers, governmental signs, and traffic control devices.
b. The restrictions contained in this Section 14-9.4 shall also apply to any areas outside the clear sight
distance triangle that fall within the sight distance requirements of the County Engineer.
FIGURE 14D
CLEAR SIGHT TRIANGLE
14-10 WOODLAND PRESERVATION.
To be eligible for landscape requirement credits the following criteria must be met:
14-10.1 Quantity of Woodland.
The minimum amount of woodland preserved shall be one-eighth of an acre (5,445 sq.ft.). The woodland
canopy shall be contiguous and fifty percent (50%) of the canopy shall be from trees that have a 10" DBH
or greater.
14-10.2 Location.
Any woodland area eligible for credit must be located within one hundred feet (100') of the principal
building or an impervious surface that directly serves the principal use on the site and physically located
within a required buffer area.
14-10.3 Credit.
If the above conditions are met, credit may be granted as follows:
a. Landscape Reduction Bonus. The landscape requirements, specified in this and other related chapters,
that are applicable to the site may be reduced or eliminated upon the determination by the
Administrative Official that the Woodland Preservation area amenities fully compensate for the
reduced or eliminated landscape requirements. The existing landscape materials shall be verified as
Woodland Preservation Credit through the submission of a landscape plan including a Landscape
Architect seal or an affidavit signed by the owner, applicant, architect, engineer or surveyor.
b. Parking Reduction Bonus. The Zoning Commission may approve a reduction of up to ten percent
(10%) of the required number of parking spaces if adequate parking will remain on the subject site and
if land area for required number of spaces remains available for future development on the subject site.
c. Intensity Reduction Bonus. The Zoning Commission may approve an increase in the intensity
(maximum ISR) up to ten percent (10%) of the district limits for any use permissible as a PUD. 
Page 14-10 Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution
[ T H I S P A G E I N T E N T I O N A L L Y L E F T B L A N K . ]

Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution Page 15-1
15 GENERAL LANDSCAPE MATERIAL STANDARDS
GENERAL LANDSCAPE MATERIAL STANDARDS
15-1 PURPOSE.
The purpose of this Chapter is to assure that, in conjunction with the purposes of Chapters 12, 14, and other related
chapters all landscape requirements of this Resolution are effectively achieved with high quality landscape elements
and to provide flexibility and incentives to retain existing landscape material elements where appropriate.
Redevelopment that is approved in accordance with the provisions of Section 1-7 shall be exempt from the
requirements of this Chapter.
15-2 STANDARDS FOR USE OF WALLS, FENCES OR BERMS.
Whenever a landscape material requirement in Chapters 12, 14, and other related chapters includes a wall, fence or
berm, such wall, fence or berm shall meet the following requirements:
15-2.1 Walls.
Any wall shall be constructed to be durable, in brick, stone or other masonry materials, with fifty percent
(50%) or less of the wall surface left open.
15-2.2 Fences.
Any fence shall be constructed to be durable, of wood, metal, PVC or wrought iron. Fence posts shall be
structurally stable. The finished side of the fence shall face out from the developing property and shall face
the adjacent property or street. Chain link fencing may not be used to meet the requirements of
Chapters 12, 14, and other related chapters.
15-2.3 Berms.
Berms shall be physical barriers made of earth, which block or screen the view similar to a hedge, fence, or
wall. In no event shall a berm have a slope of greater than 3:1 (three feet of horizontal distance for each
one-foot rise in elevation). Any berm shall be stabilized to prevent erosion immediately after its
construction and shall be landscaped within the next planting season in accordance with the landscaping
requirements in Chapters 12, 14, and other related chapters.
15-2.4 Relationship of Plant Material with Wall or Fence.
a. Where a wall or fence which is 50% or less open is used as part of a landscaping requirement, all of the
required plantings accompanying the wall or fence shall be located between the wall or fence and the
adjacent property of the lowest intensity use.
b. Where a fence is 50% or more open, as in a wrought iron type fence, the shrub requirement shall be
increased by 25% (multiply the required quantity by 1.25). When a fence is 50% or more open, the
required plantings accompanying the fence may be located on either side of the fence provided that at
least 50% (by quantity) of the shrub requirement is on the street side or the side of the adjacent
property of less intensity. Trees may be placed on either side of the fence.
15-3 PLANT INSTALLATION STANDARDS.
The following standards shall apply to all new plant material installed as part of a buffer required under the
provisions of Chapters 12, 14, and other related chapters.
C H A P T E R
15
Page 15-2 Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution
15-3.1 Species of Plant Material.
To meet the requirements of Chapters 12, 14, and other related chapters, plants shall be species listed in the
Appendix 1 entitled, Recommended Plant Material List or shall be otherwise approved as appropriate for
this region by a licensed Landscape Architect or Certified Horticulturist.
15-3.2 Quality and Installation.
a. All specifications for the quality and installation of trees and shrubs shall be in accordance with the
most recent edition of "American Standards for Nursery Stock" published by the American Association
of Nurserymen.
b. All plant material shall be free from disease and damage.
c. All plant material shall be planted in a manner that is not intrusive to utilities, pavement, pedestrian
traffic or vehicular traffic.
d. All required plant material shall be planted within one year or by the next planting season, as outlined
in the latest edition of “American Standards for Nursery Stock”, after all construction activity in the
area of the new planting has ceased.
15-3.3 Size.
a. Canopy Trees shall be deciduous trees with a minimum of twelve feet (12') overall height or a
minimum caliper of 2 1/2 inches when installed, and have an expected height of at least 35 feet at
maturity.
b. Evergreen Trees shall be a minimum of five feet (5') in height when installed.
c. Understory Trees shall be a minimum of five feet (5') in height in clump form or 1-½" caliper in single
stem form when installed.
d. Shrubs shall be at least eighteen inches (18") in height or twenty-four inches (24") in spread when
installed.
15-4 SCREENS.
The objective of providing a screen is to visually hide whatever is behind the screen. The screen shall be 100%
opaque. The following standards for each screening material shall be required:
15-4.1 Plant Material Height Requirements.
When plant material is used as screening it shall meet all height requirements in accordance with
Chapters 12 and 14. Height requirements will be considered met when plants are selected whose height at
maturity meet the required height as indicated on the list in the Appendix 2 entitled, Recommended Plant
Material List or as certified by a licensed Landscape Architect or Certified Horticulturist.
15-4.2 Planting Requirements.
To be counted towards screening requirements, evergreen trees and evergreen shrubs shall be planted close
enough to fulfill the objective as defined in Section 15-4. Recommended spacing to achieve this is as
follows:
a. Spreading evergreen trees should be planted eight feet (8') on center. Narrow evergreen trees should be
planted four feet (4') on center. Designation of evergreen trees as spreading or narrow shall be
certified by a licensed Landscape Architect or certified Horticulturist.
b. Evergreen shrubs should be planted at a maximum of 4' on center.
15-4.3 Combination of Materials.
Plant material may be used in conjunction with fences, walls and berms but the overall effect shall be a
continuous 100% opaque screen at maturity. Plants may be planted in rows or be staggered, but the overall
effect shall be a 100% opaque screen.
Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution Page 15-3
15-4.4 Approved Plant List
Plant materials used shall be on the list in Appendix 1 or shall be equivalent to plants on the list as certified
by a licensed Landscape Architect or certified Horticulturist.
15-5 MAINTENANCE RESPONSIBILITIES FOR ALL LANDSCAPE MATERIALS.
All landscape material must be properly maintained in order for the buffer or screen to fulfill its purpose. The owner
of the property and any tenant on the property where required landscaping is located shall be jointly and severally
responsible for the maintenance of all landscape materials. Such maintenance shall include all actions necessary to
keep plantings healthy and orderly in appearance and to keep walls, fences and berms in good repair and neat
appearance.
Any landscape material which fails to meet the minimum requirements of this Section at the time of installation
shall be removed and replaced with acceptable materials. All unhealthy or dead plant material shall be replaced
within one year or by the next planting period, whichever comes first. All buffer materials shall be protected from
damage by motor vehicles or pedestrians that could reduce the effectiveness of the buffer.
15-6 CREDIT FOR EXISTING LANDSCAPE MATERIALS.
The intent of this Section is to provide for the opportunity to protect and preserve existing woodlands and
established plant material.
15-6.1 Trees.
Credit may be given for existing Canopy Trees, Evergreen Trees and Understory Trees as follows:
a. Existing healthy trees may be preserved and used to fulfill landscape requirements for any required
planting provided they are in accordance with the standards set forth in this Chapter and in
Chapters 12, 14, and other related chapters.
b. Trees may be credited only one time towards any one buffer, screen or other landscape requirements
set forth in this Chapter and in Chapters 12, 14, and other related chapters. Trees must be located
within the required landscape area to which it will be credited.
c. Trees which conform to these standards and are proposed to be used for credit shall generally have
location, species, and caliper or height indicated on the required landscape plan.
d. Trees shall be credited according to the following criteria in the quantities shown:
Minimum
Caliper
Minimum
Surrounding
Landscape Area
Minimum
width of
Landscape area
Number of
Trees Credited
36” or greater 350 sf 15 ft. 7
26 - 36” 300 sf 15 ft 5
13 - 25” 250 sf 10 ft 3
4 - 12” 150 sf 5 ft 2
2 ½” 100 sf 5 ft 1

e. To be credited, a tree must have the minimum landscape area surrounding the tree according to Section
15-6.1(d) above or the area of the dripline of the tree, whichever is greater. The surrounding landscape
area required for each credited tree may overlap the surrounding landscape area required by other
existing trees to be credited by 50% of the required area. The surrounding landscape area shall be
undisturbed land.
f. If any preserved tree dies, one tree shall be replaced for each tree credited against such a preserved
tree. The required landscape plan shall indicate the quantities of trees credited and the location of the
surrounding landscape area for each tree credited.
Page 15-4 Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution
15-6.2 Shrubs.
Shrubs may be credited on a one to one basis toward landscape material requirements if the following
criteria are met:
a. Existing healthy shrubs may be used to fulfill landscape requirements for any required planting
provided they conform to the standards set forth in this Chapter and in Chapters 12, 14, and other
related chapters.
b. Shrubs may be credited only one time towards any one buffer, screen or other landscape requirement.
Shrubs must be located within the required area for the buffer or screen to which it will be credited.
c. Shrubs which conform to these standards and are proposed to be used for credit shall have location,
species, and height indicated on the required landscape plan.
d. If any shrub used for credit dies, one shrub shall be replaced for each shrub credited to that shrub.
15-6.3 Protection During Construction.
If trees or shrubs are to be credited towards landscaping requirements they shall be protected during all
phases of construction as follows:
a. Prior to any site demolition or grading, barriers shall be constructed around existing trees and shrubs to
be preserved.
1. Barriers around trees to be preserved shall include the minimum of surrounding landscape area as
required by Section 15-6.1(d) or the area under the drip line of the tree whichever is greater.
2. Barriers around shrubs to be preserved shall include the area within three feet of the shrub mass.
3. When large machinery is to be used on the site, these barriers shall be sturdy fences or a similar
barrier and shall be made more visible by high visibility orange paint or construction flagging.
When large machinery is not to be on site, high visibility construction flagging or similar device
shall clearly delineate the protected area.
b. The following activities are prohibited during demolition and construction under tree canopies and
within any areas enclosed by protective fencing as required by this section:
1. Placing backfill or storing material;
2. Moving or storage of construction equipment;
3. Changing site grades within the dripline of trees or within three feet (3') of shrubs or changing site
grades so that drainage flows into or collects near protected trees or shrubs;
4. All other construction activity not previously mentioned.
15-6.4 Credit for Fences, Walls, and Berms.
a. Fences, walls, and berms may be credited towards fulfilling any landscape material requirements
provided they conform to the standards set forth in this Chapter and Chapters 12, 14, and other related
chapters.
b. All fences, walls and berms may be credited only one time towards any one buffer or screen
requirement. All such fences, walls and berms must be located within the required area for the buffer
or screen to which it will be credited.

Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution Page 16-1
16 AMENDMENTS
AMENDMENTS
16-1 PURPOSE.
The purpose of this Chapter is to provide standards and procedures for making amendments to the text of this
Zoning Resolution and the Zoning Map. The amendment process is not intended to relieve particular hardships nor
to confer special privileges or rights upon any person, but only to make adjustments of general significance or
application that are necessary in light of changed conditions or changes in public policy.
16-2 AUTHORITY.
The text of this Zoning Resolution and the Zoning Map may be amended from time to time by the passage of a
resolution duly adopted by the Board of Township Trustees in accordance with the procedures set forth in this
Chapter.
16-3 PARTIES ENTITLED TO INITIATE AMENDMENTS.
An amendment to the text of the Zoning Resolution or to the Zoning Map may be initiated by motion of the Zoning
Commission, by passage of a resolution by the Board of Trustees, or by the filing of an application with the
Northeast Green Township Zoning Commission by one or more of the owners or lessees of property located within
the area proposed to be changed or affected by the proposed amendment. Specific Plan Districts may be initiated
only by the filing of an application with the Northeast Green Township Zoning Commission by the owner of the
property proposed to be changed by the proposed amendment.
16-4 STANDARDS FOR AMENDMENTS.
The decision of the Board of Trustees to amend the text of the Zoning Resolution or to amend the Zoning Map is
within the sound legislative discretion of the Board. As a part of the review by the Board, for any amendment to the
text of the Zoning Resolution or to the Zoning Map, the following factors, where applicable, should be considered:
a. The recommendations of the professional planning and zoning staff of Northeast Green Township, the Regional
Planning Commission, and the Northeast Green Township Zoning Commission.
b. The reports submitted by reviewing governmental agencies.
c. The comments received at the public hearing concerning the proposed amendment.
d. The relationship to the public health, safety, morals and general welfare.
e. Compatibility with the goals and objectives, if any, of adopted plans for land use, transportation, utilities, community
facilities and other plan elements and with adopted objectives and policies related to land use.
f. The economic viability of the proposed district.
g. The location of the subject property and the compatibility of the proposed use with the character of the area.
h. The existing and proposed site features of the subject property.
16-5 REVIEW PROCEDURE FOR AMENDMENTS – PUBLIC MEETINGS AND
HEARINGS REQUIRED.
16-5.1 Application.
An applicant for a zone amendment shall file an application on a form or forms provided by the
Administrative Official.
C H A P T E R
16
Page 16-2 Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution
16-5.2 Schedule of RPC Meeting
Within seven (7) days of submission of an application determined to be complete pursuant to Chapter 20,
and the payment of the applicable fees, the applicant shall submit the requisite number of copies of the
same material to the Hamilton County Regional Planning Commission. The Regional Planning
Commission shall schedule a staff review, between the Regional Planning Staff, Applicant and the
Township Administrative Official. Upon satisfactory review by the RPC staff and in conformance with
the rules and schedules established by the RPC, the Regional Planning Commission shall schedule a public
review hearing.
16-5.3 Regional Planning Commission Recommendation.
Upon receipt of the motion, certification of resolution, or the application, along with the copy of the
proposed text and map changes, the Regional Planning Commission shall at its regular meeting recommend
the approval or denial of the proposed amendment or the approval of some modification of the amendment
pursuant to the standards in Section 16-4. This recommendation shall be submitted to the Zoning
Commission.
16-5.4 Northeast Green Township Zoning Commission Recommendation.
Upon receipt of the recommendation of the Regional Planning Commission the Zoning Commission shall
set a date for a public hearing not less than twenty (20) nor more than forty (40) days from the date of
initial receipt of the RPC Resolution.
The public hearing will be scheduled to recommend the approval or denial of the proposed amendment, or
the approval of some modification of the amendment pursuant to the standards in Section 16-4. The
Northeast Green Township Zoning Commission shall then submit its recommendation together with the
proposed text and map changes and the recommendation of the Regional Planning Commission to the
Board of Trustees.
16-5.5 Staff Recommendation.
Within thirty (30) days of the submittal of any application for development approval determined to be
complete pursuant to Chapter 20, the Administrative Official shall forward a written advisory staff report to
the Regional Planning Commission recommending approval, approval with conditions, or disapproval. The
advisory staff report shall include:
a. A summary of comments and concerns of applicable departments, agencies and officials;
b. The standards and criteria used in evaluating the application pursuant to Section 16-4;
c. The reasons for the recommendation;
d. The actions or modifications, if any, that may be necessary to obtain approval in accordance with
regulations and adopted community plans.
16-5.6 Green Township Board Trustees Action.
a. Schedule of Hearing. Upon receipt of the recommendation from the Northeast Green Township
Zoning Commission, the Board of Trustees shall hold a public hearing within forty-five (45) days in
accordance with the procedures outlined in Section 16-7.
b. Decision. Within twenty (20) days after the public hearing, the Board shall either adopt or deny the
recommendation of the Northeast Green Township Zoning Commission or adopt some modification
of the recommendation by the Northeast Green Township Zoning Commission. In making its
decision, the Board shall consider the factors contained in Section 16-4. In the event the Board denies
or modifies the recommendation of the Northeast Green Township Zoning Commission, the
unanimous vote of the Board shall be required.
c. Effective Date. An amendment adopted by the Board of Trustees shall become effective in thirty (30)
days after the date of adoption unless within that time period a petition for zoning referendum is
presented in accordance with the requirements of the Ohio Revised Code. (see Appendix 4)
Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution Page 16-3
16-6 REFERENDUM.
16-6.1 Petition Time Limit.
Within thirty (30) days after the date of adoption of an amendment by the Board, a petition may be
presented to the Board of Trustees requesting that the Board submit the amendment to the electors of that
area, for approval or rejection, at a special election to be held on the day of the next primary or general
election.
16-6.2 Petition Signatures.
The petition must be signed by the number of qualified voters residing in the unincorporated area of the
township or part thereof included in the zoning plan equal to not less than eight percent (8%) of the total
vote cast for all candidates for governor in such area at the last preceding general election at which the
governor was elected.
16-6.3 Petition Content.
Each part of the petition for zoning referendum shall contain the number and full and correct title, if any, of
the zoning amendment resolution, motion or application, as the case may be, furnishing the name by which
the amendment proposal is known and a brief summary of its contents. Each petition and Statement of the
Circulator shall, in addition, conform to the rules specified in Section 3501.38 of the Ohio Revised Code as
shown in Appendix 4.
16.6-4 Effect of Referendum.
No amendment for which a referendum vote has been requested shall be put into effect unless a majority of
the vote cast on the issue is in favor of the amendment. Upon certification by the board of elections that the
amendment has been approved by the voters, it shall take effect immediately.
16-7 NOTICE REQUIREMENTS FOR PUBLIC HEARINGS.
An amendment to the text of the Zoning Resolution or to the Zoning Map, initiated by any one of the three methods
described in Section 16-3, shall require notification of required public hearings in accordance with the following
procedures.
16-7.1 Published Notice.
Notice of the public hearing shall be given by the Northeast Green Township Zoning Commission or Board
of Trustees, as the case may be, by one publication in one or more newspapers of general circulation in the
township at least ten (10) days before the date of the hearing.
16-7.2 Mailed Notice.
The Zoning Commission or the Board of Trustees, as the case may be, shall provide notice for map and text
amendments according to the following situations. When the proposed zone map amendment involves the
rezoning or redistricting of ten (10) or fewer parcels of land, as listed on the county auditor’s current tax
list, written notice of the hearing shall be mailed at least ten (10) days before the date of the public hearing.
That notice shall be mailed to all owners of property within, contiguous to, directly across from, and within
two hundred (200) feet of the area proposed to be rezoned or redistricted. When the proposed zone map
amendment involves the rezoning or redistricting of more than 10 parcels of land as listed on the county
auditor’s current tax list, or when a text amendment is proposed, the Zoning Commission shall determine
on a case-by-case basis the extent and method to which additional notice is necessary beyond general
notice as required in Section 16-7.1.
Page 16-4 Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution
16-7.3 Content of Published and Mailed Notices.
Published and mailed notices shall contain the time, date, and place of the public hearing. In addition, they
shall include all of the following information:
a. A statement indicating that the motion, resolution, or application is an amendment to the Zoning
Resolution;
b. The name of the zoning commission that will be conducting the hearing;
c. The nature of the proposed amendment;
d. The current and proposed zoning classification of the property named in the proposed amendment;
e. The time and place where the motion, resolution, or application proposing to amend the Zoning
Resolution will be available for examination for a period of at least ten (10) days prior to the public
hearing;
f. The name of the person responsible for giving notice of the public hearing by publication or by mail,
or by both publication and mail;
g. A statement that after the conclusion of the hearing the matter will be submitted to the Board of
Trustees for its action.
16-8 APPEAL OF DECISION.
Any party adversely affected by the decision of the Board of Trustees or by the Effect of Referendum may appeal to
the Court of Common Pleas of Hamilton County on the ground that such decision was unreasonable or unlawful.
[ B A L A N C E O F T H I S P A G E I N T E N T I O N A L L Y L E F T B L A N K ]

Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution Page 17-1
17 CONDITIONAL USES
CONDITIONAL USES
17-1 PURPOSE.
Conditional uses are those uses having some special impact or uniqueness which require a careful review of their
location, design, configuration and special impact to determine, against fixed standards, the desirability of
permitting their establishment on any given site. They are uses which may or may not be appropriate in a particular
location depending on a weighing, in each case, of the public benefit against the local impact, the amelioration of
any adverse impacts through special site planning, and development techniques and contributions to the provision of
public improvements and rights-of-way.
17-2 AUTHORITY.
The Board of Zoning Appeals may, in accordance with the procedures and standards set out in this Chapter, and
other regulations applicable to the district in which the subject property is located, approve by resolution those uses
listed as conditional uses in the Table in Section 17-12, in the Table of Permissible Uses in Chapter 3, or in any
other part of this Resolution.
17-3 EFFECT OF CONDITIONAL USE LISTING.
17-3.1 Compliance with Zoning Requirements.
The listing of a conditional use in the Table in Section 17-15, in a Table of Permissible Uses in Chapter 3,
or in any other part of this Resolution does not constitute an assurance or presumption that such conditional
use will be approved except as provided in Section 17-3.2. Rather, each proposed conditional use shall
be evaluated by the Board of Zoning Appeals on an individual basis. This shall be done in relation to
its compliance with the standards and conditions set forth in this Chapter and with the standards for the
district in which it is located, in order to determine whether approval of the conditional use is appropriate at
the particular location and in the particular manner proposed.
17-3.2 Compliance with Other Requirements.
Nothing in this Chapter shall be deemed to prohibit or unreasonably limit any use guaranteed by state or
federal law. However, reasonable conditions may be required by the BZA in order to satisfy the purposes
as outlined in section 17-1.
17-4 REVIEW PROCEDURE FOR CONDITIONAL USE APPLICATIONS.
17-4.1 Applicant.
An application for a Conditional Use Zoning Certificate may be filed with the Board of Zoning Appeals by
the owner, lessee, or other person having a legal or equitable interest in the subject property.
17-4.2 Application.
An applicant for a conditional use shall file a plan and an application on forms provided by the
Administrator of the Board of Zoning Appeals. The plan for the use and development of the tract shall
demonstrate that the general and specific criteria have been met.
17-4.3 Scheduling of Hearing and Transmittal of Application.
Within five (5) days after filing of an application determined to be complete pursuant to Chapter 20, the
Administrative Official shall:
C H A P T E R
17
Page 17-2 Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution
a. set a date for a public hearing not less than thirty (30) nor more than sixty-two (62) days after filing of
a complete application.
b. transmit a copy of the application and plan, together with the date of the scheduled hearing, to the
Regional Planning Commission for staff review and recommendation.
17-4.4 Staff Report.
Within twenty (20) days after the filing of a complete application, the Administrative Official shall prepare
and transmit to the Board of Zoning Appeals a written report incorporating or summarizing comments of
other departments, agencies, and officials. A recommendation shall be included, setting forth whether the
application for a conditional use should be approved, approved with modifications, or denied and reasons
for such recommendation.
17-4.5 Notice and Hearing.
The Board of Zoning Appeals (BZA) shall hold a public hearing. Notice of the hearing shall be given at
least ten (10) days before the hearing by notice in writing sent by the Administrative Official to the
applicant and the owners within two hundred (200) feet in all directions. Notice shall also be published in
one or more newspapers of general circulation in the County. Upon the hearing, any party may appear in
person or by attorney.
17-4.6 Decision.
Within twenty one (21) days after the close of the public hearing, the BZA shall, (1) approve the
conditional use; (2) approve the conditional use subject to further specified approvals or modifications
necessary to achieve full compliance with all standards; or (3) disapprove the conditional use.
17-4.7 Notification of Decision.
Following the decision of the Board of Zoning Appeals, the BZA shall return to the applicant one copy of
the resolution and submitted plans permanently marked to show either (1) approval of the conditional use;
(2) approval of the conditional use subject to further specified approvals or modifications necessary to
achieve full compliance with all standards; or (3) disapproval of the conditional use.
17-5 COORDINATED REVIEW AND APPROVAL OF APPLICATIONS.
When an application for a Conditional Use Zoning Certificate is filed, applications shall be filed with the Board of
Zoning Appeals for all other required approvals, including variances.
17-5.1 Notice of Applications for Additional Approvals.
Whenever an applicant files an application for other approvals pursuant to this Section, all required notices
shall include reference to the request for any and all additional approvals.
17-5.2 Procedures and Action by Board of Zoning Appeals.
Whenever an applicant files applications for other approvals pursuant to this Section, the Board of Zoning
Appeals shall review and process all such applications at the same public hearing. In reviewing such
combined applications the Board of Zoning Appeals shall, except as hereinafter provided with respect to
limitations on the time for taking action, comply with all of the provisions of this Resolution applicable to
each of the applications.
The Board of Zoning Appeals shall act on any such combined application within the longest time period
applicable to any one of the individual applications or within such further time as may be consented to by
the applicant. The Secretary of the Board of Zoning Appeals shall issue notices and certificates of such
action in accordance with the provisions of this Resolution applicable to the various applications involved.
Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution Page 17-3
17-6 GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS FOR CONDITIONAL USES.
In approving an application for a Conditional Use Zoning Certificate, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall make a
finding that the proposed conditional use is appropriate in the location proposed. The finding shall be based upon
the general considerations set forth below, as well as the designated specific criteria for specific uses contained in
Section 17-7.
a. Spirit and Intent. The proposed use and development shall comply with the spirit and intention of the Zoning
Resolution and with district uses. The proposed use and development will be in harmony with the general and specific
purposes for which this Resolution was enacted and for which the regulations of the district in question were
established and complies with all additional standards imposed on it by the particular provisions of this Resolution
authorizing such use.
b. No Adverse Effect. The proposed use and development shall not have an adverse effect upon adjacent property, or the
public health, safety, morals, and general welfare.
c. Protection of Public Interests. The proposed use and development should respect, to the greatest extent practicable, the
natural, scenic, and historic features of significant public interest.
d. Consistent with Adopted Plans. The proposed use and development shall, as applicable, be consistent with objectives,
policies and plans related to land use adopted by the Hamilton County Regional Planning Commission or Board of
Trustees.
17-7 SPECIFIC CRITERIA PERTAINING TO CONDITIONAL USES.
In addition to the general considerations contained in Section 17-6, each conditional use is subject to one or more
specific criteria as identified in the Table in Section 17-12. The following list contains all the specific criteria with
each preceded by a number for reference in the Table in Section 17-12.
a. Site shall contain a minimum of 1 acre and all buildings shall not occupy over 20 percent of the total area of the site.
b. Site shall contain a minimum of 20 acres.
c. Interment shall not be within 50 feet of any property line, and any mausoleum, crematory, or other structure shall be at
least 100 feet from every property line.
d. Any structure (except fences), parking area, or storage area shall be setback at least 100 feet from every property line.
e. Setbacks from any adjacent residential property line shall be a minimum of 50 feet for all buildings and 25 feet for all
parking areas.
f. Parking shall not be permitted in the area defined as the front yard setback of the existing zone district.
g. Use shall have direct access to a collector or arterial street.
h. The vehicular use area shall be located and designed so as to minimize impact on the neighborhood.
i. Any use for which drop-off or pick-up of children, residents, visitors, products, or emergency vehicles is a common
occurrence shall provide for the separation of incoming and outgoing vehicles so as not to impede other traffic.
j. The use shall be located within 300 feet of an arterial highway.
k. The facility shall be reasonably accessible, either by its location or transportation provided by the applicant, to medical,
recreational, and retail services as well as to employment opportunities that may be required by its residents
l. Measures shall be taken to minimize the impact of potential nuisances such as noise, odor, vibration, and dust on
adjacent properties.
m. No exterior alterations of an existing structure shall be made that depart from the residential character of the building.
All new structures shall be compatible in residential design with the surrounding neighborhood. However, any
improvement required by code or necessitated by licensing requirements shall not be deemed incompatible.
n. The architectural design and site layout of the structure and the location, nature, and height of any walls, screens, and
fences are to be compatible with adjoining land uses and the residential character of the neighborhood.
o. Landscaping shall be installed in accordance with one of the following buffers as described in detail in Chapter 14:
1. Boundary Buffer A (shown in Figure 14 A);
2. Boundary Buffer B (shown in Figure 14 B);
Page 17-4 Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution
3. Streetscape Buffer (shown in Figure 14C);
p. Signage shall be regulated as follows:
1. No signs shall be erected for purposes of identification except a permitted street address sign;
2. One sign permitted at a maximum of 12 square feet and non-internally illuminated;
3. One building mounted sign permitted at a maximum of 24 square feet;
4. Subject to sign standards in Chapter 13.
q. The conditional use shall be subordinate to the principal permitted use with regard to usage and character.
r. Outdoor playgrounds, tot lots, exercise areas, and pools shall be fully enclosed by a fence.
s. All exterior lighting shall be directed away from adjacent residential properties.
t. Documentation indicating the need for the facility, the specific clientele it will serve, and the location and type of
similar facilities operated by the applicant shall be submitted as part of the application.
u. Security measures shall be submitted as part of the application.
v. The applicant shall provide a plan indicating the manner in which the facility will maintain contact with neighborhood
residents along with a structured procedure whereby their grievances may be filed and resolved.
w. A refuse collection plan shall be submitted as part of the application.
x. Meals shall be served only to guests or residents of the facility and not to the general public.
y. The intensity of the particular use shall be evaluated with regard to the location, size, and configuration of property.
z. An emergency response plan shall be submitted detailing safety measures and response procedures.
aa. There shall be central management of the use to assure seasonal occupancy only (between April 1 and December 31).
bb. Shall not be located within 1,000 feet (measured property line to property line) of residentially used property,
retirement home, nursing home, hospital, church property, school property, park and recreation property, day care or
nurseries or public libraries.
cc. Shall not be located within 500 feet (measured property line to property line) of other such adult entertainment activity
of any kind.
dd. Other Approvals. Proof shall be provided by the applicant in a form satisfactory to the Board of Zoning Appeals that
the proposal has been approved by all agencies and governmental entities with jurisdiction, and conforms to all
applicable requirements.
17-8 ACCESSORY USES TO CONDITIONAL USES.
Any use or structure that is accessory to a conditional use shall be processed in the same manner as prescribed in this
chapter for conditional uses. If an application for an accessory use is made concurrently with an application for the
primary conditional use, they may be considered together as one application. Whether processed in conjunction
with a primary conditional use or as a later supplement to an existing primary conditional use, the accessory use
shall meet the appropriate specific criteria listed in Section 17-7 as well as the general conditions contained in
Section 17-6.
17-9 ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS PERTAINING TO CONDITIONAL USES.
In addition to the general standards contained in Section 17-6, the specific criteria contained in Section 17-7, all
conditional uses are subject to the following regulations:
17-9.1 Additional Conditions.
The Board of Zoning Appeals may impose additional conditions and limitations concerning use,
construction, character, location, landscaping, screening, timing of implementation, and other matters
relating to the purposes and objectives of this Resolution upon the premises benefited by a conditional use.
Such conditions are intended to prevent or minimize adverse effects upon other property and improvements
in the vicinity of the subject property or upon public facilities and services or to assure compliance with
general or specific standards. However, such conditions shall not be used as a device to authorize as a 
Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution Page 17-5
conditional use that which is intended to be temporary in nature. All such conditions, including the
designated specific criteria for a particular use, shall be expressly set forth in the resolution granting the
Conditional Use Zoning Certificate. Violation of any such condition, limitation, or specific criteria shall be
a violation of this Resolution and shall constitute grounds for revocation of the Conditional Use Zoning
Certificate.
17-9.2 Effect of Approval of Conditional Use.
The approval of a proposed conditional use by the Board of Zoning Appeals shall not authorize the
establishment or extension of any use nor the development, construction, reconstruction, alteration or
moving of any building or structure, but shall merely authorize the preparation, filing and processing of
applications for any permits or approvals that may be required by the regulations of the Township,
including but not limited to, a Conditional Use Zoning Certificate, a building permit, a certificate of
occupancy and subdivision approval and any applicable public agency permits.
17-9.3 Certification of Conditional Use Plan Compliance.
Upon receipt from the applicant of an application for a Zoning Compliance Plan certification, the
Administrative Official shall review the application to determine if it is complete pursuant to Chapter 20,
Section 20-2.2, including any additional conditions required in conjunction with the approval by the Board
of Zoning Appeals. Within fourteen (14) days of receipt of the completed application, the Administrative
Official shall either (1) certify that the Zoning Compliance Plan complies with the BZA approval; or (2)
refuse to certify the Zoning Compliance Plan for lack of compliance with the BZA approval.
17-9.4 Affidavit of Compliance with Conditions.
Whenever any proposed conditional use authorized pursuant to this Chapter is made subject to conditions
or limitations to be met by the applicant, the applicant shall, upon meeting such conditions, file an affidavit
with the Administrative Official so stating. Such affidavit shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee as
established by the Board of Trustees upon recommendation of the Administrative Official, to recover the
Township's actual direct cost of an inspection to verify that such conditions and limitations have been met.
17-9.5 Limitations on Conditional Use Approval.
The approval of a proposed conditional use by the Board of Zoning Appeals shall be deemed to authorize
only the particular use for which it was issued, and such authorization shall automatically expire and cease
to be of any force or effect if such use shall, for any reason, be discontinued for a period of twenty four (24)
consecutive months or more.
Except when otherwise provided in the Resolution for approving a conditional use, a conditional use shall
be deemed to relate to, and be for the benefit of, the use and lot in question rather than the owner or
operator of such use or lot.
17-9.6 Amendments to Conditional Uses.
A Conditional Use Zoning Certificate may be amended, varied, or altered only pursuant to the procedures
and subject to the standards and limitations provided in this Chapter for its original approval.
17-10 PERIOD OF VALIDITY.
Subject to an extension of time granted by the Board of Zoning Appeals, no Conditional Use Zoning Certificate
shall be valid for a period longer than one (1) year unless a building permit is issued.
17-11 APPEAL OF DECISION.
Any party aggrieved by the decision of the Board of Zoning Appeals may appeal to the Court of Common Pleas of
Hamilton County on the ground that such decision was unreasonable or unlawful.
17-12 LIST OF CONDITIONAL USES. (SEE TABLE 17-15 AT THE END OF THIS
CHAPTER)
Page 17-6 Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution
17-13 ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS PERTAINING TO TELECOMMUNICATION
TOWERS IN AREAS ZONED FOR RESIDENTIAL USE
17-13.1 Purpose and Intent
The following regulations are intended to minimize adverse health, safety, public welfare or visual impacts
of telecommunications facilities in areas zoned for residential use through buffering, siting, design and
construction, and reduction of the need for new towers. It is the further purpose and intent of this Section
to provide for authorization of telecommunications facilities in a manner which will retain the integrity of
neighborhoods and the character, property values and aesthetic quality of the community. These
regulations shall not unreasonably discriminate against providers of functionally equivalent services and
shall not prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting the provision of personal wireless communications
services. This section is intended to exercise, to the fullest extend permitted by law, the power of the Green
Township Board of Trustees to regulate Telecommunication Towers in areas zoned for residential use.
This section shall also govern the maintenance and removal of buildings and structures that are used in the
provision of telecommunications service.
17-13.2 Authority and Scope
Except in accordance with Ohio Revised Code 519.211 and the provisions of this section of the Northeast
Green Township Zoning Resolution, no person shall, in an area zoned for residential use, locate, erect,
construct, reconstruct, change, alter, remove or enlarge any telecommunications tower.
Whenever a notice has been received or an objection has been lodged, in the manner prescribed in Ohio
Revised Code Section 519.211 regarding a telecommunications tower in an area zoned for residential use,
the Board of Zoning Appeals shall, upon application, have the power to issue at its discretion a Conditional
Use Zoning Certificate after public hearing, allowing the construction, location, erection, reconstruction,
change, alteration or enlargement of such telecommunication facility if it finds that the applicant has
satisfied all of the applicable requirements herein.
In the event of any inconsistency between this Section 17.13 and other provisions of the Northeast Green
Township Zoning Resolution, the provision of this Section shall prevail.
17-13.3 Exceptions:
a. A Zoning Certificate shall be granted as-of-right, without the need for public hearing, to permit the
construction of a new telecommunications facility in an area zoned for residential use if that new tower
or antenna is added to an existing tower (including electrical transmission towers and other utility
towers), and if such installation extends less that 25 feet above the original height of the structure on
which it is mounted.
b. Telecommunications towers not located in an area zoned for residential uses are exempt from zoning.
c. Telecommunications towers located in an area zoned for residential use are exempt from zoning unless
within 15 days after the date of mailing of the applicant's notice sent under division (B) (3) of Ohio
Revised Code Section 519.211:
1. A contiguous property owner gives written notice to the Board of Trustees requesting that the
tower be subjected to zoning regulations, or
2. A member of the Board of Zoning Appeals or Board of Trustees, makes an objection to the
proposed location of the telecommunication tower.
17-13.4 Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply to this Section:
Co-location. The use of a telecommunications tower by more than one wireless telecommunications
provider. Co-location also includes the location of telecommunications towers or antennas with other
facilities such as water tanks, electrical transmission towers or other utility facilities.
Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution Page 17-7
Telecommunication. The technology that enables information to be exchanged through the transmission of
voice, video, or data signals by means of electrical or electromagnetic systems (also referred to as wireless
communication).
Telecommunications Tower. Any free-standing structure, or any structure to be attached to a building or
other structure, proposed to be owned or principally used by a public utility or other person or entity
engaged in the provision of wireless telecommunication services; in an area zoned for residential use;
proposed at a height greater than that permitted within the applicable zone, or an attached structure
proposed at a height greater than either the height of the building or structure to which it is to be attached or
that permitted within the applicable zone; proposed to have attached to it radio frequency transmission or
reception equipment. Towers may be constructed as: a "monopole," meaning one cylindrical column in
the air; a "lattice tower," meaning three or more vertical legs trussed together; or a "guyed tower," meaning
a structure that, because it is less substantial, is secured to the ground by wires, cables or similar material.
Such towers may be related to, but are not limited to, radio and television transmission, microwave,
commercial mobile, common carrier, cellular telephone, and personal communications services. The tower
site may include separate buildings or accessory structures used to house any supporting electronic
equipment.

(B)(1) As used in this division, “telecommunications tower” means any free-standing structure, or any
structure to be attached to a building or other structure, that meets all of the following criteria:
(a) The free-standing or attached structure is proposed to be constructed on or after October 31, 1996.
(b) The free-standing or attached structure is proposed to be owned or principally used by a public
utility engaged in the provision of telecommunications services.
(c) The free-standing or attached structure is proposed to be located in an unincorporated area of a
township, in an area zoned for residential use.
(d)(i) The free-standing structure is proposed to top at a height that is greater than either the maximum
allowable height of residential structures within the zoned area as set forth in the applicable zoning
regulations, or the maximum allowable height of such a free-standing structure as set forth in any
applicable zoning regulations in effect immediately prior to October 31, 1996, or as those
regulations subsequently are amended.
(ii) The attached structure is proposed to top at a height that is greater than either the height of the
building or other structure to which it is to be attached, or the maximum allowable height of such
an attached structure as set forth in any applicable zoning regulations in effect immediately prior
to October 31, 1996, or as those regulations subsequently are amended.
(e) The free-standing or attached structure is proposed to have attached to it radio frequency
transmission or reception equipment.
17-13.5 Application Procedure.
The following procedures shall be in addition to any procedures required by this Chapter 17 pertaining to
conditional uses and the Ohio Revised Code pertaining to telecommunications towers.
Pre-application Conference. Any person or company intending to construct or to apply for the placement
or operation of a telecommunications tower or antenna within a residential district or an "area zoned for
residential use" as defined in Section 17.13-4 shall first schedule a pre-application conference with the
Zoning Administrator or designee. The purpose of the pre-application conference is to discuss the needs of
the applicant, evaluate the impact of the proposed tower on adjacent property and neighborhoods, discuss
possibilities of co-location, identify alternative suitable sites that may minimize the negative impact on
residential areas, and clarify application process and requirements.
17-13.6 Documentation.
Any request filed under this Section for review of a proposal to construct a telecommunications tower or
antenna shall include the following:
Page 17-8 Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution
a. Analysis of Co-location Alternatives. Unless co-locating, certification, supported by evidence, must be
submitted indicating that co-location of the proposed telecommunications facility with an existing
approved tower cannot be accommodated. The applicant's certification shall include a listing of all
existing towers, a description of each existing site, and a discussion of the ability or inability to colocated on each existing site according to the following scope of analysis:
? For a tower proposed to exceed a height of 200 feet, analysis must include all towers within a 1 1/2
mile radius,
? For a tower proposed to exceed a height of 100 feet but less than 200 feet, analysis must include all
towers within a 1 mile radius,
? For a tower proposed to be built at a height less than 100 feet, analysis must include all towers with
a 1/2-mile radius.
1. Reasons for not co-locating on a site would include, but not be limited to, the following:
? No existing telecommunications towers are located within the above radius of the site;
? Existing telecommunications towers are not of sufficient height to meet the applicant's engineering
requirements;
? Existing telecommunications towers do not have sufficient structural strength to support applicant's
proposed antenna and related equipment;
? Applicant's planned equipment would cause radio frequency interference with other existing or
planned equipment of the telecommunications tower, or the existing or planned equipment of the
telecommunications tower would cause interference with the applicant's planned equipment which
cannot be reasonably prevented;
? Unwillingness of the owner of the existing telecommunications tower to allow the siting or enter
into a co-location proposal; or
? Existing telecommunications towers do not provide an acceptable location for requisite coverage for
the applicant's communications network.
b. Analysis of New Tower Site Alternatives. Unless co-locating, certification, supported by evidence,
must be submitted indicating that a proposed new site for a telecommunications tower is an essential
location. The applicant's certification shall include a listing of potential sites, a description of each
potential site (including ground elevations), and a discussion of the ability or inability of the site to
host a telecommunications tower according to the following scope of analysis:
? For a tower proposed to exceed a height of 200 feet, analysis must include all towers within a 1 1/2
mile radius,
? For a tower proposed to exceed a height of 100 feet but less than 200 feet, analysis must include all
towers within a 1 mile radius,
? For a tower proposed to be built at a height less than 100 feet, analysis must include all towers
within a 1/2-mile radius.
Potential sites that should be considered (in order from most preferred to least preferred) include: existing
telecommunications towers and utility towers, public land in non-residential district, commercial districts,
office districts, and residential districts.
1. Reasons for not locating on a potential site would include, but not be limited to, the following:
? Unwillingness of the site owner to site a telecommunications tower on commercially reasonable
terms;
? Topographic limitations of the site;
? Adjacent impediments that would obstruct adequate transmission;
? Physical site constraints that would preclude the construction of a telecommunications tower;
? Technical limitation of the telecommunications system;
Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution Page 17-9
? Existing potential sites do not provide an acceptable location for requisite coverage for the
applicant's communications network.
c. Analysis of Visual Impact. The applicant for a Conditional Use Certificate to construct a
telecommunications tower shall submit, subject to a non-site owner's permission to enter upon the land,
a pictorial representation, such as a silhouette drawing, photograph, etc., of the proposed
telecommunications facility from a point 400 feet from the facility in each of the four compass
directions showing the relationship of the tower and/or facilities against the massing of surrounding
structures, trees, and other intervening visual masses.
d. Expert Review. Prior to granting a Conditional Use Certificate, the Board of Zoning Appeals may
require that the applicant's proposal and analysis be reviewed by an independent qualified
consultant(s), at the cost of the applicant. Special review fees, not to exceed $2,500.00 may be
established to cover the costs of staff and/or external expert review of requests filed under this section.
e. Agreement to Enable Co-location. In the event of the construction of a new tower by the applicant, the
applicant shall agree to the shared use of such facilities, when technically feasible, by other
telecommunication companies upon payment of reasonable fees to the owner, or agreement to
reciprocal terms for co-location involving other site(s), provided such shared use does not violate any
law, rule or regulation. Any new towers shall be designed to accommodate antennas for more than one
use. Such agreement shall be incorporated on the conditional use plan.
f. Agreement to Accommodate Public Safety Antennas. The applicant shall agree to accommodate the
communications antennas of the Township police, fire, ambulance and other government departments
at no charge where technically feasible. Such agreement shall be incorporated on the conditional use
plan.
g. Consistency with Adopted Plans. A justification statement demonstrating that the proposed
construction is in agreement with any plans, relating to telecommunications towers, duly adopted by
the Green Township Board of Trustees.
h. Agreement to Submit an Annual Network Inventory. On or before January 1st of each calendar year
each applicant (having conditional use approval of a telecommunications tower or facility) shall
provide a listing of the present locations of the applicant's telecommunications towers and/or facilities
in Green Township. With each application, the applicant shall provide any changes to the "annual"
plan that have occurred since January 1st or verify the continued accuracy of the plan submitted. Such
agreement shall be incorporated on the conditional use plan.
i. Guarantee of Removal if Abandoned. To ensure the removal of all improvements at any abandoned
telecommunications facility in an area zoned for residential use, any applicant filing a request, except
for multi-user co-location towers, under this Section shall deposit with the Board of Zoning Appeals
and to the benefit of the Board of Trustees a letter of credit, a performance bond, or other security
acceptable to the Trustees. Performance Bonds are to be issued by a bonding agency certified and
licensed by the State of Ohio. The Administrative Official shall recommend the amount of the bond
required covering the costs in association with the removal of the improvements and the restoration of
the land to its original condition prior to the construction of the telecommunications tower.
Verification of the performance bond, line of credit or other security issued to guarantee the removal
and restoration of the land, are to be submitted to the BZA Staff on or before January 1 of each
calendar year while the telecommunications tower is in use. Any guarantee submitted shall be
irrevocable and shall provide for the Board of Trustees to collect the full amount of the guarantee if the
applicant fails to maintain the guarantee. A change in ownership, lessee, or successor by merger
requires the issuance of a new guarantee. The new guarantee shall be submitted to the Board of Zoning
Appeals Administrator for approval and submission to the Board of Trustees. The owner or lessee shall
enter into a written agreement with the property owner to remove all improvements made in
association with the construction of the tower and restore the property to its original state when the
telecommunications tower is no longer in use and or at the time of the termination of the lease
agreement.
j. Other Approvals. Proof shall be provided by the applicant in a form satisfactory to the Board of
Zoning Appeals that the proposal has been approved by all agencies and governmental entities with
jurisdiction, and conforms to all applicable requirements of the Ohio Department of Transportation, the
Federal Aviation Administration, the Federal Communication Commission, or the successors to their
respective functions.
Page 17-10 Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution
17-13.7 Specific Criteria Pertaining To Telecommunications Towers.
At the time of filing of a request under this Section, the applicant shall provide information demonstrating
compliance with the requirements listed below.
a. Design. A new tower built in an area zoned for residential use shall, to the extent economically and
technologically feasible, be designed, engineered and constructed as follows: (a) a tower 75 feet tall or
less shall be designed, engineered and constructed to support antennas installed by one or more
wireless communication service provider; (b) a tower more than 75 feet tall but less that 150 feet tall
shall be designed, engineered and constructed to support antenna installed by two or more wireless
communication service providers, and (c) a tower 150 feet tall or more shall be designed, engineered
and constructed to support antenna installed by three or more wireless communication service
providers. Monopole tower installations are required unless it is demonstrated that another type of
tower is required for safety purposes or for co-location or multiple use requirements of the Board of
Zoning Appeals.
b. Lot Size. Lot size shall be the minimum for the zoning district in which the telecommunication tower
is to be built. Sufficient ground space should be provided to enable multiple equipment structures in
accordance with co-location requirements and plans.
c. Setbacks for Towers. Telecommunication towers shall be located so as to establish a clear zone for
falling tower debris, ice and/or the collapse of the tower. Towers shall be located such that the
distance from the base of the tower to any adjoining property line of a residential use or district is a
minimum of 100 percent of the proposed tower height and a minimum of 50 percent of the proposed
tower height from any adjoining nonresidential use or district.
d. Setbacks for Accessory Structures. All structures, except fences and underground shelters, shall be
located at least 50 feet from the property line of any residentially zoned property and shall, in all other
circumstances, observe the yard requirements of the district in which they are located.
e. Underground Shelters. Underground equipment shelters are encouraged in residential districts, and
may be required by the Board of Zoning Appeals.
f. Fences. Fencing shall be utilized for aesthetics and public safety. Razor wire fencing shall be
prohibited. Barbed wire fencing may be used to enclose the facility and shall, if used, have barbed
wire strands not less than 7 feet and not more than 10 feet above grade and be a minimum of 30 feet
from any residential property line.
g. Screening and Landscaping. Existing on-site vegetation shall be maintained to the greatest extent
possible. In addition, landscaping or appropriate screening shall be required to screen the support
structure and any other ground level features. In general, landscaping should soften the appearance of
the tower site. The Board of Zoning Appeals may permit a combination of existing vegetation,
topography, walls, decorative fences or other features instead of landscaping.
h. Signs. The only signs allowed shall be emergency information signs, owner contact information,
warning or safety instructions, and signs required by a federal, state, or local agency. Such signs shall
not exceed 5 square feet in area.
i. Lights. Telecommunications towers and accessory facilities shall not be equipped with lights unless
such lighting is required due to factors outside of the applicant's control or for security precautions.
j. Visual Impact. Telecommunications towers and accessory facilities shall be constructed using designs
and materials that reduce visual impact to the extent economically and technologically feasible.
Facilities which have a greater visual impact should be permitted (for example -- taller, lighting
required, larger ground space used) when the greater visual impact of a particular facility eliminates
the need to construct other facilities in an area zoned for residential use, thus resulting in a reduced
total visual impact. Towers and accessory facilities shall be designed, painted, located, landscaped and
otherwise constructed so as to reduce visual impact of the facility in the area zoned for residential use
to the extent economically and technologically feasible.
k. Abandonment. The applicant (or its successor) shall, within 30 days of permanently ceasing operation
of a telecommunication tower, provide written notice of abandonment to the zoning inspector. An
unused telecommunication tower may stand no longer than 12 months following abandonment. All
costs associated with demolition of the tower and associated equipment buildings shall be borne by the 
Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution Page 17-11
most recent tower operator or record unless such costs are the contractual or legal responsibility of
another party.
l. Discontinuance. If the use of any telecommunications tower is discontinued, the owner shall provide
the Board of Zoning Appeals with a copy of the notice to the FCC of intent to cease operations within
30 days of such notice to the FCC. If the tower will not be reused, the owner shall have 180 days from
submittal of the FCC notice to the BZA to obtain a demolition permit and remove the tower that will
not be reused. If the tower is to be reused, the owner shall have no more than 12 months from
submittal of the FCC notice to the BZA in which to commence new operation of the tower that is to be
reused. Upon failure to commence new operation of the tower that is to be reused within 12 months,
the tower shall be presumed abandoned, and the owner shall immediately obtain a demolition permit
and remove the tower that is presumed abandoned. If the owner fails to remove a tower in the time
provided by this paragraph, the BZA may cause the demolition and removal of the tower and recover
its costs of demolition and removal from the Guarantee deposited by the applicant pursuant to Section
17-13.6 (9) above.
m. Annual Decleration. Every applicant, owner or operator of a telecommunications tower in an area
zoned for residential use shall annually file with the BZA, on or before January 1st of each year, a
declaration that each and every tower that it then maintains is used by that applicant for wireless
communication purposes.
n. Maintenance. Any owner of property used as a telecommunications tower site shall maintain such
property and all structure in good condition and free from trash, outdoor storage, weeds and other
debris.
17-13.8 Modifications.
Where the Board of Zoning Appeals finds that the conditions or circumstances relating to the particular
application are such that one or more of the requirements of this Section are not necessary or desirable for
the protection of surrounding property or the public health, safety or welfare, either at the time of
application or in the foreseeable future, and that such special conditions and circumstances make one or
more said requirements unduly burdensome, the Board of Zoning Appeals may modify or waive such
requirement, either permanently or on a temporary basis. Any such modification or waiver shall be
requested by the applicant, and the applicant shall submit a written justification for each requested
modification or waiver.
17-13.9 BZA Action.
Any decision to deny a request to place, construct or modify a telecommunications tower or antenna shall
be in writing and supported by substantial evidence contained in a written record of the proceedings of the
Board of Zoning Appeals. The BZA may not deny an application for a telecommunications tower or
antenna as a conditional use if the denial would unreasonably discriminate among providers of functionally
equivalent services or prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting the provision of personal wireless services.
Further, the BZA may not deny an application for a telecommunications tower or antenna as a conditional
use on the basis of the environmental effects of radio frequency emissions to the extent that such facilities
comply with the Federal Communication Commissioner's regulations concerning such emissions.
17-14 ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS PERTAINING TO ADULT ONLY
ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS
17-14.1 Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply to adult only entertainment uses:
ADULT BOOK STORE. Adult bookstore means an establishment deriving a majority of its gross income
from the sale or rental of, or having a majority of its stock in trade in, books, magazines or other
periodicals, films or mechanical or non-mechanical devices, which constitute adult materials.
ADULT MATERIAL. Adult material means any book, magazine, newspaper, pamphlet, poster, print,
picture, slide, transparency, figure, image, description, motion picture film, phonographic record or tape,
other tangible thing, or any service, capable of arousing interest through sight, sound, or touch, and;
Page 17-12 Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution
1. which material is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter displaying, describing, or
representing sexual activity, masturbation, sexual excitement, nudity, bestiality, or human bodily
functions of elimination; or
2. which service is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on sexual activity, masturbation, sexual
excitement, nudity, bestiality, or human bodily functions of elimination.
ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER. Adult Motion Picture Theater means an enclosed motion
picture theater or motion picture drive-in theater used for presenting and deriving a majority of its gross
income from adult material for observation by patrons therein.
ADULT ONLY ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENT. Adult only entertainment establishment means
an establishment which features services which constitute adult material, or which features exhibitions of
persons totally nude, or topless, bottomless, strippers, male or female impersonators, or similar
entertainment which constitute adult material.
BOTTOMLESS. Bottomless means less than full opaque covering of male or female genitals, pubic area
or buttocks.
NUDE (NUDITY). Nude means the showing, representation, or depiction of human male or female
genitals, pubic area, or buttocks with less than full, opaque covering of any portion thereof, or female breast
with less than a full, opaque covering of any portion thereof below the top of the nipple, or of covered male
genitals in a discernibly turgid state.
SEXUAL ACTIVITY. Sexual activity means sexual conduct or sexual contact or both.
SEXUAL CONDUCT. Sexual conduct means vaginal intercourse between a male and female, and anal
intercourse, fellatio, and cunnilingus between persons regardless or sex. Penetration, however slight, is
sufficient to complete vaginal or anal intercourse.
SEXUAL CONTACT. Sexual contact means any touching of an erogenous zone of another, including
without limitation to the thigh, genitals, buttock, pubic region, or, if the person is a female, a breast, for the
purpose of sexually arousing or gratifying either person.
SEXUAL EXCITEMENT. Sexual excitement means the condition of human male or female genitals,
when in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal.
TOPLESS. Topless means the showing of a female breast with less than a full opaque covering of any
portion thereof below the top of the nipple.
[ B A L A N C E O F T H I S P A G E I N T E N T I O N A L L Y L E F T B L A N K ]
Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution Page 17-13
TABLE 17-15
CONDITIONAL USES
CONDITIONAL USES BY DISTRICT* Specific Criteria
for
Conditional Uses
SPECIFIC USES A-C O D (Numbers as per Sec.
17-7)
RESIDENTIAL USES:
Accessory Apartment C m, p1, q, y
Bed and Breakfast C f, h, m, p2, s, x
Day Care, Type A C e, g, h, i, n, p1, r, s,
y
Granny Cottage C e, n, p1,
Group Home C f, h, k, m, n, p1, s,
t, u, v, w, x, z,
COMMERCIAL USES:
Adult Entertainment Or
related activity (see
definitions in Section 17-14)
C j, f, g, p3, o3, s, t,
y, bb, cc
Dance/Concert Clubs
(Occupancy greater than
100)
C a, g, h, i, o, u, v, w,
y, z, dd
INDUSTRIAL USES:
Mini-Storage Facility C e, g, o3, p3, u
 Telecommunications Towers
 * = Conditional Use if
located within 300 feet of a
Residential District
C * * See Section 17-13
for criteria and
applicability
Warehouse as accessory use C e, h, l, p1, q, s
INSTITUTIONAL USES:
Cemetery C b, c, g, o1, o3, p3,
s
Correctional Facility C b, g, i, o2, o3, p3,
q, (s), t, u, v, y
Day Care Center, Child/Adult C h, i, l, o1, o3, p2, r,
s
Hospital C C e, f, g, h, i, o2, o3,
p3, s, y
School C i, o1, o3, p3, s
University or College C a,d, l, o1, o3, p3, s,
w, z
PUBLIC SERVICE USES:
Government Facility C h, i, o1, s
Library C e, g, h, o1, o3, p2,
s, y
Park and Ride Facility C C e, g, h, i, l, o1, o3,
p2, s, y
Page 17-14 Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution
TABLE 17-15
CONDITIONAL USES
CONDITIONAL USES BY DISTRICT* Specific Criteria
for
Conditional Uses
SPECIFIC USES A-C O D (Numbers as per Sec.
17-7)
RECREATIONAL, CULTURAL & ENTERTAINMENT USES:
Botanical Garden C e, f, h, p4, s
Museum C d, g, h, l, o2, o3,
p3, s, y
Recreation, Community
Facility – Private
C e, f, l, h, p2, r, s, v,
w, y,
 Athletic/Play Field, private C h, l, o1, p3, s, u, v,
w, y, aa
Club, Private C f, g, h, n, o2, o3,
p4, s, y
Golf Course C b, e, f, h, p3, s, x
Recreation Center, Internal C a, e, h, l, n, o1, p2,
r, s, v
Summer Camp C d, h, i, l, o1. o3
p2, s, u, z, aa
Swim/Tennis Facility C d, h, i, l, n, o2, o3,
p2, q, r, s, u, y
*Zone Districts:
A-C = “A”, “B”, & “C” Residential Districts
D = Retail Business District
O = Office District
[ B A L A N C E O F T H I S P A G E I N T E N T I O N A L L Y L E F T B L A N K ]

Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution Page 18-1
18 PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT OVERLAY DISTRICT AND PUD REVIEW PROCEDURES
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT OVERLAY AND
PUD REVIEW PROCEDURES
18-1 PURPOSE.
The purpose of the Planned Unit Development (“PUD”) Overlay District is to encourage the efficient use of land
and resources, promoting greater efficiency in public and utility services, orderly improvement of property in
accordance with community plans, and to encourage innovation in the planning and building of all types of
development without detriment to neighboring properties. The PUD regulations are intended to permit property to
be used in a manner or intensity not permitted as-of-right by the underlying district regulations.
18-2 DISTRICT DESIGNATION AND APPLICABILITY.
The PUD District is an overlay of alternative regulations, including procedures and standards that are applicable to
all land within the jurisdiction of these regulations in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. The PUD
Overlay District is established on the official zoning map in accordance with Section 1-6 and Chapter 3. This
overlay district enables individual property owners to request administrative approval of PUD plans on their
property in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
18-3 AUTHORITY.
The Board of Trustees and the Zoning Commission may, in accordance with the procedures and standards set out in
this Chapter and other regulations applicable to the district in which the subject property is located, approve a
development plan for a PUD for any use listed as a PUD in the Table of Permissible Uses found in Chapters 4, 5, 6
and 7.
18-3.1 Approval of PUD-1 Applications.
Proposed planned unit developments whose net densities or intensities fall within the PUD-1 range, as
shown in the Table of Permissible Uses in Chapter 3 shall require administrative approval of a PUD Plan
(Planned Unit Development Plan) by the Zoning Commission and certification of a Zoning Compliance
Plan by the Administrative Official.
18-3.2 Approval of PUD-2 Applications.
Proposed planned unit developments whose net densities or intensities fall within the PUD-2 range, as
shown in the Table of Permissible Uses in Chapter 3 shall require review and recommendation of a PUD
Plan (Planned Unit Development Plan) by the Zoning Commission, approval of a PUD Plan by the Board
of Trustees and certification of a Zoning Compliance Plan by the Administrative Official.
18-3.3 Approval of Modifications of Specific Requirements.
The specific requirements in this Resolution for lot areas, height, yards, buffers, perimeter setbacks,
parking (including provision of compact car spaces), landscaping, signs, lighting, and noise shall apply to
all planned unit developments unless they are modified by the Zoning Commission or Board of Trustees
with specific findings that the general standards in section 18-7 will still be met. Nothing in this section
shall be deemed to enable modification of the average net density (dwelling units per acre) or intensity
(impervious surface ratio) requirements for PUD-1 and PUD-2 applications.
18-4 EFFECT OF PUD LISTING.
18-4.1 Compliance with Zoning Requirements.
The listing of a use in the Table of Permissible Uses or in any district regulation as being permitted with a
PUD Zoning Certificate does not constitute an assurance or presumption that a proposed development plan
C H A P T E R
18
Page 18-2 Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution
will be approved except as provided in Section 18-4.2. Rather, the Zoning Commission or Board of
Trustees shall evaluate each proposed development plan, as the case may be, on an individual basis. This
shall be done in relation to its compliance with the standards and conditions set forth in this Chapter and
with the standards for the district in which it is located, in order to determine whether approval of the
development plan is appropriate at the particular location and in the particular manner proposed.
18-4.2 Compliance with Other Requirements.
Nothing in this Chapter shall be deemed to prohibit or unreasonably limit any use guaranteed by state or
federal law.
18-5 REVIEW PROCEDURE FOR PUD PLANS.
18-5.1 Pre-application Conference.
Prior to preparing or submitting a complete application for PUD Plan approval pursuant to Section 18-5.2,
an applicant shall meet with the Administrative Official to present the concept of the proposed development
and to discuss the procedures and standards for development plan approval. The pre-application
conference is intended to facilitate the filing and consideration of an innovative development plan and
complete application consistent with adopted plans and applicable zoning regulations. No representation
made by the Administrative Official during such conference or at any other time shall be binding upon the
Township with respect to the application subsequently submitted.
18-5.2 Applicant.
The owner or lessee of the subject property or other person having a legal or equitable interest in the
subject property may file a PUD Plan application with the Administrative Official.
18-5.3 Application.
An applicant for a planned unit development shall file an application on a form or forms provided by the
Administrative Official with a PUD Plan. The plan for the use and development of the tract may be
submitted as either: (a) a conceptual plan, showing the areas within which buildings, parking areas, and
buffering are to be located accompanied by a detailed description on the plat identifying the permissible
range or limits of size, type, and other pertinent details for buildings, buffer/landscape areas, parking areas,
signage, lighting, access, circulation patterns, and other details as requested; or (b) a detailed plan meeting
the requirements of a Zoning Compliance Plan as defined in Chapter 2. The Zoning Commission and the
Board of Trustees may approve the PUD, as the case may be, on the basis of such conceptual or detailed
plan provided said plan otherwise complies with all regulations.
18-5.4 Staff Report.
The Administrative Official shall prepare and transmit to the Zoning Commission prior to its public hearing
a written report incorporating or summarizing comments of other departments, agencies and officials. A
recommendation shall be included, setting forth whether the PUD application should be approved,
approved with modifications, or denied and reasons for such recommendation.
18-5.5 Zoning Commission Hearing and Decision.
Within ten (10) to forty-five (45) days following receipt of the PUD application determined to be complete,
the Commission shall hold a public hearing. At the conclusion of the public hearing, the Commission shall,
on the basis of written findings relative to the standards set forth in Section 18-7, either (1) approve the
PUD Plan; (2) approve the PUD Plan subject to further specified approvals or modifications necessary to
achieve full compliance with all standards; or (3) disapprove the PUD Plan.
18-5.6 Notification of Decision.
The Administrative Official shall notify the applicant of the decision or recommendation of the Zoning
Commission, as the case may be, as follows:
Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution Page 18-3
a. PUD-1. The action of the Zoning Commission, and one copy of the submitted plans permanently
marked to show such decision, shall be transmitted to the applicant.
b. PUD-2. The recommendation of the Zoning Commission shall be transmitted to the applicant and such
recommendation together with the staff report and the complete application shall be transmitted to the
Board of Trustees for action pursuant to Section 18-5.8.
18-5.7 Board of Trustees Hearing and Decision on PUD-2 Application.
Following the recommendation of the Zoning Commission regarding a PUD-2 application, the Board of
Trustees shall hold a public hearing within forty-five (45) days. At the conclusion of such hearing the
Board shall, on the basis of written findings relative to the standards set forth in Section 18-7, either
(1) approve the PUD Plan; (2) approve the PUD Plan subject to further specified approvals or
modifications necessary to achieve full compliance with all standards; or (3) disapprove the PUD Plan.
18-5.8 Effect of PUD Plan Approval.
The approval of a PUD Plan by the Zoning Commission or by the Board of Trustees as being in compliance
with standards of approval pursuant to Section 18-7 shall not be considered to be an amendment or
supplement to this Zoning Resolution and, in accordance with Section 519.12 of the Ohio Revised Code,
and subject to appeal, pursuant to Chapter 2506. of the Revised Code.
18-5.9 Period of Validity.
Subject to an extension of time granted by the Zoning Commission, no PUD Plan (for PUD-1, PUD-2, or
S-PUD approvals) shall be valid for a period longer than eighteen (18) months unless a building permit is
issued.
18-6 COORDINATED REVIEW AND APPROVAL OF APPLICATIONS.
When an application for approval of a PUD also requires a zone amendment or any other zoning approvals, the
applicant shall indicate that fact on the application when submitted to the Administrative Official. At the time of
filing the application for a PUD, applications shall be filed with the Zoning Commission for all other required
approvals.
18-6.1 Notice of Applications for Additional Approvals.
Whenever an applicant files an application for other approvals pursuant to this Section, all required notices
shall include reference to the request for any and all additional approvals.
18-6.2 Procedures and Action.
Whenever an applicant files applications for other approvals pursuant to this Section, the Zoning
Commission and Board of Trustees shall review and process all such applications at the same public
hearing. In reviewing such combined applications, the Zoning Commission and Board of Trustees shall,
except as hereinafter provided with respect to limitations on the time for taking action, comply with all of
the provisions of this Resolution applicable to each of the applications.
Any such combined application shall be acted on within the longest time period applicable to any one of
the individual applications or within such further time as may be consented to by the applicant. The
Administrative Official shall issue notices and certificates of such action in accordance with the provisions
of this Resolution applicable to the various applications involved.
18-7 GENERAL STANDARDS FOR PUD PLAN APPROVAL.
In determining whether a PUD Plan filed pursuant to this Chapter shall be approved or recommended for approval,
the Administrative Official, the Zoning Commission, and the Board of Trustees shall apply the following general
standards.
a. Compliance with this Zoning Resolution and with the purposes of the Zone District in which the proposed use and
development is to be located;
Page 18-4 Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution
b. Applicability of and consistency with adopted objectives and policies of the Township related to land use and other
Township plans duly adopted by the Green Township Board of Trustees;
c. Compatibility with surrounding land uses;
d. Whether the size and physical features of the project area enable adequate protection of surrounding property and
orderly and coordinated improvement of property in the vicinity of the site;
e. Whether the proposed phasing of the development is appropriate and the development can be substantially completed
within the period of time specified in the schedule of development submitted by the applicant;
f. Whether the proposed development is served adequately and efficiently by essential public facilities and services which
are in existence or are planned;
g. Whether significant scenic or historic features, as identified in plans duly adopted by the Township or the Regional
Planning Commission, are adequately conserved;
h. Whether modifications of the zoning or other regulations are warranted by the innovative design of the development
plan;
i. The adequacy of proposed pedestrian circulation system to insulate pedestrian circulation from vehicular movement;
j. The adequacy of the provisions for visual and acoustical privacy.
18-8 ZONING COMPLIANCE PLAN -- CERTIFICATION OF PUD PLAN
COMPLIANCE.
18-8.1 Review.
Upon receipt from the applicant of an application for a Zoning Compliance Plan certification, the
Administrative Official shall review the application to determine if it is complete pursuant to Chapter 20,
including any modifications required in conjunction with the approval by the Zoning Commission or by the
Board of Trustees, as the case may be.
18-8.2 Conveyance.
Any land identified on the PUD Plan as common open space to be conveyed to an owners association shall
be so conveyed subject to a covenant restricting the common open space to the uses specified in the Zoning
Compliance Plan and providing for the maintenance of the common open space in a manner which assures
its use for the purposes intended. All such conditions, easements and open space covenants shall
specifically provide for enforcement by the Township.
18-8.3 Decision.
Within seven (7) days of receipt of the completed application the Administrative Official shall either (1)
certify that the Zoning Compliance Plan complies with the approved PUD Plan; or (2) refuse to certify the
Zoning Compliance Plan for lack of compliance with the approved PUD Plan.
18-8.4 Effect.
A Zoning Compliance Plan as finally approved and certified in accordance with the provisions of this
Chapter shall not be modified, except pursuant to Section 18-9.
18-9 ADJUSTMENTS TO PUD PLAN.
Adjustments to an approved PUD Plan or previously approved Zoning Compliance Plan may be considered minor or
major and shall be reflected on a Zoning Compliance Plan. Such adjustments may be considered provided there is
no modification of written conditions of approval or of recorded easements. Further, any modifications must be in
substantial conformity with the intent of the PUD approval. For any adjustments of a technical or engineering
nature, the applicant shall submit a report from the appropriate public agency assuring compliance with agency
regulations.
Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution Page 18-5
18-9.1 Minor Adjustments.
The Administrative Official has the authority to consider minor adjustments through the procedure defined
in Section 18-8. Minor adjustments shall be the minimum necessary to overcome a particular difficulty or
to achieve a more functional and desirable use of the property than was initially anticipated. No adjustment
shall result in a violation of any standard or requirement of this Resolution nor create or extend any
previously approved variance. Minor adjustments shall be limited to altering the location of structures,
circulation elements, open space or grading where such alterations will comply with the intent of all
perimeter setbacks and buffer yards that are required by any regulation or by the approved PUD plan.
18-9.2 Major Adjustments.
Any adjustment to the PUD Plan within the criteria of Section 18-9 but not authorized by Section 18-9.1
shall be considered a major adjustment. The Zoning Commission, following notice to all property owners
whose properties are located within two hundred (200) feet of the PUD, shall hold a public hearing within
ten (10) to forty five (45) days of receipt of the completed Zoning Compliance Plan application. At the
conclusion of the public hearing, the Commission may approve an application for a major adjustment to the
PUD Plan not requiring a modification of written conditions of approval or recorded easements. Findings
shall be made that any changes in the plan as approved will be in substantial conformity with the intent of
such PUD Plan. If the Commission determines that a major adjustment is not in substantial conformity
with the intent of such PUD Plan as approved, then the Commission shall review the request in accordance
with the procedures set forth in Section 18-5.
18-10 APPEALS.
18-10.1 Appeal of Zoning Commission Decision.
Any party aggrieved by the administrative decision of the Zoning Commission for a PUD-1 or a major
adjustment concerning compliance with PUD standards adopted by the Board of Trustees may appeal
within thirty (30) days of the date of decision to the Board of Trustees.
18-10.2 Appeal of Administrative Official’s Decision.
Any party aggrieved by the decision of the Administrative Official concerning the certification of a Zoning
Compliance Plan in the case of a PUD-1 or a PUD-2 approval or a decision regarding a minor adjustment,
may appeal within thirty (30) days of the date of decision to the Zoning Commission.
18-10.3 Appeal of Township Trustees Decision.
Any party aggrieved by the administrative decision of the Board of Trustees in the case of a PUD-2
approval or a decision on an appeal pertaining to a PUD-1 or PUD adjustment may appeal to the Court of
Common Pleas of Hamilton County on the grounds that such decision was unreasonable or unlawful.
[ B A L A N C E O F T H I S P A G E I N T E N T I O N A L L Y L E F T B L A N K ]
Page 18-6 Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution
[ T H I S P A G E I N T E N T I O N A L L Y L E F T B L A N K ]

Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution Page 19-1
19 DECISION MAKING/ADMINISTRATIVE BODIES AND OFFICIALS
DECISION MAKING/ADMINISTRATIVE BODIES
AND OFFICIALS
19-1 GREEN TOWNSHIP BOARD OF TRUSTEES.
The Board of Trustees has the following powers and duties in connection with the implementation of this
Resolution:
a. To initiate by resolution amendments or supplements to the text of this Resolution and to the Zoning Map;
b. To consider and adopt, reject or modify amendments or supplements to the text of this Resolution and to the Zoning
Map;
c. To consider and approve, approve with conditions, or disapprove PUD Plans for PUD-2s (planned unit developments
requiring Board of Trustees final approval);
d. To modify specific requirements in this resolution for lot areas, height, yards (buffers), perimeter setbacks, parking,
landscaping, signs, lighting, and noise in PUD-2s after making specific findings of compliance with general standards
e. To hear and decide appeals concerning planned unit developments pursuant to Chapter 18, Sections 18-10.1 and 18-
10.2;
f. To take such other actions not delegated to other bodies that may be desirable and necessary to implement the
provisions of this Resolution.
19-2 ZONING COMMISSION.
19-2.1 Creation.
The Zoning Commission exists pursuant to Section 519. 04 of the Ohio Revised Code.
19-2.2 Membership.
The Zoning Commission consists of (5) members, appointed by the Trustees, who must be residents of the
unincorporated territory of Northeast Green Township included in the area zoned and alternates as
permitted by Ohio law.
19-2.3 Jurisdiction and Authority.
The Zoning Commission has the following powers and duties in connection with the implementation of this
Resolution:
a. To submit a plan, including both text and maps, representing its recommendations for the carrying out,
by the Board of Trustees, of the powers, purposes and provisions set forth in the Ohio Revised Code,
including additions to territory in which the Township's Zoning Plan is in effect;
b. To initiate amendments to this Resolution, to certify amendment requests to the Regional Planning
Commission, to cause required notice and public hearings to be held, and to determine the extent and
method of additional notice beyond that required;
c. To make recommendations to the Board of Trustees on proposed amendments to this Resolution and
on PUD Plans for PUD-2s (planned unit developments requiring Board of Trustees final approval for
increases in development intensity);
d. To approve PUD Plans for PUD-1s (planned unit developments requiring Zoning Commission final
approval for increases in development intensity or clustering of single family density);
e. To hear and decide appeals of the decision of the Administrative Official concerning the certification
of a Zoning Compliance Plan for a PUD-1;
C H A P T E R
19
Page 19-2 Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution
f. To maintain a file on the Official Zoning District Map(s);
g. To modify supplemental regulations in SPI Special Public Interest Districts after public hearing in
accordance with conditions and limits;
h. To determine required setbacks for parking along entry drives based on traffic generation and parking
lot size;
i. To modify landscaping requirements for vehicular use areas;
j. To prepare Development Plan Guidelines for outdoor lighting;
k. To approve localized alternative sign regulations in Planned Unit Developments;
l. To review woodland preservation plans and reduce the required number of parking spaces up to ten
percent (10%) and vary the intensity up to ten percent (10%) of the district limits for PUD-1s;
m. To review riparian buffer plans and reduce or eliminate requirements for landscaping and bufferyards;
n. To modify or waive bufferyard and landscaping requirements consistent with general standards and the
spirit and intent of the resolution;
o. To modify the minimum area requirement for Planned Unit Developments;
p. To approve major adjustments to Zoning Compliance Plans, not requiring a modification of written
conditions of approval or recorded easements, after public hearing;
q. To modify specific requirements in this resolution for lot areas, height, yards (buffers), perimeter
setbacks, parking, landscaping, signs, lighting, and noise in PUD-1s after making specific findings of
compliance with general standards.
19-2.4 Officers.
The officers of the Commission are a Chairman and a Vice-Chairman and such other officers as it may
provide for in the adopted Organization, Procedure and Rules and Regulations of the Commission.
19-2.5 Meetings; Records.
The Commission holds meetings and makes and keeps a record of all meetings.
19-2.6 Quorum and Vote.
The quorum of the Commission and matters requiring a vote is three.
19-2.7 Conflicts.
No member of the Zoning Commission may participate in the hearing or disposition of any matter in which
that member has any conflict of interest prohibited by state law, including but not limited to a pecuniary or
familial interest relating to any matter before the Commission. Members are removable for
nonperformance of duty, misconduct in office or other cause by the Board of Trustees upon written charges
having been filed with the Trustees and after a public hearing has been held regarding such charges, a copy
of the charges having been served upon the member so charged at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing,
either personally, or by registered mail, or by leaving the same at his usual place of residence. The member
must be given an opportunity to be heard and answer such charges. Vacancies are filled by the Board of
Trustees and are for the unexpired term.
19-3 BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS.
19-3.1 Creation.
The Green Township Board of Zoning Appeals is created pursuant to Section 519.13 of the Ohio Revised
Code.
Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution Page 19-3
19-3.2 Membership.
The Board of Zoning Appeals consists of five (5) members, appointed by the Trustees, who must be
residents of the unincorporated territory of Northeast Green Township included in the area zoned. The
terms of all members must be of such length and so arranged that the term of one member will expire each
year. Each member serves until a successor is appointed and qualified. Vacancies are filled by the Trustees
and are for the unexpired term and alternates as provided by Ohio law.
19-3.3 Jurisdiction and Authority.
The Board of Zoning Appeals has the following powers and duties in connection with the implementation
of this Resolution:
a. To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision or
determination made by an administrative official in the enforcement of this Resolution pursuant to the
procedures and standards set forth in Chapter 22;
b. To authorize variances from the terms of this Resolution pursuant to the procedures and standards for
variances set forth in Chapter 21;
c. To decide conditional use requests pursuant to the procedures and standards set forth in Chapter 17.
19-3.4 Officers.
The officers of the Board of Zoning Appeals are a Chairman and a Vice-Chairman and such other officers
as it may provide for.
19-3.5 Minutes; Records.
The Board of Zoning Appeals holds meetings and keeps a record of all meetings.
19-3.6 Quorum and Vote.
The quorum of the BZA and matters requiring a vote is three.
19-3.7 Conflicts.
No member of the Board of Zoning Appeals may participate in the hearing or disposition of any matter in
which that member has any conflict of interest prohibited by state law, including but not limited to a
pecuniary or familial interest relating to any matter before the BZA. Members are removable for
nonperformance of duty, misconduct in office or other cause by the Board of Trustees upon written charges
having been filed with the Trustees and after a public hearing has been held regarding such charges, a copy
of the charges having been served upon the member so charged at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing,
either personally, or by registered mail, or by leaving the same at his usual place of residence. The member
must be given an opportunity to be heard and answer such charges. Vacancies are filled by the Board of
Trustees and are for the unexpired term.
19-4 TOWNSHIP ZONING INSPECTOR.
The Township Zoning Inspector has the following powers and duties in connection with the implementation of this
Resolution:
a. To administer and enforce this Resolution;
b. To issue various Zoning Certificates for buildings, structures or uses certifying compliance with the provisions of this
Resolution and to deny or revoke such Certificates due to lack of compliance;
c. To certify that completed buildings, structures or uses comply with the provisions of this Resolution and supplemental
conditions of approval;
d. To investigate and resolve all complaints which allege violation of this Resolution;
e. Periodically inspect all planned development district projects installed prior to the enactment of this Resolution, and all
projects encumbered by covenants, and other such conditions imposed by this Resolution;
Page 19-4 Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution
f. To inspect all projects controlled by this Resolution to ensure that provisions required herein which require perpetual
maintenance, adjustment or revision, as so maintained, adjusted, or revised;
g. To estimate the extent of damage or destruction of a structure housing a nonconforming use pursuant to Chapter 9,
Sections 9-2.8 and 9-3.4;
h. To inventory, provide notice and maintain a public record of existing and new legal nonconformities and to review and
approve applications for nonconforming use zoning certificates;
19-5 ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICIAL.
The Administrative Official has primary responsibility for administering the duties of the Zoning Commission as
required by this Resolution. These duties may be assigned to one or more individuals by the Administrative Official
(Secretary/Executive Director) of the Northeast Green Township Zoning District. The staff person or persons to
whom such administrative functions are assigned shall be referred to in this Resolution as the "Administrative
Official". The Administrative Official has the following powers and duties in connection with the implementation
of this Resolution:
a. To determine completeness of rezoning applications and to make recommendations on proposed amendments to the
text of this Resolution and the Zoning Map to the Regional Planning Commission, the Zoning Commission and to the
Board of Trustees;
b. To schedule, provide notice of, and conduct public prehearing conferences required by this Resolution or by Zoning
Commission Bylaws;
c. To make recommendations on proposed conditional uses to the Board of Zoning Appeals;
d. To make recommendations on proposed PUD’s to the Zoning Commission and the Board of Trustees;
e. To make recommendations on proposed localized alternative sign regulations to the Zoning Commission;
f. To make recommendations on proposed modifications and waivers of standards for buffer yards to the Zoning
Commission;
g. To maintain an official record of buffer agreements between different owners of adjacent parcels;
h. To administer revocation of zoning certificates and assessment of penalties for violation of sign regulations;
i. To review and certify compliance of Zoning Compliance Plans with PUD Plans;
j. To review and certify compliance of off-street parking plans for five or more vehicles submitted with applications for
zoning certificates;
k. To review and certify compliance of buffer plans submitted with applications for zoning certificates;
l. To determine compliance with general criteria for:
1. minimum landscape requirements for screening ground-mounted antennas,
2. maximum hours and days of operation, maximum traffic, adequacy of off-street parking, adequacy of the
parcel size, traffic access and absence of undue adverse impact on other properties for temporary uses,
3. bulk and yard requirements for temporary tents,
4. required parking spaces for uses not expressly listed herein,
5. joint use of required parking spaces;
6. access to and from loading spaces
7. reduction of landscape requirements in lieu of woodland preservation;
m. To authorize minor adjustments in Zoning Compliance Plans for PUD’s in accordance with criteria for approval of
final location of structures, circulation elements, open space, and landscape buffers;
n. To authorize minor adjustments in type of landscape elements for PUD Zoning Compliance Plans;
o. To make recommendations to the Board of Trustees regarding establishment and revision of fees for Zoning
Certificates and applications;
p. To hold pre-application conferences with PUD applicants to review and advise on proposed development concepts;
Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution Page 19-5
q. To provide notice to Townships following receipt of PUD applications;
r. To determine completeness of applications;
s. To make administrative interpretations of zoning regulations and permitted and conditional uses in accordance with
standards for such interpretation.
t. To administer and enforce this Resolution;
u. To issue various Zoning Certificates for buildings, structures or uses certifying compliance with the provisions of this
Resolution and to deny or revoke such Certificates due to lack of compliance;
v. To certify that completed buildings, structures or uses comply with the provisions of this Resolution and supplemental
conditions of approval;
w. To investigate and resolve all complaints which allege violation of this Resolution;
x. Periodically inspect all planned development district projects installed prior to the enactment of this Resolution, and all
projects encumbered by covenants, and other such conditions imposed by this Resolution;
y. To inspect all projects controlled by this Resolution to ensure that provisions required herein which require perpetual
maintenance, adjustment or revision, as so maintained, adjusted, or revised;
z. To estimate the extent of damage or destruction of a structure housing a nonconforming use pursuant to Chapter 9,
Sections 9-2.8 and 9-3.4;
aa. To inventory, provide notice and maintain a public record of existing and new legal nonconformities and to review and
approve applications for nonconforming use zoning certificates.
[ B A L A N C E O F T H I S P A G E I N T E N T I O N A L L Y L E F T B L A N K ]
Page 19-6 Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution
[ T H I S P A G E I N T E N T I O N A L L Y L E F T B L A N K ]

Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution Page 20-1
20 ZONING CERTIFICATES, GENERAL APPLICATION PROCEDURES AND FEES
ZONING CERTIFICATES, GENERAL
APPLICATION PROCEDURES AND FEES
20-1 ZONING CERTIFICATE.
Except as expressly provided otherwise in this Resolution, no land shall be occupied or used and no building,
structure or sign shall be located, constructed, reconstructed, enlarged or structurally altered, nor work commenced
upon the same, nor occupied or used in whole or part for any purpose whatsoever until the Administrative Official
or Inspector has issued a Zoning Certificate. The Zoning Certificate shall state the zoning districts in which the
proposed use is located and that the proposed uses and structures comply with the provisions of this Resolution. The
Zoning Certificate shall also identify whether the proposed use is a Permitted Use, a Planned Unit Development, a
Conditional Use, a Redevelopment Exception or a Nonconforming Use. No change of use shall be made in any
building or part thereof, now or hereafter located, constructed, reconstructed, enlarged or structurally altered,
without the issuance of a Zoning Certificate. No Zoning Certificate shall be issued to make a change unless the
changes are determined to be in conformity with the provisions of this Resolution.
20-1.1 Application for Zoning Certificate.
Application for a Zoning Certificate of the type required by the provisions of this Resolution shall be made
to the Zoning Administrator or Inspector prior to the application for a construction permit at the
Department of the Building Commissioner for Hamilton County. A record of all Zoning Certificates issued
shall be kept on file in the office of the Zoning Administrator and copies shall be furnished on request to
any person having a proprietary or tenancy interest in the property or building affected.
20-1.2 Zoning Compliance Plan.
Each application for a zoning certificate shall be accompanied by a specified number of zoning compliance
plans and construction drawings, drawn to scale. All dimensions shown on these plans relating to the
location and size of the lot to be built upon shall be based on an actual survey by a registered surveyor. The
lot and location of the building or structure thereon shall be staked out on the ground before construction is
started.
Prior to issuance of the first zoning certificate (except zoning certificates for entry walls, construction
trailers or other accessory or temporary uses) for the development or redevelopment of any multi-tenant
condominium development or multi-tenant condominium structure (including consolidation or division of
units within a structure), all building, floor and unit numbers for the entire development, shall be included
on the Zoning Compliance Plan.
20-1.3 Fee.
The fee for a Zoning Certificate shall be established, from time to time, by the Board of Trustees upon
recommendation of the Administrative Official.
20-1.4 Period of Validity.
Subject to an extension of time by the Administrative Official, no Zoning Certificate shall be valid for a
period longer than one (1) year unless a building permit application is submitted in compliance with the
zoning certificate.
20-2 GENERAL APPLICATION PROCEDURES.
All applications for zoning amendments, Zoning Certificates, or any other type of approval required by the
provisions of this Resolution shall be submitted in accordance with the following procedures.
C H A P T E R
20
Page 20-2 Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution
20-2.1 Application.
Submission of an application on a form or forms provided by the Administrative Official shall be required
for zoning amendments, Zoning Certificates, or any other type of approval required by the provisions of
this Resolution.
20-2.2 Determination of Completeness of Any Application.
Within eight (8) days after receipt of an application for an approval described in Section 20-2.1, the
Administrative Official shall determine if the application is complete. If the applicant is unable to furnish
the required plans, fees or forms, then the applicant will be notified.
20-2.3 Effect of Determination.
The time limits for completion of the application review and the rendering of a final decision or
Certification of Compliance as provided for specifically in the chapters of this Resolution governing
approvals of zoning amendments, Zoning Certificates, or any other type of approval required by the
provisions of this Resolution, shall commence on the date that the Administrative Official determines that
the application is complete.
20-3 FEES.
A schedule of non-refundable fees in connection with applications for a zoning amendment, a Zoning Certificate, or
any other type of approval required by the provisions of this Resolution shall be established by the Board of Trustees
and revised from time to time upon recommendation by the Administrative Official. The current Fee Schedule shall
be made available upon request at the office of the Administrative Official.
20-4 ZONE DISTRICT CERTIFICATION.
The existing zoning of a specified parcel or parcels can be certified by the Administrative Official upon receipt of
the applicable fee and a written request to the Zoning Commission specifying the property’s Book, Page and Parcel
number and street address.
[ B A L A N C E O F T H I S P A G E I N T E N T I O N A L L Y L E F T B L A N K ]

Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution Page 21-1
21 VARIANCES
VARIANCES
21-1 PURPOSE.
The variance procedure is intended to provide a means by which relief may be granted from unforeseen particular
applications of this Resolution that create practical difficulties or particular hardships. When such difficulties or
hardships may be more appropriately remedied, if at all, pursuant to other provisions of this Resolution, the variance
procedure is inappropriate.
21-2 AUTHORITY.
The Board of Zoning Appeals, pursuant to Section 519.14 of the Ohio Revised Code, shall have the authority to
grant variances from the provisions of this Resolution, but only in compliance with the standards enumerated in this
Chapter.
21-3 PARTIES ENTITLED TO SEEK VARIANCES.
Applications for variance may be filed on forms approved by the Board by any person having a legal or equitable
interest in the property affected.
21-4 PROCEDURE.
21-4.1 Application.
An application for a variance shall be filed with the Administrative Official of the Board, on forms
provided by the Administrative Official.
21-4.2 Public Hearing.
Upon receipt of a complete application for a variance, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall, within a
reasonable length of time but no longer than sixty-two (62) days from the receipt of the application, hold a
hearing. Notice of the public hearing shall be given in writing to the property owners within 200 feet of the
subject property and by one (1) publication in one or more newspapers of general circulation in the
Township, at least ten (10) days before the date of the public hearing. Upon the hearing, any party may
appear in person or by attorney.
21-4.3 Action by Board of Zoning Appeals.
Within thirty (30) days following the close of the public hearing, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall render
its decision, granting or denying the variance pursuant to the standards and procedures set out in this
Chapter. The Board may delay its decision pending revised plats or plans that may be required.
21-4.4 Special Procedures in Connection with Other Applications.
Whenever it is determined a variance is needed in addition to a Zone Amendment, Conditional Use
approval or Zoning Compliance Plan approval, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall not decide an application
for such variance until a final approval has been rendered by the Zoning Commission and/or the Board of
Trustees, as applicable.
C H A P T E R
21
Page 21-2 Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution
21-5 AUTHORIZED VARIANCES.
21-5.1 Authority of the Board of Zoning Appeals.
The Board of zoning Appeals shall have the following powers;
a. To authorize, upon appeal, in specific cases, such variance from the terms of the Zoning
Resolution, as will not be contrary to the public interest, where owing to special conditions a
literal enforcement of the provisions of the Resolution will result in unnecessary hardship or
practical difficulty, and so that the spirit of the Resolution shall be observed and substantial justice
done. Further, in authorizing such variance, the Board may impose restrictive terms and
conditions to accompany the variance authorized.
b. To permit the extension of a District where the boundary line of a district divides a tract of not
more than one (1) acre in area and held in a single ownership on the effective date of this
Resolution, provided such extension shall not exceed one hundred (100) feet.
c. To permit, where the boundary line of a District divides a tract of ten (10) acres or more under a
single ownership, adjustment of such line to conform with the topography of the ground where
such a tract has been subdivided and when a preliminary subdivision plan for such a tract has been
approved by the Zoning Commission of Green Township, provided such a variation does not
extend for a distance of more than five hundred (500) feet and does not come closer than three
hundred (300) feet to any boundary of the tract.
d. To interpret the provisions of this Resolution in a way to carry out the intent and purpose of the
plan, as shown upon the Map fixing the several Districts accompanying and made a part of this
Resolution, where the street layout actually on the ground varies from the street layout as shown
on the map aforesaid.
e. To permit a variation in the yard requirements of any District where there are practical difficulties
or unnecessary hardships in the carrying out of these provisions due to an irregular shape of the
lot, topographic or other conditions, provided such variation will not seriously affect any adjoining
property or the general welfare, so that the spirit of the Resolution shall be observed and
substantial justice done..- least to grant relief
f. To authorize by the grant of a special zoning certificate after public hearing, the locations of any
of the following uses, including such buildings and structures as are necessary for their operation,
in a District from which they are prohibited by this Resolution.
i. Parking lots on land not more than two hundred (200) feet from the boundary of a
Business District.
ii. Riding stables or fishing lakes, including the sale of food and refreshments.
iii. The location and erection and use of a tower that is to be used in the provision of cellular
telephone communication services in areas zoned for residential as provided in Chapter
17.
iv. The location, erection and use of a commercial power generating wind turbine or
windmill tower
21-5.2 Decisions of the Board of Zoning Appeals
The Board shall act by Resolution in which three (3) members concur and every variation granted
or denied shall be accompanied by a written finding of fact, based on testimony and evidence and
specifying the reason for granting or denying the variation.
Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution Page 21-3
21-6 STANDARDS FOR VARIANCES.
21-6.1 General Standard.
No variance shall be granted pursuant to this Chapter that is greater than the minimum variation necessary
to relieve the unnecessary hardship or practical difficulty demonstrated by the applicant. Such a showing
shall demonstrate that the variance being sought satisfies each of the standards set forth in this Section.
a. Unique Physical Condition.
The subject property is exceptional as compared to other lots subject to the same provision by reason of a
unique physical condition, including presence of an existing use, structure or sign, whether conforming or
nonconforming; irregular or substandard shape or size; exceptional topographical features; or the
extraordinary physical conditions peculiar to and inherent in the subject property.
b. Not Self-Created.
The aforesaid unique physical condition is not the result of any action or inaction of the owner or was
created by natural forces or was the result of governmental action, other than the adoption of this
Resolution, for which no compensation was paid.
c. Denied Substantial Rights.
The carrying out of the strict letter of the provision from which a variance is sought would deprive the
owner of the subject property of substantial rights commonly enjoyed by owners of other lots subject to the
same general or specific provisions of the Zoning Resolution.
d. Not Merely Special Privilege.
The alleged hardship or difficulty is not merely the inability of the owner or occupant to enjoy some special
privilege or additional right not commonly available to owners or occupants of other lots subject to the
same provisions of the Zoning Resolution, nor merely an inability to make more money from the use of the
subject property. However, where the standards herein set out exist, the existence of an economic hardship
may be considered.
e. Resolution Purposes.
The variance would not result in a use or development on the subject property that would not be in
harmony with the general and specific purposes for which this Resolution and the provision from which a
variance is sought were enacted.
f. Essential Character of the Area.
The variance would not result in a use or development on the subject property that:
i. would be materially detrimental to the public welfare or materially injurious to the enjoyment, use,
development value of property or improvements permitted in the vicinity;
ii. would materially impair an adequate supply of light due to adverse location of shadow to the properties
and improvements in the vicinity;
iii. would substantially increase hazardous conditions in the public streets due to traffic or parking;
iv. would unduly increase the danger of flood or fire;
v. would unduly tax public utilities and facilities in the area; or
vi. would endanger the public health or safety.
Page 21-4 Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution
21-7 VARIANCE LESS THAN REQUESTED.
A variance less than or different than that requested may be granted when the record supports the applicant's right to
some relief but not to the relief requested.
21-8 CONDITIONS ON VARIANCES.
The Board of Zoning Appeals may impose such specific conditions and limitations concerning construction,
character, location, landscaping, screening and other matters relating to the purposes and objectives of this
Resolution upon the premises benefited by a variance as may be necessary or appropriate to prevent or minimize
adverse effects upon other property and improvements in the vicinity of the subject property or upon public facilities
and services. Such conditions shall be expressly set forth in the resolution granting the variance. Violation of any
such condition or limitation shall be a violation of this Resolution and shall constitute grounds for revocation of the
variance.
21-9 EFFECT OF GRANT OF VARIANCE.
The grant of a variance shall not authorize the establishment or extension of any use, nor the development,
construction, reconstruction, alteration or moving of any building or structure. It shall merely authorize the
preparation, filing and processing of applications for any permits and approval that may be required by Township
regulations, including, but not limited to, a Zoning Certificate, a building permit, a certificate of occupancy, and
subdivision approval.
21-10 LIMITATIONS ON VARIANCES.
Subject to an extension of time granted upon application to the Board of Zoning Appeals, no variance shall be valid
for a period longer than one (1) year unless applications for permits or approvals referenced in this Chapter have
been filed; building permits issued and construction is diligently pursued to completion.
A variance shall be deemed to authorize only the particular construction, development, action or event for which it
was issued and shall automatically expire and cease to be of any force or effect if such construction, development,
action or event shall be removed and not replaced within one (1) year following such removal unless extended in
writing by the Board of Zoning Appeals.
[ B A L A N C E O F T H I S P A G E I N T E N T I O N A L L Y L E F T B L A N K ]

Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution Page 22-1
22 APPEALS TO THE BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS
APPEALS TO THE BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS
22-1 PURPOSE.
The purpose of this Chapter is to set forth the standards and procedures by which administrative relief may be taken
from any order, requirement decision or determination made by the Administrative Official.
22-2 AUTHORITY.
The Board of Zoning Appeals shall have authority to hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any
order, requirement, decision, or determination made by an administrative official in the enforcement of this
Resolution.
22-3 PARTIES ENTITLED TO APPEAL.
An appeal to the Board of Zoning Appeals may be taken by any person aggrieved or by any Officer of the Township
affected by any decision of the Administrative Officer.
22-4 PROCEDURE.
Appeals to the Board of Zoning Appeals shall be taken in accordance with the following procedures.
22-4.1 Organization.
The Board shall organize, and adopt rules in accordance with the provisions of this Resolution. Meetings
of the Board shall be held at the call of the Chairman, and at such other times as the Board may determine.
The Chairman, or in his absence, the acting Chairman, may administer oaths and the Board may compel the
attendance of witnesses. All meetings of the Board shall be open to the public. The Board shall keep
minutes of its proceedings showing the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent or failing to
vote, indicate such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which
shall be immediately filed in the office of the Township Trustees and shall be a public record.
Appeals to the Board shall be taken within thirty (30) days following the order, requirement, decision, or
determination being appealed by filing with the Officer from whom the appeal is taken and with the Board,
in such number of duplicate copies as the Board may from time to time require, a notice of appeal
specifying the grounds therefor.
22-4.2 Fees.
Nonrefundable application and hearing fees shall accompany the notice of appeal. Such fees are
established by the Board from time to time with the approval of the Board of Trustees, to help defray
administrative costs and costs of a hearing.
22-4.3 Stay of Proceeding.
An appeal to the Board shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action in respect to which the
appealed order, requirement, decision or determination was made unless the Officer from whom the appeal
is taken certifies to the Board of Zoning Appeals, after the notice of appeal has been filed, that by reason of
facts stated in writing to the Board a stay would, in that Officer’s opinion, cause imminent peril to life or
property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed other than by an order of the Court of Common
Pleas of Hamilton County upon notice to the Board and to the Officer, and for good cause shown.
C H A P T E R
22
Page 22-2 Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution
22-4.4 Public Hearing Notice.
Upon receipt of the notice of appeal, the Board shall, within a reasonable length of time but no longer than
sixty-two (62) days from the receipt of the notice of appeal, hold a hearing of the appeal in accordance with
its procedures as provided in Section 22-4. Notice of the public hearing shall be given in writing to the
property owners within 200 feet of the subject property and by one (1) publication in one or more
newspapers of general circulation in the County, at least ten (10) days before the date of the public hearing.
Upon the hearing, any party may appear in person or by attorney.
22-4.5 Action by Board of Zoning Appeals.
Within one hundred twenty (120) days following the filing of a notice of appeal and within thirty (30) days
after the closing of the public hearing, the Board shall render its decision on the appeal. Such decision may
reverse or affirm, wholly or in part, or may modify the appealed order, requirement, decision or
determination. The failure of the Board to render a decision within the one hundred twenty (120) days, or
such longer period of time as may be agreed to by the applicant, shall constitute a decision favorable to the
applicant. Within ten (10) days following such decision or the expiration of such period without a decision,
the Board shall publish notice and mail a certificate of such decision or failure to act to all parties entitled
thereto.
22-4.6 Decisions of Board of Zoning Appeals
The Board shall act by Resolution in which three (3) members concur and every variation granted or denied
shall be accompanied by a written finding of fact, based on testimony and evidence and specifying the
reason for granting or denying the variation.
22-5 RIGHT TO GRANT VARIANCE IN DECIDING APPEALS.
In any case where the notice of appeal is accompanied by an application for a variance in accordance with
Chapter 21, the Board may grant a variance as part of the relief sought on approval, but only in strict compliance
with the provisions of Chapter 21.
22-6 APPEAL OF DECISION.
Any party adversely affected by a decision of the Board of Zoning Appeals may appeal to the Court of Common
Pleas of Hamilton County on the ground that such decision was unreasonable or unlawful.
[ B A L A N C E O F T H I S P A G E I N T E N T I O N A L L Y L E F T B L A N K ]

Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution Page 23-1
23 ADMINISTRATIVE INTERPRETATIONS
ADMINISTRATIVE INTERPRETATIONS
23-1 AUTHORITY.
The Administrative Official, subject to the procedures, standards, and limitations of this Chapter, may render
interpretations, including use interpretations, of the provisions of this Resolution and of any rule or regulation issued
pursuant to it.
23-2 PURPOSE.
The interpretation authority established by this Chapter is intended to recognize that the provisions of this
Resolution, though detailed and extensive, cannot, as a practical matter, address every specific situation to which
they may have to be applied. Many such situations, however, can be readily addressed by an interpretation of the
specific provisions of this Resolution in light of the general and specific purposes for which those provisions have
been enacted. Because the interpretation authority established is an administrative rather than a legislative authority,
it is not intended to add to or change the essential content of this Resolution but rather is intended only to allow
authoritative application of that content to specific cases.
23-3 PARTIES ENTITLED TO SEEK INTERPRETATIONS.
Applications for interpretations may be filed by any person having an interest in the circumstances giving rise to the
need for an interpretation; provided that interpretations shall not be sought by any person based solely on
hypothetical facts or where the interpretation would have no effect other than as an advisory opinion.
23-4 PROCEDURE.
23-4.1 Application.
Applications for interpretations of this Resolution shall be filed on a form provided by the Administrative
Official and shall contain the following information:
a. The specific provision or provisions of this Resolution for which an interpretation is sought.
b. The facts of the specific situation giving rise to the request for an interpretation.
c. The precise interpretation claimed by the application to be correct or incorrect.
d. When a use interpretation is sought, the use permitted pursuant to the present zoning classification of
the subject property that is claimed by the applicant to include, or to be most similar to, the proposed
use.
e. When a use interpretation is sought, documents, statements, and other evidence demonstrating that the
proposed use will comply with all use limitations established for the district in which it is proposed to
be located.
23-4.2 Action on Application.
Within thirty (30) days following the receipt of an application for interpretation determined to be complete
pursuant to Chapter 20, Section 20-2.2, the Administrative Official shall inform the applicant in writing of
his interpretation, stating the specific precedent, reasons, and analysis upon which the determination is
based. The failure of the Administrative Official to act within thirty (30) days, or such further time to
which the applicant may agree, shall be deemed to be a decision denying the application rendered on the
day following such 30-day period.
C H A P T E R
23
Page 23-2 Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution
23-5 STANDARDS FOR USE INTERPRETATIONS.
The following standards shall govern the Administrative Official and the Board of Zoning Appeals on appeals from
the Administrative Official in issuing use interpretations:
a. Any use defined in Chapter 2 of this Resolution shall be interpreted as therein defined.
b. No use interpretation shall permit any use in any district unless evidence shall be presented that demonstrates that it will
comply with each use limitation established for that particular district.
c. No use interpretation shall permit any use in a particular district unless such use is substantially similar to other uses
permitted in such district and is more similar to such other uses than to uses permitted or specially permitted in a more
restrictive district.
d. If the proposed use is more closely similar to a use permitted only as a conditional use in the district in which it is
proposed to be located, then any use interpretation permitting such use shall be conditioned on the issuance of a
Conditional Use Zoning Certificate and all the specific criteria where appropriate for such use pursuant to Chapter 17.
e. No use interpretation shall permit the establishment of any use that would be inconsistent with the statement of purpose
of the district in question.
23-6 EFFECT OF FAVORABLE USE INTERPRETATIONS.
No use interpretation finding that a particular use to be permitted or specially permitted in a particular district shall
authorize the establishment of such use nor the development, construction, reconstruction, alteration, or moving of
any building or structure. It shall merely authorize the preparation, filing, and processing of applications for any
permits and approvals that may be required by the regulations of the Township including, but not limited to: a
zoning certificate, a building permit, a certificate of occupancy, subdivision approval, and development plan
approval.
23-7 LIMITATIONS ON FAVORABLE USE INTERPRETATIONS.
Subject to an extension of time granted by the Administrative Official, no use interpretation finding a use to be
permitted or specially permitted in a particular district shall be valid for a period longer than one (1) year from the
date of issuance unless applications for permits or approvals referenced in Section 23-6 have been filed, building
permits issued, and construction is diligently pursued to completion.
A use interpretation, finding a particular use to be permitted or specially permitted in a particular district, shall be
deemed to authorize only the specific use for which it was issued. Such permit shall not be deemed to authorize any
allegedly similar use for which a separate use interpretation has not been issued. Such permit shall automatically
expire and cease to be of any force or effect if the particular use for which it was issued shall for any reason be
discontinued for a period of twelve (12) consecutive months or more, unless extended in writing by the
Administrative Official or the Board of Zoning Appeals.
[ B A L A N C E O F T H I S P A G E I N T E N T I O N A L L Y L E F T B L A N K ]

Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution Page 24-1
24 ENFORCEMENT
ENFORCEMENT
24-1 COMPLAINTS REGARDING VIOLATIONS.
Whenever the Zoning Inspector receives a written, signed complaint alleging a violation of this Resolution, the
Zoning Inspector or the Administrative Official shall investigate the complaint within ten (10) working days and
take whatever action is warranted, and inform the complainant in writing as to what actions have been or will be
taken.
24-2 PERSONS LIABLE.
The owner, tenant, or occupant of any building or land or part thereof and any architect, builder, contractor, agent, or
other person who participates in, assists, directs, creates, or maintains any situation that is contrary to the
requirements of this Resolution may be held responsible for the violation and suffer the penalties and be subject to
the remedies herein provided.
24-3 PROCEDURES UPON DISCOVERY OF VIOLATIONS.
24-3.1 Initial Written Notice
If the Zoning Inspector finds that any provision of this Resolution is being violated, a written notice shall
be sent to the person responsible for such violation, indicating the nature of the violation and ordering the
action necessary to correct it and the time period allowed for corrections. Additional written notices may
be sent at the Zoning Inspector's discretion.
24-3.2 Final Written Notice
A written final notice (the initial written notice may be the final notice) may be sent by first class mail. It
shall state what action the Zoning Inspector intends to take if the violation is not corrected and shall advise
that the Zoning Inspector's decision or order may be appealed to the Board of Zoning Appeals in
accordance with the provisions of Chapter 22.
24-3.3 Citation
If no action is taken within the time period allowed for correction, cessation, or appeal to the Board of
Zoning Appeals, a citation shall be issued. The violator shall within twenty-(20) days pay the citation to
the Clerk of Courts or the matter will be scheduled for court hearing. If no action is taken within these
twenty (20) days, additional citations may be issued each day the violation remains in noncompliance.
Each day the violation occurs after the citation is issued is a separate offense. Subsequent violations of a
similar nature occurring at the same address within a twelve (12) month period, shall be deemed the same
violation, and subject to citation pursuant to Table 24-6.
24-3.4 Emergency Enforcement
Notwithstanding the foregoing, in cases where delay would pose a danger to the public health, safety, or
welfare, the Zoning Inspector may seek enforcement without prior written notice by invoking any of the
penalties or remedies authorized in Section 24-4.
C H A P T E R
24
Page 24-2 Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution
24-4 PENALTIES AND REMEDIES FOR VIOLATIONS.
24-4.1 Civil Penalty and Appeals
Any act constituting a violation of the provisions of this Resolution or a failure to comply with any of its
requirements, including violations of any conditions and safeguards established in connection with the
grants of variances or Conditional Use Zoning Certificates or Zoning Compliance Plan approval, shall
subject the offender to a civil penalty in accordance with Table 24-6 found at the end of this Chapter. A
civil penalty may not be appealed to the Board of Zoning Appeals if the offender was sent a final notice of
violation in accordance with Section 24-3 and did not appeal to the Board of Zoning Appeals within the
prescribed time.
24-4.2 Other Enforcement Actions
This Resolution may also be enforced by any appropriate equitable action.
24-4.3 Multiple Citations
Each day that any violation continues (for each citation) after notification by the Zoning Inspector that such
violation exists shall be considered a separate offense for purposes of the penalties and remedies specified
in this Chapter.
24-4.4 Multiple Remedies.
Any one, all, or any combination of the foregoing penalties and remedies may be used to enforce this
Resolution.
24-5 ZONING CERTIFICATE REVOCATION.
24-5.1 Grounds for Revocation.
A Zoning Certificate may be revoked by the Zoning Administrator or Inspector in accordance with the
provisions of this section if the recipient of the certificate fails to develop or maintain the property in
accordance with the plans submitted, the requirements of this Chapter, or any additional requirements
lawfully imposed in connection with the issuance of the Zoning Certificate.
24-5.2 Procedure.
Before a Zoning Certificate may be revoked, all of the notice, hearing and other requirements shall be
complied with. The notice shall inform the certificate holder of the alleged grounds for the revocation.
a. The burden of presenting evidence sufficient to authorize the Zoning Inspector to conclude that a
certificate should be revoked for any of the reasons set forth in Section 24-5.1 shall be upon the party
advocating that position.
b. The action to revoke a Zoning Certificate shall include a statement of the specific reasons or findings
of fact that support the decision.
24-5.3 Notice.
Before a Zoning Certificate may be revoked, the Zoning Inspector shall give the recipient of the certificate
ten (10) days notice of intent to revoke the certificate and shall inform the recipient of the alleged reasons
for the revocation and of his right to obtain an informal hearing on the allegations. If the certificate is
revoked, the Zoning Inspector shall provide to the holder of the Zoning Certificate a written statement of
the decision and the reasons therefor.
Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution Page 24-3
24-5.4 Effect of Revocation.
No person may continue to make use of land or buildings in the manner authorized by any Zoning
Certificate after such certificate has been revoked in accordance with this section.
24-5.6 Revocation by Closure or Discontinuance of Commercial Uses
Any Zoning Certificate shall be considered revoked upon closure of a business or discontinuation of a
use, for more than 90 days, regardless of ownership or management. To continue or resume occupancy
after a 90 day suspension of business shall require the issuance of a new Compliance Certificate.
24-6 Penalties
Whoever violates any provision of this zoning resolution shall be fined not more than $500 for each
offense, pursuant to Section 519.99, or any other applicable section of the Ohio Revised Code.

[ B A L A N C E O F T H I S P A G E I N T E N T I O N A L L Y L E F T B L A N K ]
Page 24-4 Northeast Green Township Zoning Resolution
 [ T H I S P A G E I N T E N T I O N A L L Y L E F T BL A N K ]