CITY OF KIRTLAND, OHIO
CODE OF ORDINANCES
2018 Replacement contains:
Local legislation current through 8-20-2018
Statutory updates through 6-29-2018
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing Corporation
One West Fourth Street, Third Floor
Cincinnati, Ohio  45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Fax: (513) 763-3562
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com
CITY OF KIRTLAND
DIRECTORY OF OFFICIALS
(2018)
 
COUNCIL
Ward 1                     Kevin F. Potter, President
Ward 2                     David L. Kirek
Ward 3                     Joseph E. Smolic
Ward 4                     Robert F. Skrbis
At Large                   John L. Lesnick, Jr.
At Large                   Richard K. Lowery
At Large                   Matthew G. Schulz, President Pro Tempore
Clerk                      Denise A. Roelle
OFFICIALS
Mayor                      Douglas E. Davidson
Director of Public Safety  Douglas E. Davidson
Director of Public Service Douglas E. Davidson
Director of Law            Daniel F. Richards
Director of Finance        Keith W. Martinet
Service Administrator      Carmelo P. Catania
Zoning Inspector           Carmelo P. Catania
City Engineer              Philip W. Kiefer
Police Chief               Lance R. Nosse
Fire Chief                 Anthony P. Hutton
 
CHARTER OF THE CITY OF KIRTLAND, OHIO
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Editor's notes:
   (a)   The Kirtland Charter was approved by the voters on November 3, 1970.
Dates appearing in parentheses at the end of section headings indicate that the
section was subsequently enacted, amended or repealed on the date given.
   (b)   Masculine pronouns have been changed to include feminine pronouns.
(Enacted 11-7-2000)
   (c)   In this charter the terms Municipality, City and City of Kirtland are
one and the same.
(Enacted 11-7-2000)
   (d)   All references to day time limits in this Charter, unless otherwise
specified, pertain to calendar days.
(Enacted 11-2-2010)
TABLE OF CONTENTS
PREAMBLE
ARTICLE I - THE COUNCIL
Section 1.   Number and Terms. (Amended 11-3-1981; 11-6-1990; 11-7-2000; 11-2-
2010)
Section 2.   Qualifications. (Amended 11-4-1980; 11-6-1990; 11-7-2000; 11-2-
2010)
Section 3.   Organization. (Amended 11-3-1981; 11-6-1990; 11-2-2010)
Section 4.   President of Council and President pro-tem. (Amended 11-4-1980)
Section 5.   Removal. (Amended 11-4-1980; 11-7-2000)
Section 6.   Vacancies. (Amended 11-7-2000)
Section 7.   Council Meetings. (Amended 11-6-1990; 11-7-2000; 11-2-2010)
Section 8.   Powers and Duties. (Amended 11-4-1980; 11-6-1990; 11-2-2010)
Section 9.   Effective Date of Ordinances and Resolutions. (Amended 11-4-1980;
11-7-2000; 11-2-2010)
Section 10.     Employees of Council. (Amended 11-7-2000)
ARTICLE II - THE MAYOR
Section 1.   Term of Office. (Amended 11-3-1981; 11-6-1990)
Section 2.   Qualifications. (Amended 11-4-1980; 11-6-1990; 11-7-2000; 11-2-
2010)
Section 3.   Removal. (Amended 11-4-1980; 11-7-2000)
Section 4.   Judicial Powers.
Section 5.   Legislative Powers.
Section 6.   Veto Powers.  (Amended 11-2-2010)
Section 7.   Executive Powers. (Amended 11-7-2000)
Section 8.   Vacancy of Office. (Enacted 11-6-1990; Amended 11-7-2000; 11-2-
2010)
ARTICLE II-A - APPOINTED ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICERS AND DEPARTMENTS
Section 1.   General Provisions.
Section 2.   Director of Public Safety.
Section 3.   Director of Public Service. (Amended 11-4-1980; 11-7-2000; 11-2-
2010)
Section 4.   Director of Finance. (Amended 11-4-1980; 11-6-1990; 11-7-2000)
Section 5.   Director of Law.  (Amended 11-2-2010)
ARTICLE III - BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
Section 1.   Procedure of Boards and Commissions. (Amended 11-7-2000)
Section 2.   Municipal Planning and Zoning Commission. (Amended 11-3-1981; 11-
6-1990; 11-7-2000)
Section 3.   Board of Zoning Appeals. (Amended 11-4-1980; 11-6-1990; 11-7-2000)
Section 4.   Civil Service Commission. (Amended 11-4-1980; 11-6-1990; 11-7-
2000)
ARTICLE IV - ELECTIONS
Section 1.   No Primary Election.
Section 2.   Nominating Procedure. (Amended 11-7-2000)
Section 3.   The Ballot.
ARTICLE V - INITIATIVE, REFERENDUM AND RECALL
Section 1.   Initiative. (Amended 11-6-1990)
Section 2.   Referendum.
Section 3.   Recall. (Amended 11-6-1990)
Section 4.   Petitions.
Section 5.   Mandatory Zoning Referendum. (Amended 11-4-1980; 11-6-1990)
ARTICLE VI - TAXATION
Section 1.   Prohibition of Excessive Income Tax. (Amended 11-4-1980; 11-7-
2000; 11-6-2001)
ARTICLE VII - CHARTER AMENDMENTS
Section 1.   Charter Amendment.
Section 2.   Charter Review Committee. (Amended 11-2-2010)
Section 3.   Corrections to Charter. (Amended 11-2-2010)
ARTICLE VIII - GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section 1.   Effect of Partial Invalidity.
Section 2.   Interpretation.
Section 3.   Effective Date. (Amended 11-4-1980; 11-6-1990)
ARTICLE IX - CITY POWERS
Section 1.   Granting of Powers. (Amended 11-4-1980)
Section 2.   Powers Not Limited by Charter. (Amended 11-4-1980)
Section 3.   Applicability of State Law. (Amended 11-4-1980; 11-6-1990)
PREAMBLE
   We, the people of the Municipality of Kirtland, in the County of Lake and
State of Ohio, in order to secure for ourselves the benefits of municipal home
rule and the exercise of all powers of local self government, do adopt this
Charter for our Municipality:
ARTICLE I - THE COUNCIL
Section 1. Number and Terms.
   The Council shall consist of seven (7) members, of which three (3) members
shall be elected at large and four (4) members shall be elected from wards, one
from each ward.
   The three (3) at large members shall be elected for a four (4) year term in
the year 2001, and every fourth year thereafter. The four (4) ward members
shall be elected for a two (2) year term in the year 2001. The four (4) ward
members shall be elected for a four year (4) term in the year 2003, and every
fourth year thereafter. Council members shall commence serving on the first day
of December following their election and shall serve until their successors are
elected and  qualified.
   Council shall, on or before January 31, 1971, divide the Municipality into
four (4) wards having as near as practical, equal population, and thereafter
the then existing Council shall have the power to change the boundaries of the
wards, as required, to make them, as near as practical, equal in population;
and at least once every four years, shall review ward apportionments. Upon the
annexation of any territory, the Council shall have the power to place said
district, or any part thereof, in any existing ward or wards as will most
efficiently keep said wards of near equal population.
(Amended 11-3-1981; 11-6-1990; 11-7-2000; 11-2-2010)
Section 2.  Qualifications.
   Each member of Council shall have been a resident and qualified elector of
the Municipality for at least two (2) years immediately prior to his/her
election and shall continue to be a resident of the Municipality throughout
his/her term of office. A member of Council shall not hold any other elected
public office, and shall not have financial interest in any contract with the
City, and no such member shall hold administrative public employment in the
City, nor hold employment with the City of Kirtland during his/her term.
   A Ward Councilperson shall reside within the voting ward he/she represents
and shall continue to reside within the ward during his/her term. If, however,
the boundaries of the wards are changed, and this action results in placing the
residence of the Ward Councilperson outside the boundaries of the district he/
she was elected to represent, he/she shall continue to represent the ward that
elected him/her for the remainder of his/her term.
   No member of Council for a period of one (1) year after the expiration of
his/her term, shall have financial interest in any contract with the City, nor
while in office be on a Council committee the purpose of which shall conflict
or may tend to conflict with the personal or professional interests of such
member. Any member of Council who shall cease to possess, or who violates, any
of the qualifications herein enumerated may be removed from his/her office, but
failure to maintain said qualifications shall not render void or ineffective
any action of Council in which such member has participated unless declared
void by two-thirds (2/3) of all the remaining members of Council.
(Amended 11-4-1980; 11-6-1990; 11-7-2000; 11-2-2010)
Section 3.  Organization.
   On the first day of December, in odd-numbered years, following the November
election of Council members (or if such date be a Saturday or Sunday, the
following Monday) and on the first Monday of December of each even-numbered
year, the Council shall meet in Council chambers for the purpose of
organization. The Council shall adopt its own rules, regulations and/or bylaws
otherwise provided in this Charter.
(Amended 11-3-1981; 11-6-1990; 11-2-2010)
Section 4.  President of Council and President pro-tem.
   The Council, at its yearly organizational meeting, shall choose one of its
members as President of Council and another as President pro-tem, who shall
preside at meetings of Council in the absence of the President of Council. The
President of Council shall serve as such until a successor is chosen and shall
have all the powers, duties, functions, obligations and rights of any other
member of Council, including the right to vote; shall preside at all meetings
of Council; and shall appoint the various committees of Council, coordinating
the work of the various committees appointed by him/her.
(Amended 11-4-1980)
Section 5.  Removal.
   The Council shall be the judge of the election and qualifications of its own
members. It may remove any member for gross misconduct, or malfeasance,
misfeasance or nonfeasance in or disqualification for office, or for the
conviction while in office of any felony or other crime involving moral
turpitude, or if adjudicated legally incompetent, or for a violation of his/her
oath of office, or persistent failure to abide by the rules of the Council;
provided, however, that such removal shall not take place without the
affirmative vote of two-thirds (2/3) of the remaining members of Council nor
until the accused member shall have been notified in writing of the charge
against him/her at least ten (10) days in advance of a public hearing upon such
charge, and he/she or his/her counsel has been given an opportunity to be
heard, present evidence, or examine any witness appearing in support of the
charge. The accused member shall not vote on the question of his/her removal.
(Amended 11-4-1980; 11-7-2000)
Section 6.  Vacancies.
   Any vacancy in the Council shall be filled by a majority vote of the
remaining members of Council for the unexpired term. If the vacancy is not
filled within thirty (30) days after it shall have occurred, the Mayor shall
fill it by appointment. A vacancy for ward Council member must be filled by a
person residing in the ward where the vacancy exists.
(Amended 11-7-2000)
Section 7.  Council Meetings.
   The Council shall hold at least two (2) regular meetings in each calendar
month provided, however, that it may recess during the month of August. A
majority of the members of the Council shall constitute a quorum for the
transaction of business at any meetings of the Council, but a lesser number may
adjourn the meeting. At any meeting at which a quorum is present, any ordinance
or resolution may be passed or adopted, or any other action may be taken, by
the affirmative vote of four (4) members of the Council unless a larger number
be required by the provisions of this Charter. The Clerk of Council shall keep
a record of its proceedings in minutes in which the yea or nay vote of each
Councilperson voting on every ordinance or resolution or the reconsideration of
legislation vetoed by the Mayor, and the action of Council on other measures
shall be recorded.
   All meetings of the Council shall be open to the public, except when Council
authorizes an executive session. All motions to hold an executive session shall
state the matter or matters to be considered in the executive session. Council
may hold an executive session after a majority vote of a quorum of Council
determines to hold such a session for the purpose of consideration of any of
the following matters:
   (a)   To consider the appointment, employment, dismissal, discipline,
promotion, demotion, or compensation of a public employee or official, or the
investigation of charges or complaints against a public employee, official,
licensee, or regulated individual, unless the public employee, official,
licensee, or regulated individual requests a public hearing. Except as
otherwise provided by law or ordinance, Council shall not hold an executive
session for the discipline of an elected official for conduct related to the
performance of his/her official duties or for his/her removal from office.
   (b)   To consider the purchase of property for public purposes, or for the
sale of property at competitive bidding; if premature disclosure of information
would give an unfair competitive or bargaining advantage to a person whose
personal, private interest is adverse to the general public interest. Council
shall not use this division as a subterfuge for providing covert information to
prospective buyers or sellers. A purchase or sale of public property is void if
the seller or buyer of the public property has received covert information from
a member of Council that has not been disclosed to the general public in
sufficient time for other prospective buyers and sellers to prepare and submit
offers. If the minutes or legislation of Council show that all meetings and
deliberations have been conducted in compliance with this section, any
instrument executed by the City purporting to convey, lease, or otherwise
dispose of any right, title, or interest in any City property shall be
conclusively presumed to have been executed in compliance with this section
insofar as title or other interest of any bona fide purchasers, lessees, or
transferees of the property is concerned.
   (c)   Conferences with an attorney for the City concerning disputes
involving the City that are the subject of pending or imminent court action;
   (d)   Preparing for, conducting, or reviewing negotiations or bargaining
sessions with public employees concerning their compensation or other terms and
conditions of their employment;
   (e)   Matters required to be kept confidential by Federal law or rules or
State statutes;
   (f)   Specialized details of security arrangements where disclosure of the
matters discussed might reveal information that could be used for the purpose
of committing, or avoiding prosecution for, a violation of the law.
(Amended 11-6-1990; 11-7-2000; 11-2-2010)
Section 8.  Powers and Duties.
   The legislative powers of the Municipality, except as otherwise provided by
this Charter and by the Constitution of the State of Ohio, shall be vested in
the Council. The Council shall by ordinance or resolution make provision for:
   (a)   The time and place of regular meetings of the Council;
   (b)   The method of calling special meetings of the Council;
   (c)   The method of giving public notice of the enactment of its ordinances
and resolutions and of any other of its acts or proceedings which it deems
proper to publish, provided, however, that until so provided for, such public
notice shall be in the manner provided by the statutes of the State of Ohio;
   (d)   Fixing the salary of its members which in no event shall be increased
during the term for which the members were elected;
   (e)   The procedure for making public improvements and levying assessments,
including the procedure for combining two (2) or more public improvements, and
the levying of assessments therefor, in one proceeding, if the Council finds
that it will be economical and practical to undertake such improvements
jointly;
   (f)   The advertising and awarding of contracts;
   (g)   Such other general regulations as the Council may deem necessary;
   (h)   The form and method of enactment of its ordinances and resolutions,
provided that:
      (1)   No ordinance or resolution shall contain more than one subject
which shall be clearly expressed in its title;
      (2)   Each ordinance and resolution shall be read by title only, provided
the Council may require any reading to be in full by a majority vote of its
members;
      (3)   Each ordinance and resolution shall be read on three (3) different
days. Council may dispense with this rule by a vote of at least two-thirds (2/
3) of its members;
      (4)   The vote of the passage of each ordinance or resolution shall be
taken by yeas and nays and entered upon the journal;
      (5)   No ordinance or resolution shall be passed without the concurrence
of a majority of all the members of Council;
      (6)   Each emergency measure necessary for the immediate preservation of
the public peace, health or safety of the community shall contain the reasons
for such necessity and shall require the affirmative vote of two-thirds (2/3)
of the members of the Council for its enactment;
      (7)   No action of the Council authorizing any change in the boundaries
of the City, or the surrender or joint exercise of any of its powers, or
granting any franchise, or contracting for the supply to the City or its
inhabitants of the product or service of any utility, whether Municipally owned
or not, shall be taken as an emergency measure.
(Amended 11-4-1980; 11-6-1990; 11-2-2010)
Section 9.  Effective Date of Ordinances and Resolutions.
   Each ordinance or resolution shall go into effect thirty (30) days after its
final passage by the Council except for the following:
   (a)   any ordinance providing for the appropriation of money, or for an
annual tax levy, or for improvements petitioned for by the owners of a majority
of the foot frontage of the property benefitted and to be specially assessed
therefor;
   (b)   any emergency ordinance or resolution necessary to promote and/or
preserve the public peace, health, safety, comfort, prosperity, morals and
general welfare of the City;
which ordinances shall take effect, unless a later time be specified therein,
upon signature by the Mayor, or as otherwise provided in Article II, Section 6
of this Charter, as the case may be.
(Amended 11-4-1980; 11-7-2000; 11-2-2010)
Section 10.  Employees of Council.
   Council shall appoint a Clerk, who shall perform those duties prescribed by
Council consistent with the provisions of this Charter or any ordinance or
resolution of the Municipality of Kirtland and the laws of the State of Ohio.
(Amended 11-7-2000)
ARTICLE II - THE MAYOR
Section 1.  Term of Office.
   Commencing with the regular Municipal election of the year 1991, and every
four years thereafter, the Mayor shall be elected for a term of four (4) years,
beginning on the first day of December next following his/her election, and
shall serve until his/her successor is elected and qualified. The Mayor shall
hold office in a part-time capacity.
(Amended 11-3-1981; 11-6-1990)
Section 2.  Qualifications.
   The Mayor, for at least three (3) years immediately prior to his/her
election, shall have been a resident and qualified elector of the Municipality,
and shall continue to be a resident of the Municipality throughout his/her term
of office. He/she shall not hold any other elected public office, and shall not
have financial interest in any contract with the City, and shall not hold
administrative public employment in the City, nor hold  employment with the
City of Kirtland during his/her term except as otherwise provided by this
Charter.
(Amended 11-4-1980; 11-6-1990; 11-7-2000; 11-2-2010)
Section 3.  Removal.
   The Council may remove the Mayor for gross misconduct, or malfeasance,
misfeasance or nonfeasance in or disqualification for office, or for the
conviction while in office of any felony or  other crime involving moral
turpitude, or if adjudicated legally incompetent, or for a violation of his/her
oath of office; provided, however, that such removal shall not take place
without the concurrence of two-thirds (2/3) of the members of the Council nor
until the Mayor has been notified in writing of the charge against him/her at
least ten (10) days in advance of a public hearing upon such charge, and he/she
or his/her counsel has been given an opportunity at such hearing to be heard,
present evidence or examine any witness appearing in support of the charge.
(Amended 11-4-1980; 11-7-2000)
Section 4.  Judicial Powers.
   The Mayor shall have all the judicial powers granted by this Charter, the
ordinances of the Municipality, and the general laws of the State of Ohio to
Mayors of municipalities of the class of this Municipality.
Section 5.  Legislative Powers.
   The Mayor shall attend all Council meetings, and be entitled to a seat in
the Council. He/she shall not have a vote in the Council but shall have the
right to introduce ordinances and resolutions and take part in the discussion
of all matters coming before the Council.
Section 6.  Veto Powers.
   Every ordinance or resolution passed by the Council shall be attested by the
Clerk of Council and promptly presented to the Mayor within forty-eight (48)
hours. If the Mayor approves such ordinance or resolution, he/she shall sign it
within ten (10) days after its passage or adoption by the Council, but if he/
she does not approve it, he/she shall return it to the Council with his/her
written objections within said ten (10) days by delivery to the Clerk of
Council, which objections shall be entered in full into the minutes of the
Council.
   The Mayor may approve or disapprove the whole or any part or item of an
ordinance or a resolution appropriating money, but otherwise his/her approval
or disapproval shall be addressed to the entire ordinance or resolution. If the
Mayor does not sign or veto an ordinance or resolution after its passage or
adoption within said ten (10) day period, it shall take effect in the same
manner as if he/she had signed it. When the Mayor has disapproved an ordinance
or a resolution or a part or item thereof as herein provided, the Council
shall, not later than the next regular meeting, proceed to reconsider it, and
if upon reconsideration the ordinance or resolution or part or item thereof be
approved by a vote of two-thirds (2/3) of the members of Council it shall take
effect as if it had received the signature of the Mayor. In all such cases the
vote shall be taken by yeas and nays and entered into the minutes of the
Council.
(Amended 11-2-2010)
Section 7.  Executive Powers.
   The Mayor shall be the chief executive officer of the Municipality. He/she
shall supervise the administration of the affairs of the Municipality and shall
exercise control over all departments and divisions. He/she shall be the chief
conservator of the peace within the Municipality and shall cause all laws and
ordinances to be enforced therein.
   He/she shall recommend to the Council such measures as he/she deems
necessary or expedient. He/she shall see to it that all terms and conditions
imposed in favor of the Municipality or its inhabitants in any franchise or
contract to which the Municipality is a party are faithfully kept and
performed.
   Except as may otherwise be provided by this Charter or the laws of the State
of Ohio, the Mayor shall have the power to appoint, promote, transfer, reduce
or remove any officer or employee of the Municipality except those required by
this Charter to be elected, and those whose terms of office may be fixed by
this Charter. The Director of Public Safety, the Director of Public Service,
the Director of Finance, and the Director of Law, and all appointive officers
may be removed by the Mayor; provided, however, that such removal shall not
take effect without the concurrence of two-thirds (2/3) of the members of
Council.
   The finances of the Municipality shall be conducted upon an annual budget
which shall be adopted by the Council as required by law. For the purposes of
the budget, each office, department or agency of the Municipality shall furnish
to the Mayor, at such times and in such forms as the Mayor may require,
estimates of revenue and expenditures of that office, department or agency and
such other supporting data as the Mayor may request, together with an estimate
of all capital  projects pending or which the head of each office, department
or agency believes should be undertaken (a) within the succeeding fiscal year,
and (b) within the next five years. The Mayor may review such estimates,
conduct hearings in connection therewith and make such revisions as he/she may
deem advisable.
   The Mayor shall execute on behalf of the Municipality all contracts,
conveyances, evidences of indebtedness, and all other instruments to which the
Municipality is a party. He/she shall have custody of the seal of the
Municipality and may affix it to all of said instruments, but the absence of
the seal shall not affect the validity of any such instrument. The Mayor shall
be recognized as the official and ceremonial head of the Municipal government
by the Governor for military purposes and by the courts for the purpose of
serving civil processes.
(Amended 11-7-2000) 
Section 8.  Vacancy of Office.
   In the event of the death, resignation or removal of the Mayor, the
President of Council shall become the Mayor and shall hold office until the
Mayor's successor is elected and qualified. The President of Council shall
serve as Mayor until the next regular Municipal election, provided the vacancy
does not occur within one hundred days before such election.
   In the event that the President of Council shall, for any reason, fail to
qualify or decline to serve as Mayor, then a majority of Council shall elect
among its members one member to become Mayor.
(Enacted 11-6-1990; Amended 11-7-2000)
ARTICLE II-A - APPOINTED ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICERS AND DEPARTMENTS
Section 1.  General Provisions.
   A Department of Public Safety, a Department of Public Service, a Department
of Finance, and a Department of Law, are hereby established by this Charter,
and the Council shall provide by ordinance for the organization thereof. The
Council may establish by ordinance new departments or divisions thereof. With
the exception of the Department of Finance and the Department of Law, the
Council may combine or abolish existing departments and divisions as it may
deem necessary and may authorize one person to be the head of two (2) or more
departments or divisions. The Mayor may act as the head of the Department of
Public Safety and/or the Department of Public Service.
   All directors appointed hereunder shall hold office only for the term of the
Mayor appointing them.
Section 2.  Director of Public Safety.
   The Director of Public Safety shall be appointed by the Mayor, subject to
the confirmation by a majority vote of the members of Council. He/she may be
removed from office by the Mayor, but such removal shall not take place during
term without the concurrence of two-thirds (2/3) of the members of Council;
provided, however, that if the Mayor acts as Safety Director, the Council may,
by a vote of two-thirds (2/3) of its members, remove him/her as such Safety
Director. The Council shall set the salary of the Safety Director.
   The Director of Public Safety shall be the head of the Division of Police,
Division of Fire, Division of Building, Engineering and Inspection, and
Division of Health. He/she shall make all necessary rules and regulations for
the government of the Department of Public Safety and the several divisions
thereof, and he/she shall be charged with the duty of enforcing all police,
health, safety and sanitary regulations that may be prescribed by ordinances or
rules of the Municipality or the general laws of the State of Ohio.
   No appointment of a chief of a department or Division of Police or Fire
shall be effective unless and until the same receives the concurrence of two-
thirds (2/3) of the members of Council. The Director of Public Safety shall
perform such other duties; consistent with his/her office, as may be required
by this Charter, by ordinance of the Council, or as directed by the Mayor. The
Director of Public Safety shall be a resident of Lake County, Ohio.
Section 3.  Director of Public Service.
   The Director of Public Service shall be appointed by the Mayor, subject to
confirmation by a majority vote of the members of Council. He/she may be
removed from office by the Mayor, but such removal shall not take place during
term without the concurrence of two-thirds (2/3) of the members of Council;
provided, however, that if the Mayor acts as Service Director, the Council may,
with the concurrence of two-thirds (2/3) of its members, remove him/her as such
Service Director. The Council shall set the salary of the Director of Public
Service.
   The Director of Public Service shall be the head of the Division of Public
Works and the Division of Recreation and Community Services. He/she shall have
charge of all public works and improvements and the construction thereof, and
of all engineering and inspection in connection therewith. He/she shall be
charged with the construction, improvement, repair and maintenance of streets,
sidewalks, alleys, lanes, bridges, wharves, docks and break walls; of water
mains, pumps, systems, pipes, purification and filtration plants, and the water
distribution system; of sewers, sewage systems, drains, ditches, culverts,
streams, water courses and harbors; and of all public buildings, parks,
playgrounds, and other public places belonging to the Municipality or dedicated
to public use.
   He/she shall manage and control market houses, sewage treatment plants,
water works, and all public utilities of the Municipality supported in whole or
in part by taxation, and shall enforce all the obligations of privately-owned
or operated public utilities enforceable by the Municipality. He/she shall have
charge of the making and preservation of all surveys, maps, plans, drawings and
estimates for public work; the cleaning, resurfacing, repairing, sprinkling and
lighting of streets and public places; the collection and disposal of waste;
and the preservation of all property belonging to the Municipality and
pertaining to the functions thereof. He/she shall manage and control cemetery
maintenance, services, cemetery plantings and decorations. He/she shall have
the authority to administer, equip, operate and maintain parks, playgrounds or
community center within the City and to organize and administer recreation,
senior and leisure service programs for the residents of the City.
   He/she shall perform such other duties, consistent with his/her office, as
may be required by this Charter, by ordinance of the Council, or as directed by
the Mayor. The Director of Public Service shall be a resident of Lake County,
Ohio.
(Amended 11-4-1980; 11-7-2000; 11-2-2010)
Section 4.  Director of Finance.
   The Director of Finance shall be appointed by the Mayor, subject to
confirmation by a majority vote of the members of Council. The Director of
Finance may be removed from office by the Mayor, but such removal shall not
take place during term without the concurrence of two-thirds (2/3) of the
members of Council.
   The Director of Finance shall be head of the Department of Finance and
fiscal officer of the Municipality. He/she shall keep the financial records of
the Municipality, exhibiting accurate statements of all moneys received and
expended, of all property owned by the Municipality and of all taxes and
assessments. He/she shall be the custodian of all public money of the
Municipality, shall keep and preserve such money in the place or places
authorized by ordinance, and shall disburse the same as may be required by law
or ordinance. The fiscal year of the Municipality for budget, accounting and
all other similar purposes shall be the calendar year.
   He/she shall not allow the amount set aside for any appropriation to be
overdrawn or drawn for any other purpose. He/she shall examine and audit the
accounts of all other officers, employees and departments. He/she shall require
evidence that the amount of any claim presented to him/her is due. He/she shall
be responsible for the preparation and submission of appropriation measures and
shall assist the Mayor and Council in the preparation of estimates, budgets,
and other financial matters, and at all times keep the Mayor and Council fully
advised as to the financial condition and needs of the Municipality upon
demand. He/she shall perform such other duties consistent with his/her office
as the Mayor or the Council may direct. The Director of Finance shall be a
resident of Lake County, Ohio.
(Amended 11-4-1980; 11-6-1990; 11-7-2000)
Section 5.  Director of Law.
   The Director of Law shall be appointed by the Mayor subject to confirmation
by a majority vote of the members of Council. He/she may be removed from office
by the Mayor, but such removal shall not take place during term without the
concurrence of two-thirds (2/3) of the members of Council. Council shall
provide for such assistants to the Director of Law as shall from time to time
be deemed to be necessary and such assistants shall be appointed by the
Director of Law and shall serve at his/her pleasure.
   The Council shall determine the compensation of the Director of Law and all
assistants, which may be changed from time to time.
   The Director of Law and his/her assistants, if any, must be residents of
Lake County, Ohio.
   The Director of Law shall have the management and supervision of the
Department of Law and shall perform all duties imposed upon him/her by this
Charter, by the Constitution of the State of Ohio, and by any applicable
statutes. He/she shall be the legal advisor of the Municipality and all of its
officials, departments, boards or commissions and except as herein otherwise
provided shall prosecute and defend all actions and proceedings in which the
Municipality is a party or in which it has an interest. Council may from time
to time authorize the Mayor to employ  special counsel for particular matters.
   No person shall act as Director of Law unless duly admitted to practice law
in the State of Ohio for a period of not less than five (5) years and shall
have and maintain an active license to practice law throughout his/her term as
Director of Law.  The Director of Law must be a resident of Lake County, Ohio.
(Amended 11-2-2010)
ARTICLE III - BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
Section 1.  Procedure of Boards and Commissions.
   Each board and commission shall adopt its own rules and regulations,
including the manner of selection of a chairman, and its method of procedure,
except as may be otherwise provided by Council or the laws of Ohio, or the
provisions of this Charter.
   All meetings of boards and commissions shall be open to the public. The
Mayor shall be ex-officio a member of all boards and commissions but shall have
no vote thereon. He/she shall make such recommendations as he/she deems
advisable to Council for providing funds for the necessary expenses of boards
and commissions.
   All members of any board or commission shall serve without compensation,
unless otherwise provided by ordinance and their terms shall expire on December
31 of the last year of their appointed term.
   Any member of any board or commission may be removed from office by the
Mayor after a public hearing, but such removal shall not take place during the
term of any such member of any board or commission without the concurrence of
two-thirds (2/3) of the members of Council.
(Amended 11-7-2000)
Section 2.  Municipal Planning and Zoning Commission.
   There shall be a Municipal Planning and Zoning Commission which shall
consist of five (5) members, all of whom shall be electors of the Municipality
not holding other public office, who shall be appointed by the Mayor, subject
to confirmation by a majority vote of members of Council, for a term of five
(5) years. At the end of each expired term, appointments to the Planning and
Zoning Commission shall be made in a manner to retain the initial pattern of
five (5) staggered terms with one term expiring each year.
   A vacancy occurring during the term of any member of the Planning and Zoning
Commission shall be filled for the unexpired term in the manner authorized for
an original appointment.
   The Planning and Zoning Commission shall meet at least once a month. Each
year the Planning and Zoning Commission shall meet with Council by January 31
for the purpose of discussing upcoming Planning and Zoning issues.
   The Planning and Zoning Commission shall have such powers and duties as
shall be conferred upon it by ordinance of the Council or general laws of the
State of Ohio, concerning:
   (a)   the plan, design, location, removal, relocation and alteration of any
buildings or structures or land owned by the public, Municipality or private
institution, or located on public streets or public property;
   (b)   the location, relocation, widening, extension and vacation of streets,
parkways, playgrounds, parks, or any other public places;
   (c)   alterations to the drainage of any land;
   (d)   approval of plats for the subdivision of land;
   (e)   the planning for and the zoning of the Municipality for any lawful 
purpose or purposes.
   (f)   the upgrading of the zoning map of the Municipality.
   Council shall not pass any ordinance or resolution pertaining to land use
and zoning without first receiving the recommendation of the Planning and
Zoning Commission, and the Planning and Zoning Commission shall act upon
request of Council within sixty (60) days after receipt of any such request for
a recommendation unless additional time is granted by Council. The Planning and
Zoning Commission shall be required to conduct a public hearing prior to
recommending to Council any change in the zoning ordinance or zoning map of the
Municipality.
   Any recommendation made by the Planning and Zoning Commission to Council
shall be introduced at the next regular Council meeting following the receipt
of any such recommendation by the Clerk, and any such recommendation shall be
introduced in the form of an ordinance by the President of Council.
   The Planning and Zoning Commission shall adopt and recommend to Council a
comprehensive general plan for the physical development of the Municipality. In
addition, the Commission shall make and maintain plans and maps of the whole or
any portion of the Municipality which relate to the planning of the
Municipality.
   The Planning and Zoning Commission shall be required to make a comprehensive
review of the zoning ordinances of the Municipality and shall recommend to City
Council such revisions or amendments to the zoning ordinances as it deems
necessary to preserve the development of the physical character of the
Municipality and to plan for future growth and development of the Municipality.
Such initial comprehensive review shall be completed not later than December 1,
1993, and thereafter, the Commission shall conduct comprehensive reviews of the
zoning ordinances as it deems necessary, provided that a complete review of the
zoning ordinances shall take place not less than once every five (5) years.
   At the first regularly scheduled meeting of City Council in each calendar
month, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall submit to Council a written
report of its activities during the previous month.
(Amended 11-3-1981; 11-6-1990; 11-7-2000)
Section 3.  Board of Zoning Appeals.
   There shall be established a Board of Zoning Appeals which shall consist of
five (5) members, all of whom shall be electors of the Municipality not holding
other public office, who shall be appointed by the Mayor, subject to
confirmation by a majority vote of the members of Council, for a term of five
(5) years. At the end of each expired term, appointments to the Board of Zoning
Appeals shall be made in a manner to retain the initial pattern of five (5)
staggered terms with one term expiring each year.
   A vacancy occurring during the term of any member of the Board of Zoning
Appeals shall be filled for the unexpired term in the manner authorized for an
original appointment.
   The Board of Zoning Appeals by action at any regularly convened meeting may
determine the application and vary the provisions of the zoning ordinances of
the Municipality in harmony with the general purpose and intent thereof in
cases where there are practical difficulties or particular hardships in the way
of carrying out the strict letter of any provisions of the zoning ordinances
relating to the use, construction and alterations of buildings, structures, or
land. However, such variations shall be limited to specific cases where the
hardship or difficulty is caused by the peculiar size, shape, topography, or
geology of the premises, or by conditions created prior to applicable and
specific zoning ordinances, which differentiate them from other premises in the
same district causing the owner to lose any reasonable use thereof.
   In no event shall a variance be permitted or granted so as to:
   (a)   Alter or change the character of the immediate area surrounding said
premises;
   (b)   Constitute a change of zoning or district or so as to permit a
nonconforming building or use where none previously existed;
   (c)   Constitute a violation of the terms and provisions of the zoning
ordinances of the Municipality.
   Except as otherwise provided by this Charter, the Board of Zoning Appeals
shall have the powers conferred upon such boards by the general laws of Ohio
and by ordinance of the Municipality; and shall hear and determine appeals made
to it for exceptions to and variances from the application of the provisions of
the zoning ordinances of the Municipality, in harmony with the intent and
purposes thereof, and from any ordinances, regulations, rules, restrictions, or
limitations, or orders from any administrative official or agency in connection
therewith.
   Decisions of the Board of Zoning Appeals shall be final within the
Municipality, except that an appeal therefrom may be taken to any court of
record in accordance with the laws of the State of Ohio, by any proper and
interested party, including the Municipality.
   After each meeting of the Board of Zoning Appeals, the Board shall within
fifteen (15) days advise in writing the Council and Planning and Zoning
Commission of the actions taken at that meeting.
(Amended 11-4-1980; 11-6-1990; 11-7-2000)
Section 4.  Civil Service Commission.
   The Civil Service Commission shall consist of three (3) electors of the
Municipality, not holding other Municipal office or employment, to be appointed
by the Mayor, subject to confirmation by a majority vote of the members of
Council; for terms of six (6) years each, except that the three (3) original
members of the Commission shall be appointed for terms expiring on the last day
of December of the second, fourth, and sixth years after their appointment. A
vacancy occurring during the term of any member of the Civil Service Commission
shall be filled for the unexpired term in the manner authorized for an original
appointment. The Commission shall designate one of its members as chairman and
may appoint a secretary who need not be a member of the Commission and may hold
other Municipal office or appointment.
   The Commission shall, consistent with all the provisions of this Charter,
determine which employees of the Municipality shall be within the classified
service and which shall be within the unclassified service. Persons, other than
those serving a probationary period of employment, who have been continuously
employed on a full-time basis in the service of the Municipality in the same or
a similar position in the classified service for at least ninety (90) days
prior to the date such position is placed in the classified service, shall be
retained in the same or similar position without examination until discharged,
reduced, disciplined, promoted or transferred in accordance with the rules and
regulations of the Commission.
   Upon the creation of any full-time positions in the Police or Fire
Departments, any part-time member of the Police or Fire Department, shall be
eligible to take the competitive examination for his/her respective department,
for an original appointment as a police officer or firefighter, regardless of
his/her age, provided such part-time member has been in the service of the
Municipality for at least ninety (90) days prior to the date of the creation of
the full-time position of police officer or firefighter.
   The civil service of the Municipality shall be divided into the classified
service and the unclassified service.
   (a)   The classified service shall consist of all positions which may,
consistent with the provisions of this Charter, be classified by the Civil
Service Commission. The classified service shall be divided into the
“competitive class,” “professional class” and “labor/clerical class.”
      (1)   The competitive class shall consist of:
         A.   All regular full-time members of the Police Department except the
Chief;
         B.   All regular full-time members of the Fire Department except the
Chief and paramedics.
      (2)   The professional class shall consist of:
         A.   Paramedics;
         B.   Those persons of a professional or managerial character and
wherein, in the opinion of the Commission, it would be in the best interests of
the service to permit applicants to present their qualifications for
appointment without requiring participation in the formal type of examination.
      (3)   The labor/clerical class shall consist of:
         A.   All regular full-time employees of the Public Works Department;
         B.   All regular full-time Dispatchers for the Police Department;
         C.   All other regular full-time employees of the City performing
unskilled and/or ordinary labor or clerical services.
   (b)   The unclassified service shall be comprised of all positions not
specifically included in the classified service. The unclassified service shall
be exempt from examination and fitness testing and shall include, but not be
limited to, the following:
      (1)   All officers elected by popular vote or persons appointed to fill
vacancies in such offices.
      (2)   All members of the Boards and Commissions of the City.
      (3)   Chief of Police, Fire Chief, Public Service Administrator, Safety
Director, Law Director, Finance Director, City Engineer, and all other Heads of
Departments.
      (4)   The Clerk of City Council and the secretary and/or clerk of all
Boards and Commissions of the City.
      (5)   Tax Administrator, Zoning Inspector, and administrative personnel.
      (6)   Legal assistants to the City Law Director.
      (7)   Part-time firefighters.
      (8)   All employees who are hired as part-time employees including, but
not limited to, part-time police officers in the Police Department, part-time
dispatchers in the Police Department, part-time firefighters, and part-time
employees of the Public Works Department.
      (9)   All emergency and seasonal employees.
   (c)   Vacancies in the competitive class shall be filled by competitive
examinations as provided in the rules adopted by the Commission.
      Vacancies in the labor/clerical class shall be filled by appointment from
lists of applicants who are required to furnish such evidence or take such
tests as the Commission requires and considers proper with respect to age,
residency, physical condition, ability to labor, honesty, sobriety, industry,
capacity, and experience in the work or employment in which  the applicant
applies. Unless otherwise specifically indicated by the Civil Service
Commission, no applicant for a position on the classified service labor/
clerical class shall be required to take a competitive examination.
      Vacancies in the professional class shall be filled by appointment from
lists of applicants who are required to furnish such evidence relating to the
applicant’s academic training, experience, residency, physical condition,
honesty, level of formal education, state certified training programs, any
necessary state and/or federal licensing, approval by all necessary local or
state licensing boards, or review skill assessment boards or personnel. In
addition, the applicant must submit to an interview procedure before the
Appointing Authority and must establish or demonstrate his/her knowledge of the
duties and functions of the classification for which the applicant is being
considered. Unless otherwise specifically indicated by the Civil Service
Commission, no applicant for a position on the professional class shall be
required to take a competitive examination.
   (d)   All applicants to the classified service must be citizens of the
United States. The Commission may require applicants for examinations for
original appointment to the Police Division as police officers to be certified
by the State of Ohio Peace Officers Training Council as having completed the
Ohio Peace Officer Basic Training Program before being eligible to take the
examination; and, likewise, may require applicants for examinations for
original appointment to the Fire Division as firefighters to be certified or
otherwise having completed approved training certifying them as firefighters
before being eligible to take the examination.
   (e)   When proper proof of acceptable service in the armed forces of the
United States is presented to the Commission and such ex-service person being
otherwise eligible has received a passing grade in any regular entrance
examination, he/she shall be granted additional credit as provided by the
Commission rules thereby receiving a higher final grade in view of the above
mentioned service.
          When proper proof of completion of a course of study from an
accredited college, junior college, community college, trade or vocational
school, or university is presented to the Commission, for a course of study
determined by the Commission to be in the field of endeavor for which the
examination is being given, and such applicant being otherwise eligible has,
except for promotional examinations, received a passing grade, he/she may be
granted additional credit as provided by the Commission rules, thereby
receiving a higher final grade for completion of said course or courses.
      When proper proof of actual work experience in the field of endeavor for
which the examination is being given is presented to the Commission, and such
applicant being otherwise eligible has, except for promotional examinations,
received a passing grade, he/she may be granted an additional credit as
provided by the Commission rules, depending on the amount of actual work
experience, of such qualifying grade, thereby receiving a higher final grade
for work experience.
      When proper proof of an applicant being certified or otherwise licensed
by the State of Ohio as either a police officer or firefighter for which the
examination is given for entry level position in the Police Division (unless
such certification is required in order to take the examinations provided in
paragraph (d) above) or Fire Division, whichever is applicable, and such
applicant being otherwise eligible and has received a passing grade, he/she may
be granted additional credit as provided by the Commission rules, thereby
receiving a higher final grade for possessing such certification and/or
licensing by the State of Ohio.
   (f)   The term or eligibility of each list and of the names appearing
thereon shall be fixed by the Commission at not less than one nor more than two
years. Any list that has been in effect for more than one year may, at the
discretion of the Commission, be terminated at any time in the public interest.
   The Civil Service Commission shall make, promulgate, and amend rules
consistent with the provisions of this Charter, which are necessary for
implementing the administration of the classified service including the
classification of positions, eligibility of applicants, testing requirements
and procedure, appointment, promotion, transfer, layoff, reinstatement,
suspension and removal of employees in the classified service. After each
meeting of the Civil Service Commission, the Commission shall submit a written
report to Council of the actions taken at that meeting.
(Amended 11-4-1980; 11-6-1990; 11-2-2010)
ARTICLE IV - ELECTIONS
Section 1.  No Primary Election.
   No primary election shall be held for the selection of any candidate for any
elective office of this Municipality; and no nomination for any such office
shall be of any effect unless made as required by
Article IV Section 2 of this Charter.
Section 2.  Nominating Procedure.
   Nominations for elective offices of this Municipality shall be made by
petition only. The nomination of each candidate shall be made by separate
petition and shall be accompanied by the written acceptance of the nominee.
Petitions for the office of Mayor and Councilperson-at-Large shall be signed by
qualified electors of the Municipality equal to three percent (3%) of the
number voting at the last preceding general election for the office sought or
fifty (50), whichever is larger. Petitions for Ward Councilperson shall be
signed by qualified electors of the ward equal to three percent (3%) of the
number voting at the last preceding general election for the office sought or
twenty-five (25), whichever is larger.
(Amended 11-7-2000)
Section 3.  The Ballot.
   The ballot used in the election of officers of this Municipality shall be
without party mark or designation. The names of all candidates for any
Municipal office shall be placed upon the same ballot and shall be rotated in
the manner provided by the laws of Ohio. Except as otherwise provided in this
Charter, the laws of Ohio shall govern the nomination and election of the
elected officers of this Municipality.
ARTICLE V - INITIATIVE, REFERENDUM AND RECALL
Section 1.  Initiative.
   The electors of the Municipality shall have the power to propose any
ordinance or resolution, except an ordinance for the appropriation of money,
and to adopt or reject the same at the polls, such power being known as the
initiative. An initiated ordinance or resolution shall be submitted to the
Clerk of the Council by petition signed by at least that number of electors
which equals ten percent (10%) of the electors voting at the last preceding
general election. When so submitted, the Clerk shall forthwith determine the
sufficiency of the petition, and if found sufficient the Council shall at once
have the proposed ordinance or resolution read and referred to an appropriate
committee which may be a committee of the whole.
    Provisions shall be made for public hearings on the proposed ordinance or
resolution not later than thirty (30) days after the date on which such
ordinance or resolution was submitted to the Clerk. The Council shall within
forty (40) days after such ordinance or resolution is submitted take final
action thereon, either enacting, amending, or rejecting the proposed ordinance
or resolution. If the Council fails or refuses to pass such proposed ordinance
or resolution, or passes it in a form different from that set forth in the
original petition, the petitioners may file a supplemental petition with the
Clerk of Council within ten (10) days after final action on such proposed
ordinance or resolution by the Council.
   The supplemental petition shall be signed by that number of additional
qualified electors which, when taken together with those who signed the
original petition, will total at least that number which equals fifteen percent
(15%) of the electors voting at the last preceding general election. The
supplemental petition may require that the proposed ordinance or resolution be
submitted to the electors in its original form, or in the form adopted by
Council, and may fix the date of the election, provided such date shall be not
less than ninety (90) days from the filing of such supplemental petitions. Upon
receipt of a supplemental petition, found to be sufficient by the Clerk, the
Council shall provide for submitting such ordinance or resolution to a vote of
the electors on the date in the supplemental petition; or, if no date is fixed
therein, at the next general election occurring more than ninety (90) days from
the filing of such supplemental petition.
   Such ordinance or resolution submitted to a vote of the electors shall
become effective from the time of its approval by a majority of the electors
unless such resolution or ordinance changes the zoning classification or zoning
district from one land use to another land use, then such ordinance or
resolution must be approved by fifty-five percent (55%) of those voting in the
election.
(Amended 11-6-1990)
Section 2.  Referendum.
   The electors of the Municipality shall have the power to approve or reject
at the polls any ordinance or resolution passed by the Council except as
hereinafter provided. Within thirty (30) days after the final passage by
Council of an ordinance or resolution, a petition signed by at least that
number of electors which equals ten percent (10%) of the electors voting at the
last preceding general election may be filed with the Clerk of Council
requesting that such ordinance or resolution be either repealed or submitted to
a vote of the electors. If said petition is signed by that number of electors
which equals fifteen percent (15%) or more of such electors, the date of
election may be fixed therein, provided such date shall be not less than ninety
(90) days from the time of filing thereof. When said petition is filed, the
Clerk shall forthwith determine the sufficiency of the petition, and if found
sufficient, the Council shall thereupon, within thirty (30) days of the filing
of such petition, reconsider such ordinance or resolution. If, upon such
reconsideration, the ordinance or resolution is not repealed, the Council shall
submit it to a vote of the electors on the date fixed in the petition, or if no
date is fixed therein, at the next general election occurring more than ninety
(90) days after the filing of such petition. No such ordinance or resolution
shall go into effect until approved by a majority of those voting thereon.
Ordinances or resolutions providing for improvements petitioned for by the
owners of a majority of the front feet of the property benefitted and to be
specifically assessed therefor, ordinances limited to the subject of fiscal
appropriations, and emergency ordinances or resolutions shall not be subject to
the referendum.
   Ordinances or resolutions submitted to the Council by initiative petition
and passed by the Council either with or without change but not submitted to a
vote of the electors, shall be subject to referendum in the same manner as
other ordinances or resolutions.
Section 3.  Recall.
   The electors shall have the power to remove from office any elected officer
of the Municipality by a recall election. If an elected officer shall have
served for six (6) months of his/her term, a petition demanding his/her removal
may be filed with the Clerk of the Council who shall note thereon the name and
address of the person filing the petition and the date of such filing. A
petition for the recall of the Mayor or Councilperson-at-Large shall be signed
by at least that number of electors which equals twenty-five percent (25%) of
the electors voting in the City at the last preceding general election. A
petition for the recall of a Ward Councilperson shall be signed by at least
that number of electors residing in the ward of the Councilperson who is being
recalled which equals twenty-five percent (25%) of the electors voting in that
ward at the last preceding general election. Within ten (10) days after the day
on which such petition shall have been filed the Clerk shall determine whether
or not it meets the requirements hereof. If the Clerk shall find the petition
insufficient he/she shall promptly certify the particulars in which the
petition is defective, deliver a copy of his/her certificate to the person who
filed the petition with him/her, and make a record of such delivery. Such
person shall be allowed a period of twenty (20) days after the day on which
such delivery was made in which to make the petition sufficient. If the Clerk
shall find the petition sufficient he/she shall promptly so certify to the
Council, shall deliver a copy of such certificate to the officer whose removal
is sought, and shall make a record of such delivery. If such officer shall not
resign within five (5) days after the day on which such delivery shall have
been made the Council shall thereupon fix a day for holding a recall election
not less than sixty (60) nor more than seventy-five (75) days after the date of
such delivery. At such recall election this question shall be placed on the
ballot: "Shall (naming the officer) be allowed to continue as (naming the
office)?" with the provision on the ballot for voting affirmatively or
negatively on such question. If a majority of the votes cast at such election
shall be voted affirmatively, such officer shall remain in office. If a
majority of the votes cast shall be voted negatively, such officer shall be
considered as removed, his/her office shall be deemed vacant, and such vacancy
shall be filled as provided in this Charter. The officer removed by such recall
election shall not be eligible for appointment to the vacancy created thereby.
(Amended 11-6-1990)
Section 4.  Petitions.
   An initiative, referendum or recall petition may be circulated in separate
parts, but the separate parts shall be bound together and filed as one (1)
instrument. Each part shall contain in the case of the initiative or
referendum, a full and correct copy of the title and text of the proposed or
referred ordinance or resolution, or in the case of the recall the name and
office of the person whose removal is sought, and a statement in not more than
200 words, of the grounds for removal. The manner of signing, the method of
circulating, the form and requirements as to the affidavit, and the other
requirements of the general law regulating initiative and referendum petitions
shall apply in the case of initiative, referendum, and recall in this
Municipality, except as otherwise provided in this Charter.
Section 5.  Mandatory Zoning Referendum.
   Any ordinance or resolution enacted by the Council of the City of Kirtland
which changes the zoning classification or zoning district from one land use to
another land use shall be, after passage by Council, submitted to the electors
for approval or disapproval at the next general or primary election which
occurs at least ninety (90) days after the passage of said ordinance or
resolution.
   If the ordinance is approved by fifty-five percent (55%) of those voting in
the election, the ordinance shall become law on the first Monday after the
results of the election are certified to the City by the Board of Elections of
Lake County.
   In the event the ordinance is disapproved by the electors, the ordinance or
issue set forth therein shall not be submitted to the Planning and Zoning
Commission for consideration or acted upon by Council until three hundred
sixty-five (365) days have elapsed since the date of the election in which the
ordinance or regulation was disapproved.
(Amended 11-4-1980; 11-6-1990)
ARTICLE VI - TAXATION
Section 1.  Prohibition of Excessive Income Tax.
   No income tax shall be imposed by Council which shall be in excess of two
percent (2%).
   The Council shall, by ordinance, levy a tax at the rate of two percent (2%)
on all incomes which are now, or may hereafter be, subject to taxation by the
Municipality of Kirtland under the Constitution and laws of the State of Ohio,
subject to such exceptions and deductions as Council may determine. Such
ordinance may be amended from time to time, but the tax required to be levied
by this section shall remain in effect until repealed by amendment to this
Charter by vote of the electors of the Municipality of Kirtland.
(Amended 11-4-1980; 11-7-2000; 11-6-2001)
ARTICLE VII - CHARTER AMENDMENTS
Section 1.  Charter Amendment.
   The Council may by a vote of at least two-thirds (2/3) of its members submit
proposed amendments to this Charter to a vote of the electors of the
Municipality. Upon receipt of petitions, setting forth a proposed amendment to
this Charter and signed by at least that number of electors which equals ten
percent (10%) of the electors voting at the last preceding general election,
the Council shall submit such proposed amendment to a vote of the electors of
the Municipality. The submission of any proposed amendment to the electors
shall be governed by the requirements of the Constitution of Ohio, and, to such
extent as such Constitution shall fail to provide therefor the Council shall
determine the manner of such submission. If any such amendment is approved by a
majority of the electors voting thereon it shall become a part of this Charter;
except that if two (2) or more inconsistent amendments on the same subject are
submitted at the same election, only the one of such amendments receiving the
largest affirmative vote, not less than a majority of the votes cast upon such
amendment, shall become a part of this Charter.
Section 2.  Charter Review Committee.
   During the month of January, 1980, and every ten (10) years thereafter, the
Mayor shall appoint a Charter Review Committee subject to confirmation by a
majority vote of the members of Council.  The Committee shall be composed of
two (2) electors from each ward and one (1) elector at large from the
Municipality. None of the members of such Committee shall be an elected officer
of the Municipality. The Committee shall review the Charter and propose for
adoption any alterations, revisions or amendments which the Committee deems
advisable. At the conclusion of the review process and prior to submitting any
proposed changes to Council, the Committee shall hold a public hearing and give
public notice of same. Council shall submit all such proposals unaltered to the
electorate for adoption at the next general election. Each such Charter Review
Committee shall cease to function on the day of the next general election
following its appointment. The members of the Committee shall serve without
compensation, but Council shall provide for the payment of its reasonable
expenses.
(Amended 11-2-2010)
Section 3.  Corrections to Charter.
   In the event that a typographical, grammatical, numerical or organizational
sequencing, or other non-substantive error, including absence of gender neutral
references, is found to exist in the Charter, and the correction of which will
not change the legal intent or purpose of any part of the Charter, then City
Council may correct such error by unanimous vote of the entire Council and no
ballot measure would be required.
(Amended 11-2-2010)
ARTICLE VIII - GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section 1.  Effect of Partial Invalidity.
   A determination that any part of this Charter is invalid shall not
invalidate or impair the force or effect of any other part thereof, except to
the extent that such other part is wholly dependent for its operation upon the
part declared invalid.
Section 2.  Interpretation.
   The article and section headings herein have been inserted for convenience
in reference and are not intended to define or limit the scope of, or otherwise
affect, any provision of this Charter.
   Whenever the Charter requires the affirmative vote of a stated fraction of
the Council, the multiplicand shall be seven (7) reduced by the number of
vacancies then existing in the Council.
   The period of residence in the Municipality required by this Charter as a
qualification for elective office shall include the period of residence in any
territory which has been annexed to the Municipality.
Section 3.  Effective Date.
   This Charter shall become effective from the time of its approval by the
electors on November 3, 1970.
   Amendments to the Charter, which are approved by a majority of those voting
in the election, shall become a part of the Charter of the City of Kirtland and
shall take effect on the day the election results are certified to the City by
the Board of Elections of Lake County, and any existing sections affected by
such amendments shall be repealed from such effective date.
(Amended 11-4-1980; 11-6-1990)
ARTICLE IX - CITY POWERS
Section 1.  Granting of Powers.
   It is hereby established that the City of Kirtland shall have all powers
that now are, or hereafter may be granted to municipalities by the Constitution
or laws of Ohio; and all such powers whether expressed or implied, shall be
exercised and enforced in the manner prescribed by this Charter, or when not
prescribed herein, in such manner that shall be provided by ordinance or
resolution of the City Council. In the absence of such provision as to any
power, such power shall be exercised in the manner now or hereafter prescribed
by the general laws of the State applicable to municipalities.
(Amended 11-4-1980)
Section 2.  Powers Not Limited by Charter.
   The enumeration of particular powers by this Charter shall not be held or
deemed to be exclusive, but in addition to the powers enumerated herein,
implied thereby or appropriate to the exercise thereof the City shall have, and
may exercise all other powers which under Constitution and laws of Ohio, it
would be competent for this Charter specifically to enumerate.
(Amended 11-4-1980)
Section 3.  Applicability of State Law.
   All general laws of the State applicable to municipal corporations, now or
hereafter enacted, which are not in conflict with the provisions of this
Charter, or with ordinances or resolutions hereafter enacted by the City
Council, shall be applicable to this City; provided, however, that nothing
contained in this Charter shall be construed as limiting the powers of the City
Council to enact any ordinance or resolution not in conflict with the
Constitution of the State or this Charter.
(Amended 11-4-1980; 11-6-1990)
PART TWO - ADMINISTRATION CODE
   Chapter
      TITLE TWO - GENERAL PROVISIONS
         
202.   Codified Ordinances.
         
204.   Official Standards.
         
206.   Wards and Boundaries.
         
208.   Public Records.
         
210.   Elections.
      TITLE FOUR - LEGISLATION
         
220.   Council.
         
222.   Ordinances and Resolutions.
      TITLE SIX - ADMINISTRATION
         
230.   Mayor.
         
232.   City Clerk.
         
234.   Department of Law.
         
236.   Department of Finance.
         
238.   Department of Public Service.
         
240.   Department of Public Safety.
         
242.   Division of Building, Engineering and Inspection.
         
244.   Division of Police.
         
246.   Division of Fire.
         
248.   Division of Health.
         
250.   Community Improvement Corporation.
         
252.   Emergency Management.
         
254.   Employees Generally.
      TITLE EIGHT - BOARDS, COMMISSIONS, AGENCIES AND COMMITTEES
         
260.   Planning and Zoning Commission.
         
262.   Board of Zoning Appeals.
         
264.   Records Commission.
         
266.   Board of Tax Review.
         
268.   Volunteer Firefighters Dependents Fund Board.
         
270.   Civil Service Commission.
         
272.   Board of Cemetery Trustees. (Repealed)
         
274.   Park and Recreation Commission.
         
276.   Lake County Disaster Services Agency.
         
278.   Charter Review Committee.
         
280.   Public Utilities Commission.
      TITLE TEN- JUDICIARY
         
290.   Municipal Court.
TITLE TWO - GENERAL PROVISIONS
CHAPTER 202:  CODIFIED ORDINANCES
Section
202.01   Designation; citation; headings.
202.02   General definitions.
202.03   Rules of construction.
202.04   Revivor; effect of reenactment, amendment or repeal.
202.05   Construction of section references.
202.06   Severability.
202.99   General penalty.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Codification in book form - see Ohio R.C. 731.23
   Imprisonment until fine paid - see Ohio R.C. 1905.30, 2947.14
   Ordinances and resolutions - see ADM.
Ch. 222
   See section histories for similar state law
   Statute of limitations on prosecutions - see GEN. OFF.
606.06
§ 202.01  DESIGNATION; CITATION; HEADINGS.
   This volume consists of all ordinances and resolutions of a permanent and
general nature of the municipality, as revised and consolidated into component
codes, titles, chapters and sections, and as such shall be known and designated
as the Codified Ordinances of Kirtland, Ohio, 2008, for which designation
"Codified Ordinances" may be substituted. Code, title, chapter and section
headings do not constitute any part of the law as contained in the Codified
Ordinances.
(ORC 1.01)
§ 202.02  GENERAL DEFINITIONS.
   As used in the Codified Ordinances, unless otherwise expressly provided or
the context otherwise requires.
   (a)   And, or. "And" may be read "or" and "or" may be read "and", if the
sense requires it.
   (b)   Another. "Another", when used to designate the owner of property which
is the subject of an offense, includes not only natural persons but also every
other owner of property.
   (c)   Bond. "Bond" includes an undertaking.
   (d)   Child. "Child" includes child by adoption.
   (e)   Council. "Council" means the legislative authority of the
municipality.
   (f)   County. "County" means the county or counties in which the
municipality is located.
   (g)   Fire Chief. "Fire Chief" shall include the Chief of the Fire
Department if such Fire Department has been established in the municipality and
shall include the Fire Prevention Officer if no Fire Department has been
established in the municipality.
   (h)   Imprisoned. "Imprisoned" shall have the same meaning as in Ohio R.C.
1.05.
   (i)   Keeper, proprietor. "Keeper" or "proprietor" includes all persons,
whether acting by themselves or as a servant, agent or employee.
   (j)   Land, real estate. "Land" or "real estate" includes rights and
easements of incorporeal nature.
   (k)   Legislative authority. "Legislative authority" means the legislative
authority of the municipality.
   (l)   May. "May" is permissive.
   (m)   Municipality, village. "Municipality" or "Village", when used in this
Model Ohio Municipal Code, shall denote the municipality irrespective of its
population or legal classification.
   (n)   OAC. "OAC" refers to the Ohio Administrative Code.
   (o)   Oath. "Oath" includes affirmation; and "swear" includes affirm.
   (p)   Ohio R.C., ORC, Revised Code. "Ohio R.C.", "ORC" or "Revised Code"
refers to the Ohio Revised Code.
   (q)   Owner. "Owner", when applied to property, includes any part owner,
joint owner or tenant in common of the whole or part of the property.
   (r)   Person. "Person" includes an individual, corporation, business trust,
estate, trust, partnership and association.
   (s)   Personal property. "Personal property" includes all property, except
real property.
   (t)   Plan of sewerage, system of sewerage, sewer. "Plan of sewerage",
"system of sewerage", "sewer" and "sewers" includes sewers, sewage disposal
works and treatment plants and sewage pumping stations, together with
facilities and appurtenances necessary and proper therefor.
   (u)   Premises. "Premises", as applied to property, includes land and
buildings.
   (v)   Property. "Property" includes real, personal, mixed estates and
interests.
   (w)   Public authority. "Public authority" includes boards of education; the
municipal, county, state or federal government, its officers or an agency
thereof; or any duly authorized public official.
   (x)   Public place. "Public place" includes any street, sidewalk, park,
cemetery, school yard, body of water or watercourse, public conveyance or any
other place for the sale of merchandise, public accommodation or amusement.
   (y)   Real property. "Real property" includes lands, tenements and
hereditaments.
   (z)   Registered mail. "Registered mail" includes certified mail; and
"certified mail" includes registered mail.
   (aa)   Shall. "Shall" is mandatory.
   (bb)   Sidewalk. "Sidewalk" means that portion of the street between the
curb line and the adjacent property line intended for the use of pedestrians.
   (cc)   State. "State" means the State of Ohio.
   (dd)   Street. "Street" includes alleys, avenues, boulevards, lanes, roads,
highways, viaducts and all other public thoroughfares within the municipality.
   (ee)   Tenant, occupant. "Tenant" or "occupant", as applied to premises,
includes any person holding a written or oral lease, or who actually occupies
the whole or any part of such premises, alone or with others.
   (ff)   Undertaking. "Undertaking" includes a bond.
   (gg)   Week. "Week" means seven consecutive days.
   (hh)   Whoever. "Whoever" includes all persons, natural and artificial;
partners; principals, agents and employees; and all officials, public or
private.
   (ii)   Writing. "Writing" includes printing.
   (jj)   Written, in writing. "Written" or "in writing" include any
representation of words, letters, symbols or figures; this provision does not
affect any law relating to signatures.
   (kk)   Year. "Year" means 12 consecutive months.
(ORC 1.02, 1.05, 1.44, 1.59, 701.01)
§ 202.03  RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.
   (a)   Common and technical use. Words and phrases shall be read in context
and construed according to the rules of grammar and common usage. Words and
phrases that have acquired a technical or particular meaning, whether by
legislative definition or otherwise, shall be construed accordingly.
(ORC 1.42)
   (b)   Singular and plural; gender; tense.
      (1)   The singular includes the plural and the plural includes the
singular.
      (2)   Words of one gender include the other genders.
      (3)   Words in the present tense include the future.
(ORC 1.43)
   (c)   Computation of time.
      (1)   The time within which an act is required by law to be done shall be
computed by excluding the first and including the last day; except that when
the last day falls on Sunday or a legal holiday, then the act may be done on
the next succeeding day that is not a Sunday or a legal holiday.
      (2)   When a public office, in which an act required by law is to be
performed, is closed to the public for the entire day that constitutes the last
day for doing the act or before its usual closing time on that day, the act may
be performed on the next succeeding day that is not a Sunday or a legal
holiday.
      (3)   "Legal holiday", as used in subsections (c)(1) and (c)(2) of this
section, means the following days:
         A.   The first day of January, known as New Year's Day;
         B.   The third Monday in January, known as Martin Luther King Jr. Day;
         C.   The third Monday in February, known as Washington-Lincoln Day;
         D.   The day designated in the "Act of June 28, 1968", 82 Stat. 250, 5
U.S.C. § 6103, as amended, for the commemoration of Memorial Day;
         E.   The fourth day of July, known as Independence Day;
         F.   The first Monday in September, known as Labor Day;
         G.   The second Monday in October, known as Columbus Day;
         H.   The eleventh day of November, known as Veteran's Day;
         I.   The fourth Thursday in November, known as Thanksgiving Day;
         J.   The twenty-fifth day of December, known as Christmas Day; and
         K.   Any day appointed and recommended by the Governor of this state
or the President of the United States as a holiday.
      (4)   If any day designated in this section as a legal holiday falls on a
Sunday, the next succeeding day is a legal holiday.
(ORC 1.14)
      (5)   When an act is to take effect or become operative from and after a
day named, no part of that day shall be included. If priority of legal rights
depends upon the order of events on the same day, such priority shall be
determined by the times in the day at which they respectively occurred.
(ORC 1.15)
      (6)   If a number of months is to be computed by counting the months from
a particular day, the period ends on the same numerical day in the concluding
month as the day of the month from which the computation is begun, unless there
are not that many days in the concluding month, in which case the period ends
on the last day of that month.
(ORC 1.45)
§ 202.04  REVIVOR; EFFECT OF REENACTMENT, AMENDMENT OR REPEAL.
   (a)   The repeal of a repealing provision of the Codified Ordinances does
not revive the provision originally repealed nor impair the effect of any
saving clause therein.
(ORC 1.57)
   (b)   The reenactment, amendment or repeal of a provision of the Codified
Ordinances does not, except as provided in subsection (c) hereof:
      (1)   Affect the prior operation of the provision or any prior action
taken thereunder;
      (2)   Affect any validation, cure, right, privilege, obligation or
liability previously acquired, accrued, accorded or incurred thereunder;
      (3)   Affect any violation thereof or penalty, forfeiture or punishment
incurred in respect thereto, prior to the amendment or repeal;
      (4)   Affect any investigation, proceeding or remedy in respect of any
such privilege, obligation, liability, penalty, forfeiture or punishment; and
the investigation, proceeding or remedy may be instituted, continued or
enforced and the penalty, forfeiture or punishment imposed, as if the provision
had not been repealed or amended.
   (c)   If the penalty, forfeiture or punishment for any offense is reduced by
a reenactment or amendment of a provision of the Codified Ordinances, the
penalty, forfeiture or punishment, if not already imposed, shall be imposed
according to the provision as amended.
(ORC 1.58)
§ 202.05  CONSTRUCTION OF SECTION REFERENCES.
   (a)   Wherever in a penalty section reference is made to a violation of a
section or an inclusive group of sections, or of subsections of a section, such
reference shall be construed to mean a violation of any provision of the
section, sections, subsections included in the reference.
   (b)   References in this Model Ohio Municipal Code to action taken or
authorized under designated sections of this Model Ohio Municipal Code include,
in every case, action taken or authorized under the applicable legislative
provision which is superseded by this Model Ohio Municipal Code.
(ORC 1.23)
   (c)   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof,
the reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently
amended, revised, recodified or renumbered, unless the subject matter be
changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.
(ORC 1.55)
§ 202.06  SEVERABILITY.
   If any provisions of a section of the Codified Ordinances or the application
thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity does not
affect other provisions or applications of the section or related sections
which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application and, to
this end, the provisions are severable.
(ORC 1.50)
§ 202.99  GENERAL PENALTY.
   Whenever, in the Codified Ordinances or in any ordinance of the
municipality, any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an
offense or a misdemeanor, or whenever the doing of any act is required or the
failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is
otherwise provided, whoever violates or fails to comply with any such provision
is guilty of a minor misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than one hundred
fifty dollars ($150.00). A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day
during or on which a violation or noncompliance occurs or continues.
CHAPTER 204:  OFFICIAL STANDARDS
Section
Editor's note:
   The State of Ohio operates on Eastern Daylight Savings Time from 2:00 a.m.
of the first Sunday in April until 2:00 a.m. of the last Sunday in October.
Congress, on March 22, 1966, passed the Uniform Time Act requiring uniform
observance throughout the nation of Daylight Savings Time starting in 1967,
except that a state legislature could exempt the entire state from Daylight
Savings Time or divide a state into not more than two parts, each with a
different time standard. The Ohio Legislature, through inaction, has elected to
observe Eastern Daylight Savings Time throughout the State of Ohio.
   On August 8, 2005, the Energy Policy Act of 2005 was enacted. This Act
changed the time change dates for Daylight Saving Time in the United States.
Beginning in 2007, the State of Ohio begins Daylight Saving Time at 2:00 a.m.
on the second Sunday in March and reverts to standard time at 2:00 a.m. on the
first Sunday in November. The Secretary of Energy will report the impact of
this change to Congress. Congress retains the right to resume the 2005 Daylight
Saving Time schedule once the Department of Energy study is complete.
204.01   Marking of city vehicles.
204.02   Public depositories.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   State bird - see Ohio R.C. 5.03
   State flag - see Ohio R.C. 5.01
   State floral emblem - see Ohio R.C. 5.02
   State legal holidays - see Ohio R.C. 1.14, 5.20 et seq.
   State motto - see Ohio R.C. 5.06
   State standard of time - see Ohio R.C. 1.04
   State tree - see Ohio R.C. 5.05
§ 204.01  MARKING OF CITY VEHICLES.
   All motor vehicles, self-powered construction equipment and trailers, either
owned or possessed under a lease purchase agreement by the city, with the
exception of undercover police vehicles, shall be conspicuously marked with the
name of the city and the department of the city to which the vehicle belongs.
The city and the department name may be incorporated into an emblem.
(Ord. 87-O-49, passed 10-19-1987)
§ 204.02  PUBLIC DEPOSITORIES.
   (a)   Active funds.  On estimate duly made by the Director of Finance,
monies of the city, aggregating in the maximum amount of five million dollars
($5,000,000) shall be awarded as active deposits to Chase Bank, Charter One
Bank, First Merit Bank N.A., Key Bank, Huntington National Bank and PNC Bank. 
The Mayor and the Director of Finance are hereby authorized to enter into such
depository contracts with the above-mentioned depositories containing such
provisions as they deem necessary in order to accomplish the purposes for which
these designations are made. Such awards shall be for a five-year period from
the effective date of this legislation.
   (b)   Inactive and interim funds.  On estimate duly made by the Director of
Finance, monies of the city, aggregating in the maximum amount of five million
dollars ($5,000,000) shall be awarded as interim and inactive deposits to Chase
Bank, Charter One Bank, First Merit Bank N.A., Key Bank, Huntington National
Bank and PNC Bank, as depositories of all inactive and interim funds for the
city for the period of February 2, 2017 through February 1, 2018, and the
Director of Finance is hereby authorized to deposit from time to time, as
available, the inactive and interim funds of the city in any such depository or
depositories as will, in his judgment, provide the best terms for the city at
the time of such deposit.
   (c)   Compliance.  Such depositories as listed in divisions (a) and (b) of
this section shall comply with the provisions set forth in R.C. Chapter 135
relating to securities to be given to secure the active deposits, inactive
deposits and interim deposits.
(Res. 06-R-67, passed 1-3-2007; Am. Ord. 11-O-60, passed 12-19-2011; Am. Ord.
12-O-37, passed 7-2-2012; Am. Ord. 12-O-57, passed 12-17-2012; Am. Ord. 16-O-
49, passed 12-19-2016)
CHAPTER 206:  WARDS AND BOUNDARIES
Section
206.01   Wards.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Division of City into wards; election of Councilmen from wards - see CHTR.
Art. I, § 1
   Voting precincts - see Ohio R.C. 3501.18
§ 206.01  WARDS.
   In compliance with
Article I, § 1, of the City Charter, the following wards, having very nearly
equal populations, are hereby established:
   (a)   Ward 1. Beginning at the northeast corner of the City of Kirtland,
Ward 1 is bounded as follows:
      (1)   On the north by the north corporation line of the city (the south
corporation line of the City of Mentor) to the northwest corner of the city;
      (2)   On the west by the west corporation line of the city (east
corporation lines of the City of Willoughby and the Village of Waite Hill) to
the centerline of Hobart Road, thence along the centerline of Hobart Road to
the centerline of Euclid-Chardon Road (a.k.a. U.S. Route 6);
      (3)   On the south by the centerline of said Euclid-Chardon Road easterly
to the centerline of Chillicothe Road (a.k.a. State Route 306);
      (4)   On the east by the centerline of Chillicothe Road northerly to the
centerline of Eagle Road, the centerline of the Eagle Road to the centerline of
the First Energy high tension power line easement, the centerline of the First
Energy easement to the south line of First Energy property (V.679-P.515), the
south line of the First Energy property to the southwest corner of the Church
of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (LDS) property (Doc. 2008R021717)
(formerly the McFarland property (V.275-P.369)), the south line of the LDS
property to the centerline of Kirtland-Chardon Road, the centerline of
Kirtland-Chardon Road and relocated Kirtland-Chardon Road to a southwest corner
of the Village of
Kirtland Hills and an easterly corporation line of the city (west corporation
line of the Village of Kirtland Hills) to the northeast corner of the city.
   (b)   Ward 2. Beginning at the southeast corner of the Village of Kirtland
Hills, Ward 2 is bounded as follows:
      (1)   On the north by a northerly corporation line of the city (south
corporation line of the Village of Kirtland Hills) to the east line of Ward 1;
      (2)   On the west by the east line of Ward 1 to the centerline of Eagle
Road at the northwest corner of Sublot 56 of Alpine Drive Subdivision #2 (V. M-
98) and the west line of the Alpine Drive Subdivision #2 to the southwest
corner thereof;
      (3)   On the south by the southerly lines of the Alpine Drive Subdivision
#2, Alpine Drive Subdivision (V. K-21), the Valente property (Doc. 980042105
and 2007R012175), and the Allen properties (Doc.2003R031008 and 2012R022959) to
the west line of Silver Fox Subdivision (V. W-24), the west and south lines of
the Silver Fox Subdivision to the southwest corner of Woodglen Subdivision No.1
(V. 12-7), the south and east lines of the Woodglen Subdivision No.1 to the
southwest corner of Woodglen Subdivision No. 2 (V. 12-10), the east and south
lines of the Woodglen Subdivision No. 2 to the southwest corner of Holden
Arboretum property (V.272-P.1149), the south line of the Holden Arboretum
property to the centerline of Kirtland-Chardon Road, the centerline of
Kirtland-Chardon Road to the east corporation line of the city (west
corporation line of Chardon Township, Geauga County);
      (4)   On the east by the corporation line of the city to the southeast
corner of the Village of Kirtland Hills.
   (c)   Ward 3. Ward 3 consists of all the area west of Chillicothe Road not
included in Ward 1; and
   (d)   Ward 4. Ward 4 consists of all the area east of Chillicothe Road not
included in Wards 1 and 2.
(Ord. 02-O-55, passed 12-2-2002; Am. Ord. 14-O-28, passed 6-2-2014)
CHAPTER 208:  PUBLIC RECORDS
Section
208.01   Copies; costs. (Repealed)
208.02   Policy adopted.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Photostat or microfilm recording - see Ohio R.C. 9.01
   Posting places for legislation - see ADM.
222.01
   Procedure for disposal of records - see Ohio R.C. 149.39
   Records Commission - see ADM.
Ch. 264
§ 208.01  COPIES; COSTS. (Repealed)
Editor's note:
   Section
208.01 was repealed by Ord. 01-O-16, passed April 2, 2001.
§ 208.02  POLICY ADOPTED.
   (a)   Adoption. In order to comply with Ohio R.C. § 149.43, the City of
Kirtland, Ohio, does hereby adopt the Public Records Policy, as detailed below,
which shall be applicable to the city and all of its officials and departments.
   (b)   Introduction. It is the policy of the City of Kirtland, Ohio, that
openness leads to a better informed citizenry, which leads to better government
and better public policy. It is the policy of this city and all of its
officials and departments to strictly adhere to the state's Public Records Act.
All exemptions to openness are to be construed in their narrowest sense and any
denial of public records in response to a valid request must be accompanied by
an explanation, including legal authority, as outlined in the Ohio Revised
Code. If the request is in writing, the explanation must also be in writing.
      (1)   Public records.
         A.   The City of Kirtland, in accordance with the Ohio Revised Code,
defines records as including the following: Any document – paper, electronic
(including, but not limited to, e-mail), or other format – that is created or
received by, or comes under the jurisdiction of a public office that documents
the organization, functions, policies, decisions, procedures, operations or
other activities of the office. All records of the city are public unless they
are specifically exempt from disclosure under the Ohio Revised Code.
         B.   It is the policy of this city that, as required by Ohio law,
records will be organized and maintained so that they are readily available for
inspection and copying (See subsection (4) below for the email record policy).
Record retention schedules are to be updated regularly and posted prominently.
      (2)   Record requests. Each request for public records should be
evaluated for a response using the following guidelines.
         A.   Although no specific language is required to make a request, the
requester must at least identify the records requested with sufficient clarity
to allow the public office to identify, retrieve and review the records. If it
is not clear what records are being sought, the records custodian must contact
the requester for clarification and should assist the requestor in revising the
request by informing the requestor of the manner in which the office keeps its
records.
         B.   The requester does not have to put a records request in writing
and does not have to provide his or her identity or the intended use of the
requested public record. It is this city's general policy that this information
is not to be requested.
         C.   Public records are to be available for inspection during regular
business hours, with the exception of published holidays. Public records must
be made available for inspection promptly. Copies of public records must be
made available within a reasonable period of time. "Prompt" and "reasonable"
take into account the volume of records requested; the proximity of the
location where the records are stored; and the necessity for any legal review
of the records requested.
         D.   1.   Each request should be evaluated for an estimated length of
time required to gather the records. Routine requests for records should be
satisfied immediately if feasible to do so. Routine requests include, but are
not limited to, meeting minutes (both in draft and final form), budgets, salary
information, forms and applications, personnel rosters and the like. If fewer
than 20 pages of copies are requested or if the records are readily available
in an electronic format that can be e-mailed or downloaded easily, these should
be made as quickly as the equipment allows. (If more copies are requested, an
appointment should be made with the requester on when the copies or computer
files can be picked up.)
            2.   All requests for public records must either be satisfied (see
subsection D.) or be acknowledged in writing by the city official or department
within three business days following the office's receipt of the request. If a
request is deemed significantly beyond "routine", such as seeking a voluminous
number of copies or requiring extensive research, the acknowledgment must
include the following:
               a.   An estimated number of business days it will take to
satisfy the request;
               b.   An estimated cost if copies are requested; and
               c.   Any items within the request that may be exempt from
disclosure.
         E.   Any denial of public records requested must include an
explanation, including legal authority. If portions of a record are public and
portions are exempt, the exempt portions are to be redacted and the rest
released. If there are redactions, each redaction must be accompanied by a
supporting explanation, including legal authority.
      (3)   Costs for public records. Those seeking public records will be
charged only the actual cost of making copies.
         A.   The charge for paper copies is stated in the Fee Schedule in §
236.07.
         B.   The charge for downloaded computer files to a compact disc is
stated in the Fee Schedule in §
236.07.
         C.   There is no charge for documents e-mailed.
         D.   Requesters may ask that documents be mailed to them. They will be
charged the actual cost of the postage and mailing supplies.
      (4)   E-mail. Documents in electronic mail format are records as defined
by the Ohio Revised Code when their content relates to the business of the
office. E-mail is to be treated in the same fashion as records in other formats
and should follow the same retention schedules.
         A.   Records in private e-mail accounts used to conduct public
business are subject to disclosure and all employees or representatives of this
office are instructed to retain their e-mails that relate to public business
(see subsection (b)(1)) and to copy them to their business email accounts and/
or to the office's records custodian.
         B.   The records custodian is to treat the e-mails from private
accounts as records of the public office, filing them in the appropriate way,
retaining them per established schedules and making them available for
inspection and copying in accordance with the Public Records Act.
      (5)   Failure to respond to a public records request. The City of
Kirtland recognizes the legal and non-legal consequences of failure to properly
respond to a public records request. In addition to the distrust in government
that failure to comply may cause, the failure of the city's officials and the
departments to comply with a request may result in a court ordering the City of
Kirtland to comply with the law and to pay the requester attorney's fees and
damages.
(Res. 07-R-37, passed 9-17-2007; Am. Ord. 17-O-20, passed 7-3-2017)
CHAPTER 210:  ELECTIONS
Section
210.01   Examination of registration records of candidates; written protests
against unqualified candidates.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Elections generally - see CHTR.
Art. IV; Ohio R.C. Ch. 3501 et seq.
   Qualifications of Council members - see CHTR.
Art. I, § 2
   Qualifications of Mayor - see CHTR.
Art. II, § 2
§ 210.01  EXAMINATION OF REGISTRATION RECORDS OF CANDIDATES; WRITTEN PROTESTS
AGAINST UNQUALIFIED CANDIDATES.
   (a)   Within three business days after nominating petitions of candidates
for office in the city are filed with the Board of Elections on the ninetieth
day before the day of the general election, the Law Director shall examine the
registration records of each such candidate to determine if such candidate has
been a qualified elector for a period of time which complies with the City
Charter.
   (b)   The Law Director shall immediately notify the President of Council of
the results of his or her findings and if any proposed candidate appears not to
hold the necessary qualifications to comply with the City Charter, then the
President of Council shall immediately call for a special meeting of Council in
accordance with §
220.02.
   (c)   At such special meeting, the results of the Law Director’s findings
shall be made known to Council as a whole and the President of Council shall
propose a resolution requiring a member of Council, who is a qualified elector
eligible to vote for such candidate who does not meet the requirements of the
City Charter, to file written protests against the nominating petitions filed
by such candidate in accordance with Ohio R.C. 3513.263.
(Ord. 90-O-8, passed 2-20-1990; Am. Ord. 11-O-47, passed 9-19-2011)
TITLE FOUR - LEGISLATION
CHAPTER 220:  COUNCIL
Section
220.01   Governing rules; meetings.
220.02   Special meetings.
220.03   President; President Pro Tem.
220.04   Quorum.
220.05   Order of business.
220.06   Adjournment.
220.07   Preserving order.
220.08   Control of Chamber.
220.09   Members presiding at meetings.
220.10   Appointment of committees.
220.11   Standing committees.
220.12   Special committees.
220.13   Committee quorum.
220.14   Duties of committee chairperson; expenses.
220.15   General Committee.
220.16   Discussions at Council meetings.
220.17   Transgression of rules of Council.
220.18   Referring matters to committees.
220.19   Preparation of legislation.
220.20   Procedure for enactment of legislation.
220.21   Voting on legislation.
220.22   Seconding of motions.
220.23   Copies of pending legislation.
220.24   Suspension of rules.
220.25   Public notice of Council action.
220.26   Agenda of Council meetings.
220.27   Receiving motions when question is before Council.
220.28   Motions to reconsider.
220.29   Motion that matter be taken from committee.
220.30   Amendment of legislation.
220.31   Amendment of Council rules.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Council generally - see CHTR.
Art. I
   Council's traffic control powers - see TRAF.
406.07
   Department heads required at Council meetings - see ADM.
254.16
   Elections - see CHTR.
Art. IV
   Legislative powers of the Mayor - see CHTR.
Art. II, § 5
   Reports of board, commission and agency heads to Council - see ADM.
254.17
§ 220.01  GOVERNING RULES; MEETINGS.
   (a)   The Kirtland Council Rules, together with Robert’s Rules of Order,
will be used to govern the actions of Council.
   (b)   Council will meet regularly twice each month at 7:00 p.m. on the first
and third Mondays. The only exceptions to this rule are:
      (1)   Monday, January 1, 2018 (New Year's Day). Council will meet on
Wednesday, January 3, 2018.
      (2)   Monday, January 15, 2018 (Martin Luther King, Jr. Day). Council
will meet on Wednesday, January 17, 2018.
      (3)   Monday, February 19, 2018 (Presidents' Day). Council will meet on
Thursday, February 22, 2018.
      (4)   Monday, May 7, 2018.  To accommodate the Board of Elections with
regard to the setup of voting equipment prior to the primary election, Council
will meet on Wednesday, May 9, 2018.
      (5)   To provide for Summer Recess, Council will meet on Monday, July 2,
2018 and Monday, July 9, 2018. Council will meet once during the month of
August, on the third Monday, to-wit: August 20, 2018.
      (6)   Monday, September 3, 2018 (Labor Day). Council will meet on
Wednesday, September 5, 2018.
      (7)   Monday, November 5, 2018. To accommodate the Board of Elections
with regard to the set-up of voting equipment prior to Election Day, Council
will meet on Wednesday, November 7, 2018.
(Res. 98-R-77, passed 12-7-1998; Am. Res. 00-R-87, passed 12-4-2000; Am. Res.
01-R-55, passed 12-3-2001; Am. Res. 03-R-52, passed 12-1-2003; Am. Res. 04-R-
33, passed 6-21-2004; Am. Res. 04-R-61, passed 12-6-2004; Am. Res. 05-R-70,
passed 12-1-2005; Am. Res. 06-R-66, passed 12-4-2006; Am. Res. 07-R-33, passed
9-5-2007; Am. Res. 07-R-50, passed 12-3-2007; Am. Res. 08-R-44, passed 12-1-
2008; Am. Res. 09-R-13, passed 3-16-2009; Am. Res. 09-R-59, passed 12-1-2009;
Am. Res. 10-R-65, passed 12-6-2010; Am. Res. 11-R-64, passed 12-1-2011; Am.
Res. 12-R-63, passed 12-3-2012; Am. Res. 13-R-12, passed 3-4-2013; Am. Res. 13-
R-64, passed 12-2- 2013; Am. Res. 14-R-68, passed 12-1-2014; Am. Res. 15-R-66,
passed 12-1-2015; Am. Res. 16-R- 53, passed 12-5-2016; Am. Res. 17-R-5, passed
2-22-2017; Am. Res. 17-R-44, passed 12-1-2017; Am. Res. 18-R-3, passed 2-5-
2018)
   (c)   The time of all meetings shall be 7:00 p.m. and all meetings shall be
held in Council Chambers, City Hall, unless otherwise posted.
(Res. 97-R-73, passed 12-1-1997)
§ 220.02  SPECIAL MEETINGS.
   Upon written or verbal request of the Mayor, the President of Council or any
three members of Council, a special meeting of Council may be called. Written
or verbal notice thereof shall be given by the Clerk of Council to the Mayor
and each member of Council personally, or by leaving written notice at such
individual's usual place of residence at least 24 hours before the time
specified for such meeting. The Mayor and any member of Council may waive such
notice and any defect or irregularity in the service of such notice shall be
conclusively waived by attendance at such meeting. Only such matters as are set
forth in such notice shall be considered and acted upon. Failure to notify any
member of Council or the Mayor in the manner prescribed in this section will
void any and all action taken at such special meeting unless such notification
has been waived.
(Res. 81-R-31, passed 4-6-1981)
§ 220.03  PRESIDENT; PRESIDENT PRO TEM.
   The President of Council and the President Pro Tem shall be elected by
Council at its yearly organizational meeting, in accordance with
Article I, § 4, of the City Charter. The President or, in his or her absence,
the President Pro Tem, shall take the chair at a meeting of Council and shall
call Council to order. A quorum being present, Council shall proceed with the
order of business.
(Res. 81-R-31, passed 4-6-1981)
§ 220.04  QUORUM.
   A majority of all members of Council holding office at the time of a Council
meeting shall be present at such Council meeting to constitute a quorum to do
business, but a smaller number may be adjourned from time to time and shall
have the power to compel the attendance of absent members.
(Res. 81-R-31, passed 4-6-1981)
§ 220.05  ORDER OF BUSINESS.
   (a)   The order of business of all Council meetings shall be as follows:
      (1)   Pledge of Allegiance;
      (2)   Roll call;
      (3)   Approval of minutes;
      (4)   Reports of department heads;
      (5)   Report of the Mayor and announcements;
      (6)   Reports of standing committees;
      (7)   Reports of special committees;
      (8)   Reading of correspondence;
      (9)   Public comments on matters not on the agenda;
      (10)   Old business (public comments on agenda items under old business);
      (11)   New business (public comments on agenda items under new business);
      (12)   Council comments;
      (13)   Continuing concerns; and
      (14)   Adjournment.
   (b)   All questions relating to the priority of business shall be decided by
the President of Council. A matter may be made a special order of business at a
meeting with the assent of four members of Council.
   (c)   The order of business shall not be changed except with the unanimous
consent of Council or by a vote for suspension of the Rules of Council.
(Res. 81-R-31, passed 4-6-1981)
§ 220.06  ADJOURNMENT.
   A motion to adjourn a meeting of Council shall always be in order except
during roll call. When a motion is made to adjourn, the President of Council
may, before putting the question to a vote, state any fact to Council relating
to the conditions of the business of Council which would seem to make it
advisable or inadvisable to adjourn at that time.
(Res. 81-R-31, passed 4-6-1981)
§ 220.07  PRESERVING ORDER.
   The President of Council shall at all times preserve order and decorum. He
or she shall decide questions of order, subject to an appeal to Council by any
member. No member shall speak more than once on such an appeal. If procedural
questions arise which are not provided for by general law or by ordinance,
Robert's Rules of Order, Revised, shall govern.
(Res. 81-R-31, passed 4-6-1981)
§ 220.08  CONTROL OF CHAMBER.
   The President of Council shall have direction and control of the Council
Chamber in case of any disturbance or disorderly conduct in the Chamber or so
near thereto as to disturb the orderly proceedings of Council and may cause the
same to be cleared.
(Res. 81-R-31, passed 4-6-1981)
§ 220.09  MEMBERS PRESIDING AT MEETINGS.
   The President of Council may name any member of Council to perform the
duties of the Chair during any meeting at which the President is present.
(Res. 81-R-31, passed 4-6-1981)
§ 220.10  APPOINTMENT OF COMMITTEES.
   The President of Council shall appoint all committees of Council, whether
standing or special, and the Mayor and the President shall be ex-officio
members thereof.
(Res. 81-R-31, passed 4-6-1981)
§ 220.11  STANDING COMMITTEES.
   (a)   The members of standing committees of Council shall be appointed by
the President of Council, with Council's approval, not later than the twentieth
day following Council's yearly organizational meeting. The first named member
of a committee shall be its Chairperson.
(Ord. 83-O-72, passed 11-21-1983)
   (b)   The standing committees of Council shall be as follows:
      (1)   Recreation;
      (2)   Police and Fire Divisions;
      (3)   Planning and Zoning;
      (4)   Public Relations;
      (5)   Utilities;
      (6)   Service Department;
      (7)   Finance; and
      (8)   Parliamentarian.
   (c)   Councilpersons of each committee are requested and encouraged to seek
assistance from civic minded persons in the community to work with them in
accomplishing municipal duties.
(Res. 88-R-5, passed 1-4-1988)
§ 220.12  SPECIAL COMMITTEES.
   Special committees for the consideration of special measures or matters, or
for the performance of special legislative functions, may be appointed by the
President of Council.
(Res. 81-R-31, passed 4-6-1981)
§ 220.13  COMMITTEE QUORUM.
   A majority of all members of a committee shall constitute a quorum thereof.
(Res. 81-R-31, passed 4-6-1981)
§ 220.14  DUTIES OF COMMITTEE CHAIRPERSON; EXPENSES.
   The chairperson of each committee of Council shall give notice of all
meetings of his or her committee, conduct such meetings, report matters out of
the committee and make recommendations with respect to any subject referred to
such committee. No committee or member thereof shall be permitted to incur any
expense without first receiving the consent of Council.
(Res. 81-R-31, passed 4-6-1981)
§ 220.15  GENERAL COMMITTEE.
   Meetings of the General Committee, or Committee of the Whole, may be called
by the Chairperson thereof at a regular or special meeting of Council at which
all members of Council are present. Such announcement shall be deemed due
notice of the meeting of the General Committee.
(Res. 81-R-31, passed 4-6-1981)
§ 220.16  DISCUSSIONS AT COUNCIL MEETINGS.
   When a member of Council or any other public official wishes to address
Council, he or she shall address the Chair and say "Mr. or Mrs. President". If
the President of Council wishes to recognize the member or public official, he
or she shall announce the name of the member or public official. If two members
wish to speak at the same time, the President shall name the member who is to
have the floor. No member shall speak more than twice on the same question,
except with the permission of Council. He or she shall confine himself or
herself to the question under discussion or debate. No member shall speak on
any one question, ordinance or resolution more than a total of ten minutes at a
meeting, unless additional time is granted by a majority vote of Council upon
motion.
(Res. 81-R-31, passed 4-6-1981)
§ 220.17  TRANSGRESSION OF RULES OF COUNCIL.
   If any Council member, in speaking or otherwise, transgresses the Rules of
Council, the President of Council shall call the offending member to order. A
member may, by raising a point of order, call the attention of the President to
such a transgression and the point of order shall be decided by the President
without debate.
(Res. 81-R-31, passed 4-6-1981)
§ 220.18  REFERRING MATTERS TO COMMITTEES.
   Any matter brought to the attention of Council may be referred by the
President of Council to such standing or special committee as will be, in his
or her judgment and discretion, proper. All such matters shall be investigated
and a report shall be made to Council within such time as is fixed by the
President. Upon expiration of such time, a motion shall be in order to
discharge a committee of the responsibility for further consideration of a
matter referred to it. Roll call shall be had on such motion and a majority of
the members of Council must vote favorably upon the motion before the adoption
thereof.
(Res. 81-R-31, passed 4-6-1981)
§ 220.19  PREPARATION OF LEGISLATION.
   Upon the request of the chairperson of a standing or special committee, or
of a majority of Council members, the Director of Law shall prepare legislation
dealing with specific matters. All such legislation shall be delivered to
members of the committee concerned with the subject matter of the legislation.
Such committee shall review the legislation and give its report and
recommendation not later than the second Council meeting following the referral
of such legislation to the committee.
(Res. 81-R-31, passed 4-6-1981)
§ 220.20  PROCEDURE FOR ENACTMENT OF LEGISLATION.
   (a)   Each ordinance and resolution shall be read by caption only, rather
than in its entirety, provided, however, that Council may require any reading
to be in full by a majority vote of its members.
   (b)   Each ordinance and resolution shall be read on three different days.
Council may dispense with this rule by vote of at least two thirds of its
members on a separate motion for such suspension. The Clerk of Council shall
enter such separate vote on the journal or minute books of Council, indicating
the number of yeas and nays if the vote is other than unanimous. If a motion to
suspend the rule requiring three readings is passed prior to the taking of a
vote on the passage or adoption of any legislation and an amendment is offered
and approved prior to the taking of such final vote, no further separate vote
need be taken on suspension of the rule as to three readings. If any
legislation has initially been introduced and read by caption only, then the
reading of the caption of such legislation at any subsequent meeting held on
any subsequent day shall constitute a further reading of such legislation. Upon
the third such reading of such legislation, the same may then be passed or
adopted upon the affirmative vote of a majority of the members of Council.
   (c)   An ordinance or resolution may contain an emergency clause declaring
that the same is an emergency measure necessary for the immediate preservation
of the public peace, health or safety and such clause shall contain a specific
reason for such necessity and shall require the affirmative vote of five
members of Council for its enactment. If an ordinance or resolution, which has
been read or introduced, contains an emergency clause and such ordinance or
resolution receives an affirmative vote of fewer than five, but at least a
majority of the members of Council, such ordinance or resolution shall be
deemed to have passed but shall not become effective immediately upon its
passage or adoption. It shall, however, become effective at the earliest period
allowed for nonemergency ordinances or resolutions.
(Res. 81-R-31, passed 4-6-1981; Am. Ord. 04-O-50, passed 10-18-2004)
§ 220.21  VOTING ON LEGISLATION.
   (a)   Because of the great importance of ordinances and resolutions,
especially the former, ordinances and resolutions shall be voted upon
separately. The voting on such legislation shall be entered by the Clerk of
Council in writing in the minutes as "yea" and "nay", together with the names
of members of Council voting "yea" and those voting "nay".
   (b)   Beginning with the first month of the newly elected Council, the
Clerk, when taking the vote of Council, shall poll Council alphabetically
according to the last names of members. Each succeeding month, the Clerk shall
start the roll call vote with the next name on the list. Special meetings shall
follow the same procedure as regular meetings in the months they are held.
(Res. 81-R-31, passed 4-6-1981)
§ 220.22  SECONDING OF MOTIONS.
   All motions shall require a second before consideration by Council.
(Res. 81-R-31, passed 4-6-1981)
§ 220.23  COPIES OF PENDING LEGISLATION.
   Copies of ordinances and resolutions to be presented to Council at a meeting
shall be deposited in Council member mail boxes at least five days before the
time of the meeting.
(Res. 81-R-31. Passed 4-6-1981)
§ 220.24  SUSPENSION OF RULES.
   Unless otherwise prohibited by the City Charter or state law, the rules of
Council may be suspended upon motion passed by a majority of Council present at
any meeting.
§ 220.25  PUBLIC NOTICE OF COUNCIL ACTION.
   Public notice of the enactment of ordinances and resolutions and of any
other Council act or proceeding which Council deems proper to publish shall be
given, until otherwise determined by Council resolution, by posting copies
thereof in the following three public places in the city:  Kirtland Municipal
Center (City Hall), 9301 Chillicothe Road; Kirtland Public Library, 9258
Chillicothe Road; and Kirtland Community Center, 7900 Euclid-Chardon Road. The
notices shall be posted for not fewer than 15 consecutive days following
Council action unless otherwise determined by a vote of Council.
(Res. 81-R-31, passed 4-6-1981; Am. Ord. 08-O-15, passed 7-7-2008)
§ 220.26  AGENDA OF COUNCIL MEETINGS.
   The Clerk of Council shall prepare an agenda or schedule of matters to be
brought before Council. Such agenda shall be available to members of Council
five days before its scheduled meeting and shall be posted in the lobby of City
Hall. The members of Council shall cooperate with the Clerk by providing
information (including ordinances and resolutions) needed to prepare the
agenda. The agenda shall be finalized on the sixth day preceding the Council
meeting for which the agenda was prepared.
(Res. 81-R-31, passed 4-6-1981)
§ 220.27  RECEIVING MOTIONS WHEN QUESTION IS BEFORE COUNCIL.
   (a)   When a question or a proposition is before Council or under debate or
when a motion has been made, no other motions shall be received except the
following:
      (1)   To adjourn;
      (2)   To table the motion;
      (3)   To request that discussion end and that any motion being considered
be voted on (previous question);
      (4)   To postpone any action on a motion until some stated future time;
      (5)   To refer the proposal to a standing or special committee or to the
Director of Law; and
      (6)   To amend the main motion.
   (b)   The motions enumerated in subsections (1) through (6) hereof shall
have precedence in the order in which they are enumerated. Motions listed in
subsections (1) through (3) hereof shall be decided without debate. Because a
motion is undebatable, it does not follow that while it is pending the Chair
may not permit a question or an explanation. The distinction between debate and
asking questions or making brief suggestions should be kept clearly in mind
and, when the latter will aid the assembly in transacting business, the Chair
should permit it before taking the vote on an undebatable question.
(Res. 81-R-31, passed 4-6-1981)
§ 220.28  MOTIONS TO RECONSIDER.
   A motion to reconsider a subject that has been acted upon favorably must be
made before adjournment of the session of Council at which such action was
taken. A motion to reconsider any other subject may be made not later than the
next regular meeting after action on such subject was taken. A motion to
reconsider may be made only by a member who voted with the winning or
prevailing side. A motion to reconsider shall be in order at any time, except
when a motion on some other subject is standing. A motion to reconsider, being
laid on the table, may be taken up and acted upon at any time when Council is
engaged in the transaction of new or miscellaneous business. No motion to
reconsider shall be made more than once on a matter or subject and the same
number of votes shall be required to reconsider an action of Council as was
required to pass or adopt the same.
(Res. 81-R-31, passed 4-6-1981)
§ 220.29  MOTION THAT MATTER BE TAKEN FROM COMMITTEE.
   When an ordinance, resolution, petition or other matter has been referred to
a committee, and such committee fails, within a reasonable time, to report or
to offer a valid reason for its failure to report, any member of Council shall
have the right to make a motion that such ordinance, resolution, petition or
matter be taken from such committee and that the same be laid before Council
for action. Such motion shall be decided without debate, provided that the
member making the motion may briefly state his or her reasons for the motion.
The chairperson of such committee shall report to the Clerk of Council the
progress being made so that the Clerk can report it in the minutes.
(Res. 81-R-31, passed 4-6-1981)
§ 220.30  AMENDMENT OF LEGISLATION.
   A proposed ordinance or resolution may be amended at any time, but if such
amendment is made after the second reading of such proposed ordinance or
resolution, the ordinance or resolution shall again be read, as amended, as the
second reading.
(Res. 81-R-31, passed 4-6-1981)
§ 220.31  AMENDMENT OF COUNCIL RULES.
   The Rules of Council, codified herein as §§
220.01 through
220.30, may be amended or altered, or new rules may be adopted, at any time,
but in the case of an amendment, alteration or adoption of new rules, the
matter shall be referred to the proper committee for report, and any such
amendment, alteration or new rules shall be read on three different days,
unless the rules are suspended by a two-thirds vote of the members of Council.
Any such amendment, alteration or adoption of new rules shall be by a majority
vote of the members.
(Res. 81-R-31, passed 4-6-1981; Am. Ord. 04-O-50, passed 10-18-2004)
CHAPTER 222:  ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS
Section
222.01   Posting places.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Amendment of legislation - see ADM.
220.30
   Effective date of ordinances and resolutions - see CHTR.
Art. I, § 9
   Enactment of legislation - see ADM.
220.20
   Form and method of enactment of ordinances - see CHTR.
Art. I, § 8(h)
   Preparation of legislation - see ADM.
220.19
   Voting on legislation - see ADM.
220.21
§ 222.01  POSTING PLACES.
   The following public places in the city are hereby determined to be proper
and public places for the posting of all enactments of ordinances, resolutions
and any other Council acts or proceedings:
   (a)   Kirtland Municipal Center (City Hall), 9301 Chillicothe Road;
   (b)   Kirtland Public Library, 9258 Chillicothe Road; and
   (c)   Kirtland Community Center, 7900 Euclid-Chardon Road.
(Ord. 04-O-46, passed 8-23-2004)
TITLE SIX - ADMINISTRATION
CHAPTER 230:  MAYOR
Section
230.01   Administrative Assistant to the Mayor.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Disposition of fines and fees collected by Mayor - see Ohio R.C. 733.40
   Elections - see
CHTR. Art. IV; ADM.
Ch. 210
   State law provisions - see Ohio R.C. 733.02 et seq.
   The Mayor generally - see CHTR.
Art. II
§ 230.01  ADMINISTRATIVE ASSISTANT TO THE MAYOR.
   There is hereby established the position of Administrative Assistant to the
Mayor, with the following duties:
   (a)   Assist the Mayor in maintaining a sound administrative structure
consistent with the City Charter and the legislation of the city;
   (b)   Assist the Mayor in administrative procedures essential to the
efficient operation of the city;
   (c)   Assist the Mayor in directing the activities of city employees and
reviewing the actions of subordinates in accordance with city policy; and
   (d)   Assist the Mayor in such other official action as may be reasonably
necessary to carry out the objectives of administration of the city government.
(Res. 76-R-14, passed 1-5-1976)
CHAPTER 232:  CITY CLERK
Section
Editor's note:
   There are no sections in
Chapter 232. This chapter has been established to provide a place for cross
references and any future legislation.
CHAPTER 234:  DEPARTMENT OF LAW
Section
Editor's note:
   There are no sections in
Chapter 234. This chapter has been established to provide a place for cross
references and any future legislation.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Director of Law - see CHTR.
Art. II-A, § 5
   Establishment - see CHTR.
Art. II-A, § 1
CHAPTER 236:  DEPARTMENT OF FINANCE
Section
236.01   Duties of Director.
236.02   Expenditures; competitive bidding.
236.03   Expenditures by department heads.
236.04   Withdrawal of funds by officials.
236.05   Furnishing services or equipment to city. (Repealed)
236.06   Cooperative purchasing.
236.07   Fees, professional, consulting and related expenses required from
applicants or appellants.
236.08   Petty cash fund.
236.09   Zoning permit fees.
236.10   Disposition of surplus municipal personal property.
236.11   Recreation Park Development Fund.
236.12   Annual road plan.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Deposit of public monies - see Ohio R.C. 117.17
   Director of Finance - see CHTR.
Art. II-A, § 4
   Earned Income Tax - see B.R. & T.
Ch. 882
   Establishment - see CHTR.
Art. II-A, § 1
   Law Enforcement Trust Fund - see ADM.
244.06
   Uniform Depository Act - see Ohio R.C. Ch. 135
§ 236.01  DUTIES OF DIRECTOR.
   (a)   The Director of Finance shall provide Council with the following
information at the second regular Council meeting of each month:
      (1)   Fund balances as of the end of the preceding month;
      (2)   A breakdown of receipts for the preceding month and year to date,
as compared to budget by major income categories;
      (3)   A breakdown of expenditures for the preceding month and year to
date, as compared to budget by major expense categories; and
      (4)   A list of funds encumbered but not actually disbursed.
   (b)   The Director is hereby directed and authorized to pay for medical
examinations as required by Ohio R.C. 2907.28.
(Ord. 73-O-38, passed 4-30-1973; Am. Ord. 74-O-36, passed 1-21-1974; Am. Ord.
76-O-90, passed 9-7-1976)
§ 236.02  EXPENDITURES; COMPETITIVE BIDDING.
   (a)   If the probable cost of an expenditure by the city will be fifty
thousand dollars ($50,000.00) or more, the city shall follow the formal bidding
requirements of subsection (e) hereof.
   (b)   If the probable cost of an expenditure by the city will be more than
twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) but less than fifty thousand dollars
($50,000.00), Council may authorize the Mayor or a person designated by him or
her to take informal bids, and Council may award the contract to the lowest and
best informal bidder.
   (c)   Expenditures of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) or less may
be made by the Mayor without the approval of Council, but the taking of
informal bids shall be used when such procedure would tend to conserve public
funds.
(Ord. 99-O-1, passed 2-1-1999; Am. Ord. 13-O-37, passed 7-24-2013)
   (d)   All expenditures made under this section must be in conformity with
the general appropriations ordinance and shall have the approval of the Finance
Director.
   (e)   The formal bidding process shall be carried out as follows.
      (1)   The Mayor or a person designated by him or her shall prepare or
cause to be prepared specifications for the articles or services required and
shall advertise the requirements of the city for the same for at least two
consecutive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the city or in a
professional or trade magazine appropriate for such purpose, inviting suppliers
to tender sealed bids in writing for the furnishing of such articles or
services, such bids to be publicly opened not less than 15 days following the
date of the first advertisement, at a time and place specified in the current
published notice.
      (2)   The formal bids shall be opened and tabulated publicly at the time
and place specified in the advertisement for bids, an investigation of the
responsibility of the bidders shall be made by the Mayor as he or she may deem
necessary. The Mayor shall report to Council the bids and the results of any
investigation of the responsibility of the bidders and shall recommend to
Council the selection of the lowest and best bid or, if the Mayor determines
that the interest of the city would be better served, the rejection of all
bids.
      (3)   Council shall accept or reject the bids received under this
procedure.
   (f)   Competitive bidding shall not be required where a contract involves
performance of personal services of a specialized nature requiring the exercise
of a peculiar skill and aptitude, such as, but not limited to, engineers,
architects, legal services, accounting services and the like. Further,
competitive bidding shall not be required where a two-thirds vote of Council
determines that there exists a real and present emergency arising in connection
with the maintenance and repair of a municipal utility, the operation and
maintenance of the Department of Public Service, the Fire and Police Divisions
and/or any other department, division or commission of the city.
(Ord. 90-O-20, passed 3-19-1990)
   (g)   Notwithstanding any of the provisions of this section, no contract for
the purchase of articles or services at a cost of more than twenty-five
thousand dollars ($25,000.00) shall be made unless Council has, by ordinance or
resolution, authorized and directed the Mayor to do so. Contracts for the
purchase of articles or services costing more than twenty-five thousand dollars
($25,000.00) shall be submitted to the Director of Finance for certification as
to the availability of funds.
(Ord. 99-O-1, passed 2-1-1999; Am. Ord. 13-O-37, passed 7-24-2013)
§ 236.03  EXPENDITURES BY DEPARTMENT HEADS.
   All department heads may approve expenditures up to, but not exceeding, five
hundred dollars ($500.00).
(Ord. 99-O-1, passed 2-1-1999)
§ 236.04  WITHDRAWAL OF FUNDS BY OFFICIALS.
   (a)   Any two of the following officers may execute checks or other
withdrawals of funds of the city from the city bank account: the Mayor, the
Director of Finance and the President of Council.
   (b)   The Mayor, the Director, the President of Council and the Clerk of
Council are hereby authorized to execute any document required by the bank to
permit such withdrawals.
(Res. 74-O-24, passed 1-7-1974)
§ 236.05  FURNISHING SERVICES OR EQUIPMENT TO CITY.(Repealed)
Editor's note:
   Section
236.05 was repealed by Ord. 83-O-50, passed July 5, 1983.
§ 236.06  COOPERATIVE PURCHASING.
   (a)   Department of Administrative Services, Office of State Purchasing.
      (1)   The Mayor hereby requests authority, in the name of the city, to
participate in state contracts which the Department of Administrative Services,
Office of State Purchasing, has entered into for the purchase of supplies,
services, equipment and certain materials pursuant to Ohio R.C. 125.04.
      (2)   The Mayor is hereby authorized to agree, in the name of the city,
to be bound by all contract terms and conditions as the Department of
Administrative Services, Office of State Purchasing, prescribes. Such terms and
conditions may include a reasonable fee to cover the administrative costs which
the Department incurs as a result of the city's participation in a contract.
Further, the Mayor does hereby agree to be bound by all terms and conditions.
      (3)   The Mayor is hereby authorized to agree, in the name of the city,
to directly pay the vendor, under each such state contract in which it
participates, for items it receives pursuant to the contract, and the Mayor
does hereby agree to directly pay the vendor.
      (4)   The Clerk of Council is hereby authorized to forward a certified
copy of this subsection to the Department of Administrative Services,
Administrator, Office of State Purchasing, upon request that this subsection be
filed.
(Res. 88-R-11, passed 2-16-1988)
   (b)   Ohio Department of Transportation.
      (1)   The Mayor hereby requests authority, in the name of the city, to
participate in contracts of the Ohio Department of Transportation for the
purchase of machinery, materials, supplies or other articles which the
Department has entered into pursuant to Ohio R.C. 5513.01(B).
      (2)   The Mayor is hereby authorized to agree, in the name of the city,
to be bound by all terms and conditions as the Director of Transportation
prescribes.
      (3)   The Mayor is hereby authorized to agree, in the name of the city,
to directly pay the vendor, under each such contract of the Department in which
the city participates, for the items it receives pursuant to the contract.
      (4)   The city hereby agrees to hold the Director of Transportation and
the Ohio Department of Transportation harmless for any claim or dispute arising
out of participation in a contract pursuant to Ohio R.C. 5513.01(B).
      (5)   The Clerk of Council is hereby authorized to forward a certified
copy of this subsection to the Ohio Department of Transportation, 1980 W. Broad
Street, Columbus, Ohio, 43223, requesting that this subsection be filed.
(Res. 88-R-74, passed 10-17-1988; Am. Res. 00-R-32, passed 6-19-2000)
§ 236.07  FEES, PROFESSIONAL CONSULTING AND RELATED EXPENSES REQUIRED FROM
APPLICANTS OR APPELLANTS.
   (a)   Fees and expenses.  In addition to all other fees required by the
Kirtland Codified Ordinances, an applicant shall deposit, as provided in
division (c) below, the fees and funds to pay for estimated expected expenses
described in division (b) set forth below when making an application for any of
the hereinafter described purposes unless the City Council, Board, Commission
or Administrator involved determines that, by the nature of the application it
is not necessary to do so.
   (b)   Purposes.  The purposes for which fees and/or funds are to be
deposited shall include but not be limited to applications for approval of,
permits for, amendments to or variances related to the following:
      (1)   Subdivisions as provided for in Chapters
1240 through
1248.
      (2)   Excavations, landfills and gradings as provided for in
Chapter 1442.
      (3)   Floodplain management as provided for in
Chapter 1446.
      (4)   Site and grading plans as provided for in
Chapter 1452.
      (5)   Rezoning of land, zoning map amendment, or zoning text change as
provided for in Chapters
1262 and
1299.
      (6)   Comprehensive Plan of the City of Kirtland as provided for in §
1226.01 of the Kirtland Code of Ordinances and R.C. § 713.02.
      (7)   Variance or appeal to the Board of Zoning Appeals as provided for
in
Chapter 1264.
      (8)   Variance from the Planning and Zoning Commission as same is
provided for in the Kirtland Codified Ordinances.
      (9)   Telephone and electric service as provided in
Chapter 1248.
      (10)   In any application or procedure, including those referred to
hereinabove, for which the Board of Zoning Appeals, Planning and Zoning
Commission, Council, or the Mayor, or other administrative official or agency,
to whom the application is made, determines that, by nature of the application,
the retention of expert and/or professional consulting services are required to
assist in providing relevant evidence and making a fully informed
determination. Such services may be contractually retained by the city for a
fee calculated upon an hourly rate plus reasonable expenses or a fixed fee plus
reasonable expenses.
      (11)   Securing the payment of advertising or other expenses that will be
incurred by the city in the processing of such a request.
   (c)   Deposit of fees and funds. Applicant shall first deposit the required
fees and/or funds in a special account with the Director of Finance, to defray
such fees and expenses as are related to the applicant's request.
   (d)   Schedule of fees.  The following is a non-exclusive schedule of fees
which are in addition to the normal or usual filing fee or any other fee
provided for in the Kirtland Codified Ordinances.
 
 Code    Type of Proposal Fee or
 Section                  Deposit Note
(1)    208.02(b)(3)   Costs for public records
   A              Paper copies - cost per page                 $0.05     *1
   B              Computer files on compact disc - cost per    $1.00     *1
                      disc
(2)    440.01(c)      Heavy vehicles on local roads
   A              Permit fee                                   $5.00     *1
   B              Police Dept. Supervision - charge per hour   $10.00    *1
   C              Bond to compensate for any damage to road    T.B.D.    *4
                      Reclaim vehicle willfully left on private or
(3)    452.05(c)(3 )  public property - fee paid to storage                  *5
                      facility
(4)    452.055        Reclaim of vehicle ordered into storage -              *5
                      fee paid to storage facility
(5)    630.02(f)      Filing fees for sweepstakes terminal device            *5
                      - filed with Attorney General
                      Certificate of compliance for sweepstakes
(6)    630.02(g)(2 )  terminal device - filing fee paid to                   *5
                      Attorney General
(7)    672.05(b)      Dangerous ordnance
   A              License to possess dangerous ordnance        $50.00    *1
   B              Temporary permit for dangerous ordnance      $5.00     *1
(8)    672.10(e)(5 )  Permit for public fireworks exhibition (no
                      fee specified - Council can prescribe fee)
(9)    802.02         Business license                             $15.00    *1
(10)   824.05         Application for solicitors license or        $150.00   *1
                      temporary business license
(11)   826.02         Garage sale permit                           $3.00     *1
(12)   834.04         Game rooms and amusement devices
   A              Annual fee for license                       $100.00   *1
   B              Annual fee for each amusement device         $50.00    *1
(13)   836.01         Gas and oil wells permit - issued by ODNR              *5
(14)   870.06         Sexually oriented business license - annual  $200.00   *1
                      fee
(15)   872.01         Video service provider (VSP) fee - 5 percent T.B.D.    *1
                      of gross revenues
(16)   1022.02(c)( 1) Bond for excavations - not less than $300    T.B.D.    *3
(17)   1022.02(c)( 2) Blanket bond for excavations - not less than T.B.D.    *3
                      $2,500
(18)   1024.01(b)     Culvert permit and inspection                $50.00    *1
(19)   1026.02        Ditch enclosure permit and inspection        $150.00   *1
(20)   1028.02(a)     Drive apron - other than one and two family  $100.00   *1
                      dwellings
(21)   1028.02(b)     Drive apron - one and two family dwellings   $25.00    *1
(22)   1040.06        Water service rates (Aqua Ohio)                        *5
(23)   1040.08        Extension of water mains; related facilities           *5
                      charges (Aqua Ohio)
                      Sanitary sewer tap-in permit for Hickory
(24)   1042.03(b)     Hill, Rockwood Ledges and Shenandoah package $1,000.00 *1
                      plants
(25)   1062.02        Cemetery fees
   A              Resident per grave price                     $500.00   *1
   B              Nonresident per grave price                  $1,000.00 *1
   C              New deed and/or transfer fee                 $25.00    *1
   D              Burial fee - adult weekday                   $500.00   *1
   E              Burial fee - adult Saturday                  $750.00   *1
   F              Burial fee - infant weekday                  $200.00   *1
   G              Burial fee - infant Saturday                 $350.00   *1
   H              Cremation fee - weekday urn                  $100.00   *1
   I              Cremation fee - Saturday urn                 $250.00   *1
   J              Cremation fee - weekday vault                $250.00   *1
   K              Cremation fee - Saturday vault               $350.00   *1
   L              Disinterment fee - weekday adult (no         $1,200.00 *1
                      Saturday or holiday disinterments)
   M              Disinterment fee - weekday infant            $400.00   *1
   N              Disinterment fee - weekday urn               $200.00   *1
   O              Disinterment fee - weekday vault             $350.00   *1
   P              Foundation fee - flush headstone - per sq.   $50.00    *1
                      ft.(rounded up to nearest foot)
   Q              Foundation fee - above ground headstone -    $70.00    *1
                      per sq. ft. (rounded up to nearest foot)
   R              Foundation fee - 2' x 1' flush               $100.00   *1
   S              Foundation fee - 2' x 1' above ground        $140.00   *1
   T              Foundation fee - 3' x 1' flush               $150.00   *1
   U              Foundation fee - 3' x 1' above ground        $210.00   *1
   V              Foundation fee - 4' x 1' flush               $200.00   *1
   W              Foundation fee - 4' x 1' above ground        $280.00   *1
   X              Foundation fee - 5' x 1' flush               $250.00   *1
   Y              Foundation fee - 5' x 1' above ground        $350.00   *1
   Z              Headstone with retractable vase - additional $25.00    *1
                      fee
   A              Headstone foundation removal                 $100.00   *1
   B              Retractable vase installation next to        $25.00    *1
                      headstone
(26)   1064.03        False alarms - third and additional false    $50.00    *1
                      alarms annually
(27)   1064.05        Burglary or fire monitoring device installed
                      or monitored by the city
   A              Per month rental for private residence       $5.00     *1
   B              Per month rental for other user              $10.00    *1
                      Ambulance and rescue squad service (non-
(28)   1066.01        residents) - billed according to level of              *1
                      service
(29)   1240.06        Copy of Subdivision Regulations              $10.00    *1
(30)   1242.05(a)     Preliminary plat filing fee 0-10 lots        $100.00   *1
                      Each additional lot in excess of 10          $5.00     *1
(31)   1242.05(b)     Minor subdivision fee                        $25.00    *1
                      Improvement plan review and inspection
(32)   1242.05(c)     deposit amount to be determined by City      T.B.D.    *2
                      Engineer
(33)   1248.01        Guarantee for subdivision improvements       T.B.D.    *4
(34)   1262.03(e)     Zoning permit for commercial and industrial
                      developments:
   A              All developments containing less than 20,000 $250.00   *1
                      square feet of floor area.
   B              All developments containing between 20,000   $500.00   *1
                      and 100,000 square feet of floor area.
   C              All developments containing more than        $1,000.00 *1
                      100,000 square feet of floor area.
(35)   1262.08        Cash bond for construction of building or    $1,200.00 *3
                      structure
(36)   1264.11        Board of Zoning Appeals
   A              Application for residential use appeal or    $150.00   *1
                      variance
   B              Application for non-residential use appeal   $250.00   *1
                      or variance
   C              Deposit for consultant review and expert     T.B.D.    *2
                      witness
(37)   1268.04(i)( 4) Permit to display used vehicle for sale on   $5.00     *1
                      residential property
(38)   1285.02(b)     Application for zoning permit for            $250.00   *1
                      conditional use
(39)   1292.04        Wireless communication facilities
   A              New wireless communication tower             $2,000.00 *1
   B              New wireless communication antenna           $500.00   *1
   C              Deposit for consultant review                T.B.D.    *2
(40)   1292.05(e)     Co-location, removal or replacement of
                      antenna on wireless tower
   A              Administrative approval only needed          $100.00   *1
   B              Planning and Zoning Commission approval      $500.00   *1
                      needed
(41)   1294.10(a)( 1) Riparian setback appeal or variance request  $100.00   *1
(42)   1299.03(b)( 9) Zoning, rezoning, text change or map
                      amendment
   A              Application requested by property owner      $250.00   *1
   B              Deposit for planning consultant review       T.B.D.    *2
(43)   1442.04(b)     Excavations, landfills and grading
   A              Application for excavations, landfills and   $250.00   *1
                      grading permit
   B              Plan review and inspection deposit amount to T.B.D.    *2
                      be determined by City Engineer
(44)   1442.12(a)( 1) Appeal of decision under                     $100.00   *1
                      Chapter 1442
(45)   1446.03(d)( 6) Flood plain management applications.
   A              Flood plain management application.          $100.00   *1
   B              Review of a fill, house, addition, or        $500.00   *2
                      accessory structure
   C              Review of a watercourse alteration or        $2,000.00 *2
                      relocation
   D              Review of hydrologic and/or hydraulic        $5,000.00 *2
                      engineering analysis
   E              Any appeal or variance associated with       $1,000.00 *2
                      floodplain development
(46)   1448.02(b)     Moving of buildings
   A              One-story wood frame across a public         $100.00   *1
                      thoroughfare
   B              More than one-story wood frame across a      $200.00   *1
                      public thoroughfare
   C              Any type of masonry across a public          $300.00   *1
                      thoroughfare
   D              From one lot to another without going on a   $50.00    *1
                      public thoroughfare
   E              From one location to another on the same lot $25.00    *1
(47)   1448.03        Compliance bond relating to moving of        $25,000   *4
                      buildings
(48)   1452.05(a)     Site and grading plan applications (house    $500.00   *2
                      construction)
(49)   1460.06        Licensing and/or registration of contractors $50.00    *1
                      (yearly)
(50)   1464.11        Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan review  $500.00   *1
                      fee
(51)   1464.12        Erosion and sediment control compliance
                      additional fee
   A              Less than 1 acre disturbed                   $3,500.00 *3
   B              Each additional acre disturbed or fraction   $2,500.00 *3
                      thereof
(52)   1466.14        Stormwater Management Plan review fee        $500.00   *2
(53)   1466.15        Stormwater Management inspection and         T.B.D.    *3
                      compliance bond
(54)   1610.13        Permits issued by Fire Chief or Municipal    $25.00    *1
                      Fire Safety Inspector
(55)                 All other applications requiring consulting  T.B.D.    *2
                      expenses
Notes:
   T.B.D. To be determined by review consultant based on the complexity of the
project
   1.   Non-refundable fee
   2.   Review deposit. Any unused review deposits will be returned to the
applicant. If the deposited review funds are insufficient to cover the city's
expenses, review will be suspended until additional review monies are deposited
with the city.
   3.   Cash compliance bond deposit. Compliance deposits will be returned to
the applicant when the project is satisfactorily completed, soil stabilized,
roadways repaired, and any dispute resolved. If the deposited compliance bond
funds are depleted due to any claim, the applicant shall deposit additional
monies with the city upon receipt of an invoice from the Department of Finance.
Failure to deposit the additional funds may result in a stop work order from
the Mayor and/or a lien on the property.
   4.   Cash or Surety bond
   5.   Fees collected by other agencies - see agency for current fees.
 
   (e)   Application/or a variance or an appeal to the Board of Zoning
Appeals.  Notwithstanding the provisions of division (d)(36) of this section,
when an applicant makes application to the Board of Zoning Appeals for a
variance or to file an appeal to the Board of Zoning Appeals, the applicant or
appellant shall deposit funds to defray city expenses in the manner of, and
pursuant to, the rules established in divisions (a), (b) and (c) of this
section.
   (f)   Payment for professional consulting services.  If professional
consulting services are rendered by the City Engineer, the City Planner and/or
any other expert, professional or consultant not already employed by the city,
the same shall be rendered and billed at prevailing contractual hourly rates
for such consulting services or for a reasonable fixed fee to which the city
has agreed. The applicant or appellant shall be responsible, as hereinabove
provided, for the payment of the referred to fees.
   (g)   Special accounts for applicants.  The Director of Finance shall
establish special accounts within the city's funds on behalf of applicants and,
upon authorization of the Mayor, such applicant shall pay to the city, by way
of reimbursement, or directly to the person rendering such services, all
expenses incurred in connection with the applicant's business or proceedings
with the city. Should any applicant's special account have a balance of less
than 20 percent of the original deposit, the Mayor shall request in writing
that the applicant provide an additional deposit so that the balance shall then
equal the original deposit required. If such request is approved or disapproved
by the city, or withdrawn by the applicant, all funds remaining in such special
deposit account, after payment of all lawful charges thereupon, shall promptly
be returned to the applicant. The Director of Finance shall furnish an
accounting of charges to such account, at any reasonable time, upon request of
the applicant and upon final dispersal.
   (h)   Failure to post deposit.  Upon failure of an applicant to post deposit
funds to defray municipal costs or expenses, as hereinabove provided, the city
may dismiss an application.
   (i)   Deposit does not ensure approval.  Nothing contained in this section
shall obligate the city to grant its approval of an application or be construed
as consideration therefor. Rather, the purpose of the deposits is to furnish
the city with necessary technical data, information or opinion from
professional or expert consultants, when requested or required by it on
specific applications, or to defray necessary advertising and/or other
administrative expenses, regardless of the outcome of the city's final
decision, so that the city will continue to be governed by its officers'
informed decisions upon each specific application or appeal.
   (j)   Application of section.  This section is not intended to repeal,
abrogate or impair any other ordinance relating to fees or expenses to be paid
by an applicant, and not specifically provided for hereinabove, but is deemed
to be supplemental thereto. However, in the event of any conflict between this
section and any other section of the code, this section will control.
(Ord. 17-O-20, passed 7-3-2017)
§ 236.08  PETTY CASH FUND.
   (a)   The Director of Finance is hereby authorized and directed to take all
steps necessary to establish and maintain the following petty cash funds in the
amount of two hundred dollars ($200.00) to meet the daily needs of the
Department of Finance to make change and minor expenditures; and in the amount
of four hundred dollars ($400.00) to meet the daily needs of the Kirtland
Community Center to make change and minor expenditures.
   (b)   The Director of Finance shall be responsible to establish and maintain
controls and oversight to insure the proper utilization of and accounting for
the use of these funds by the Department of Finance and the Kirtland Community
Center and the Recreation and Senior Coordinator of the Community Center shall
be responsible to comply with and conform to the controls, oversight and
accounting required by the Director of Finance.
(Ord. 94-O-17, passed 3-21-1994; Am. Ord. 10-O-56, passed 11-3-2010)
§ 236.09  ZONING PERMIT FEES.
   (a)   Each application for a zoning permit shall be accompanied by the
required fee, as follows:
 
Use or Activity Fee
New single-family dwelling             $100.00
New duplex dwelling                    $200.00
Additions to a dwelling (including     $50.00 up to 1,000 sq. ft. and $5.00 per
decks)                                 100 sq. ft. over 1,000 sq. ft.
New auxiliary building                 Minimum fee (8 ft. x 8 ft. or less)
                                       $10.00
Up to 300 sq. ft. (over 8 ft. x 8 ft.) $25.00
301 sq. ft. to 500 sq. ft.             $40.00
501 sq. ft. to 1,000 sq. ft.           $50.00 plus $5.00 for each additional
                                       100 sq. ft. over 501 sq. ft.
                                       $100.00 plus $10.00 for each additional
                                       100 sq. ft. over 1,000 sq. ft. (Any
Over 1,000 sq. ft.                     auxiliary building over 1,000 sq. ft.
                                       must be referred to the Planning and
                                       Zoning Commission for approval prior to
                                       issuance of a permit.)
Additions to auxiliary building        Same schedule as any new auxiliary
                                       building.
New multifamily dwelling (2 or more    $100.00/fam. unit
families)
Additions to multifamily dwelling      $50.00/fam. unit
Commercial or business building and    $5.00/100 sq. ft. ($150.00 minimum fee).
additions
Removal of earth material              $250.00
Sign                                   $50.00
Swimming pools (in-ground)             $75.00
Swimming pools (above-ground)          $35.00
Change of use                          $50.00
Residential fences                     $25.00
Commercial fences                      $50.00
Sewer line installation                $50.00
Sewer line inspection                  $200.00
Driveway apron                         See §
                                       1028.02
Driveway culvert and road inspection   $50.00
Erosion control inspection fee         $100.00 per house and $100.00 per sublot
 
   (b)   The fee shall not be refunded if the permit is refused.
   (c)   In the event that a fee is not provided for in subsection (a) of this
section, the applicant shall be charged a minimum fee of forty dollars ($40.00)
with the application. An additional fee shall be paid upon granting the permit,
which additional fee shall be equal to the actual cost to the city for
approving and issuing the permit and the anticipated costs for inspection.
(Ord. 11-O-10, passed 3-21-2011)
§ 236.10  DISPOSITION OF SURPLUS MUNICIPAL PERSONAL PROPERTY.
   The Mayor is hereby granted the authority and responsibility to provide for
the orderly disposition of surplus municipal property. The authority and
responsibility shall be exercised in the following manner.
   (a)   The Mayor shall require department heads to periodically prepare an
itemized list of surplus municipal personal property which is no longer useful
or necessary for any current municipal purpose. The list shall be in such form
so as to separately list all items determined by the Mayor (or appropriate
appointee), or department head to have a fair market value of more than one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00), and all items determined by the Mayor (or
appropriate appointee) or department head, to have a fair market value of one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or less.
   (b)   For those items on the surplus property list that have been determined
to have a fair market value of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or less, the
Mayor shall order the disposal of, or by executive order require the
appropriate department head to dispose of, the property upon such terms and
conditions as the Mayor shall deem to be appropriate and in the best interests
of the city.
   (c)   For those items on the surplus property list that have been determined
to have a fair market value of more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), the
Mayor shall submit a list of items to be disposed of to the City Council for
approval by resolution, and the items shall be disposed of in one of the
following ways:
      (1)   Sealed bids after advertising at least one time in a newspaper of
general circulation in the city or after advertising for at least one week on
the city’s website;
      (2)   Public auction after advertising at least one time in a newspaper
of general circulation in the city or after advertising for one week on the
city’s website;
      (3)   Through a commercial or government auction website with
simultaneous announcement in a newspaper of general circulation in the city or
on the city’s website;
      (4)   Trade-in on the purchase of replacement product; or
      (5)   Pursuant to a sale or trade to another governmental agency as set
forth in subsection (e) hereinafter.
   (d)   If, during preparation of the surplus municipal personal property
list, the Mayor, after obtaining the opinion of the appropriate department
head, determines that certain municipal personal property has little or no
value, the Mayor is authorized to cause such property to be properly recycled,
disposed of, or sold as scrap.
   (e)   The Mayor may sell or trade surplus municipal property to another
governmental agency, without the necessity of advertising, bids, or auction
sale, pursuant to the following procedure.
      (1)   The Mayor shall notify City Council of the property to be sold or
traded, its estimated fair market value, and the consideration to be received
for the property.
      (2)   If the estimated fair market value of the property is greater than
one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), City Council must approve the transaction by
resolution.
   (f)   All funds or anything of value received as a consequence of surplus
sale or disposal under this section shall be duly reported to, processed, and
accounted for by the Department of Finance.
(Ord. 14-O-45, passed 7-28-2014)
§ 236.11  RECREATION PARK DEVELOPMENT FUND.
   (a)   There is hereby created a fund to be known as the Recreation Park
Development Fund. All funds received by the city for recreational purposes by
donations, impact fees, or otherwise, together with all funds appropriated by
City Council for recreation capital improvements and/or development shall be
paid into the Recreation Park Development Fund. The Finance Director shall make
payment from such funds upon presentation of vouchers or orders by proper city
officials in accordance with law. Such disbursements shall be made for the
purposes of planning, constructing, and equipping of improvements to the
recreation parks within the city.
   (b)   The Finance Director is hereby authorized and directed to make
application to the appropriate agencies of the State of Ohio for approval of
the creation of the Recreation Improvement Fund pursuant to the provisions of
Ohio R.C. § 5705.12.
(Ord. 15-O-6, passed 2-18-2015)
§ 236.12  ANNUAL ROAD PLAN.
   (a)   The Mayor shall annually furnish and present to the City Council, a
Comprehensive Road Plan to be included with the submission of the annual budget
referred to in
Article II § 7 of the Kirtland City Charter.
   (b)   To facilitate the annual preparation of a Comprehensive Road Plan, the
Mayor, is authorized to retain the services of such professionals and/or expert
consultants as are determined necessary by the Mayor to formulate a reliable
Comprehensive Road Plan and to expend such municipal funds as are necessary to
compensate such professional and/or expert consultants for that purpose.
   (c)   The Comprehensive Road Plan at the minimum shall contain the
following:
      (1)   A Pavement Condition Rating (PCR) Report performed in accordance
with the Ohio Department of Transportation to a pavement Condition Reading
Manual;
      (2)   The anticipated available funding for the upcoming paving and road
maintenance season;
      (3)   A listing of roads expected to be reconstructed, repaired and
maintained for each construction and repair season;
      (4)   The funding mechanisms and/or means by which the anticipated and
upcoming road repairs will be funded;
      (5)   A ten-year Road Project Plan, that prioritizes all roads and
estimated costs and funding mechanisms by year.
   (d)   Annually, the administration and City Council shall determine the
method and funding to accomplish the work set forth in the Annual Road Plan.
   (e)   Prior to commencement of any road project proposed to be performed by
the city Public Works Department, the cost of which will exceed the amount of
the twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000) as specified in §
236.02(c), a resolution for an appropriation request shall be submitted to
Council for approval. The appropriation request shall contain an estimate for
material, labor, and benefits for the work to be performed by the city Public
Works Department and at least two alternate estimates for each project. Upon
completion of each road project, a detailed summary of the actual costs shall
be submitted to Council for review.
(Ord. 18-O-18, passed 8-20-2018)
CHAPTER 238:  DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SERVICE
Section
238.01   Public Service Administrator.
238.02   Sewage Treatment Division.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Director of Public Service - see CHTR.
Art. II-A, § 3
   Establishment - see CHTR.
Art. II-A, § 1
   Garbage and rubbish collection and disposal - see S.U. & P.S.
Ch. 1060
   Sewers and private disposal systems - see S.U. & P.S.
Ch. 1042
   State law provisions - see Ohio R.C. 735.01 et seq.
   Streets - see S.U. & P.S.
Ch. 1020
   Water - see S.U. & P.S.
Ch. 1040
§ 238.01  PUBLIC SERVICE ADMINISTRATOR.
   (a)   The Mayor is hereby authorized and directed to hire a suitable person
to serve in the capacity of Public Service Administrator within the Department
of Public Service, according to job specifications now on file in the office of
the Mayor.
(Res. 77-R-87, passed 9-6-1977)
   (b)   The Public Service Administrator shall serve in the Department for an
indefinite period and shall continue to serve until he or she resigns or
otherwise removes himself or herself from office or is removed as provided in
subsection (c) hereof.
   (c)   The Mayor may remove the Public Service Administrator from office for
just cause; provided, however, that such removal shall not take effect without
the concurrence of two-thirds of the members of Council.
(Ord. 77-O-94, passed 11-7-1977)
§ 238.02  SEWAGE TREATMENT DIVISION.
   There is hereby established a Sewage Treatment Division in the Department of
Public Service, the purpose of which is to manage, conduct and control sewage
treatment facilities located in Hickory Hill Colony Subdivision, Shenandoah
Valley Estate Subdivision, Rockwood Ledges Estate Subdivision and certain other
sewage treatment systems which may be established in the future in the city.
Such Sewage Treatment Division shall be comprised of the several individual
sewage treatment facilities.
(Ord. 76-O-68, passed 7-19-1976)
CHAPTER 240:  DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SAFETY
Section
Editor's note:
   There are no sections in
Chapter 240. This chapter has been established to provide a place for cross
references and any future legislation.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Authority of Director re placement of signs - see TRAF.
406.09
   Director of Public Safety - see CHTR.
Art. II-A, § 2
   Establishment - see CHTR.
Art. II-A, § 1
   State law provisions - see Ohio R.C. 737.01 et seq.
CHAPTER 242:  DIVISION OF BUILDING, ENGINEERING AND INSPECTION
Section
242.01   Sanitary Engineer.
242.02   Building Inspector.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Building permits and certificates of occupancy - see B. & H.
Ch. 1450
   Duties of City Engineer re flood plain management - see B. & H.
1446.03
   Establishment - see CHTR.
Art. II-A, § 2
   Site and grading plans - see B. & H.
Ch. 1452
§ 242.01  SANITARY ENGINEER.
   The city shall enter into an agreement with the Board of Commissioners of
the county, providing for the hiring of the County Sanitary Engineer to act as
the Sanitary Engineer of the city, for the purpose of enforcing the Ohio
Sanitary Code, to collect permit fees as prescribed by his or her office and to
do all things necessary and incidental thereto. Such agreement shall cover all
aspects of the Sanitary Engineer's office as are or will be performed in the
city and shall continue from time to time until terminated with 30 days notice
by either party.
(Res. 69-O-20, passed 2-25-1969)
§ 242.02  BUILDING INSPECTOR.
   The city shall enter into an agreement with the Board of Commissioners of
the county, providing for the hiring of the County Building Inspector to act as
the Building Inspector of the city, for the purpose of enforcing the Regional
Dwelling House Code in the city, to collect permit fees as prescribed by his or
her office and to do all things necessary and incidental thereto. Such
agreement shall cover all residential, business, commercial, assembly and
industrial construction in the city and shall continue from time to time until
terminated with 30 days notice by either party.
(Res. 68-O-23, passed 12-30-1968)
CHAPTER 244:  DIVISION OF POLICE
Section
Editor's note:
   The city enters into agreements from time to time with the Ohio Patrolmen's
Benevolent Association. Such agreements provide for compensation, benefits and
other incidents of employment for certain employees of the Police Division. In
the event of a conflict between any of the provisions of such agreements and a
provision of these Codified Ordinances or of any other ordinance or resolution
of Council, the provision of the agreement shall control. The provisions of
this
Chapter 244, therefore, apply only to those employees and those subjects not
otherwise provided for in such agreements. Copies of the latest relevant
legislation and of such agreements may be obtained, at cost, from the Clerk of
Council.
244.01   Appointment and removal of Chief.
244.02   Residency requirement of Chief. (Repealed)
244.03   Fringe benefits.
244.04   Age limits for new appointments.
244.05   Petty cash fund. (Repealed)
244.06   Law Enforcement Trust Fund.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Assaulting police dog or horse - see GEN. OFF.
642.08
   Breaks for dispatchers - see ADM.
254.23
   Conflicts of interest - see GEN. OFF.
606.17,
606.175
   Court, range and fitness testing time compensation for police - see ADM.
254.09
   Dereliction of duty - see GEN. OFF.
606.19
   Disposition of property held by Police Division - see GEN. OFF.
606.24
   Establishment - see CHTR.
Art. II-A, § 2
   Failure to aid a law enforcement officer - see GEN. OFF.
606.13
   Pick-up of contributions to Police Pension Fund - see ADM.
254.26
   Resisting arrest - see TRAF.
404.02; GEN. OFF.
606.16
   Tuition credit for police - see ADM.
254.11
   Uniform allowances - see ADM.
254.08
§ 244.01  APPOINTMENT AND REMOVAL OF CHIEF.
   (a)   The Mayor shall appoint the Chief of Police of the city.
   (b)   Such appointment shall be for an indefinite period and shall continue
until the person so appointed resigns or otherwise removes himself or herself
from such office or is removed as provided in subsection (d) hereof.
   (c)   No appointment of the Chief by the Mayor shall be effective without
the concurrence of two-thirds of the members of Council.
   (d)   The Mayor may remove the Chief from office for just cause; provided,
however, that such removal shall not take effect without the concurrence of
two-thirds of the members of Council.
(Ord. 73-O-78, passed 10-29-1973)
§ 244.02  RESIDENCY REQUIREMENT OF CHIEF. (Repealed)
Editor's note:
   Section
244.02 was repealed by Ord. 99-O-38, passed April 19, 1999.
§ 244.03  FRINGE BENEFITS.
   Except as otherwise provided in
Chapter 254, fringe benefits for members of the Division of Police are as
follows:
   (a)   Payment of pistol range fees; and
   (b)   Payment for false arrest and wrongful death insurance; provided that,
such coverage is available to the city at reasonable cost.
(Ord. 75-O-121, passed 12-1-1975; Am. Ord. 82-O-24, passed 3-1-1982)
§ 244.04  AGE LIMITS FOR NEW APPOINTMENTS.
   New appointments of full-time Police Division personnel shall be not less
than 21 years of age.
(Ord. 91-O-42, passed 7-8-1991)
§ 244.05  PETTY CASH FUND.(Repealed)
Editor's note:
   Section
244.05 was repealed by Ord. 94-O-17, passed March 21, 1994. See §
236.08.
§ 244.06  LAW ENFORCEMENT TRUST FUND.
   (a)   A Law Enforcement Trust Fund bearing those account numbers as the
Director of Finance from time to time deems appropriate is hereby created to
collect the proceeds from the sale at public auction of forfeited contraband
and for the deposit of forfeited monies received pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2981.01
et seq.
   (b)   The Chief of Police is hereby authorized and instructed to adopt a
written internal control policy as required by Ohio R.C. 2981.11(B)(1)
addressing the use of the monies received by the Law Enforcement Trust Fund.
   (c)   The Chief of Police during each calendar year shall file a report with
the City Council no later than January 31 of the next calendar year, verifying
that the proceeds and forfeited monies that were spent from the Law Enforcement
Trust Fund were expended only for the purposes authorized by the Ohio Revised
Code and specifying the amount expended for each authorized purpose.
(Ord. 91-O-4, passed 2-19-1991)
CHAPTER 246:  DIVISION OF FIRE
Section
246.01   Contract for services.
246.02   Appointment and removal of Chief.
246.03   Establishment of firefighter and paramedic positions; required
training; duties; supervising officials; pay rate; benefits; paramedic
incentive.
246.04   Firefighter/paramedics. (Repealed)
246.05   Age limits for new appointments.
246.06   Services outside the city.
246.07   Kelly Days.
246.08   Compensation.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Arson - see GEN. OFF.
642.09
   Compensatory time for Fire Division employees - see ADM.
254.04
   Early warning fire detection systems - see B. & H.
Ch. 1454
   Establishment - see CHTR.
Art. II-A, § 2
   Ohio Fire Code - see F.P.
Ch. 1610
   Open burning - see GEN. OFF.
660.08
   Paramedic compensation incentive - see ADM.
254.14
   Pick-up of contributions to Firemen's Pension Fund - see ADM.
254.26
   Uniform allowances - see ADM.
254.08
   Volunteer Firefighters Dependents Fund Board - see ADM.
Ch. 268
§ 246.01  CONTRACT FOR SERVICES.
   The Mayor is hereby authorized and directed to execute a contract, as
provided by the terms of Exhibit A, which is attached to original Ord. 72-O-82,
passed November 13, 1972, with the volunteer firefighters of the Kirtland Fire
Division, for fire protection services to the city and its inhabitants.
(Ord. 72-O-82, passed 11-13-1972)
§ 246.02  APPOINTMENT AND REMOVAL OF CHIEF.
   (a)   The Mayor shall appoint the Fire Chief of the city.
   (b)   Such appointment shall be for an indefinite period and shall continue
until the person so appointed resigns or otherwise removes himself or herself
from such office or is removed as provided in subsection (d) hereof.
   (c)   No appointment of the Fire Chief by the Mayor shall be effective
without the concurrence of two-thirds of the members of Council.
   (d)   The Mayor shall have the power to remove the Fire Chief from office
for just cause; provided, however, that, such removal shall not take effect
without the concurrence of two-thirds of the members of Council.
(Ord. 74-O-44, passed 3-4-1974)
§ 246.03  ESTABLISHMENT OF FIREFIGHTER AND PARAMEDIC POSITIONS; REQUIRED
TRAINING; DUTIES; SUPERVISING OFFICIALS; PAY RATE; BENEFITS; PARAMEDIC
INCENTIVE.
   (a)   The Fire Division may have a staff consisting of a Chief, a full-time
Captain and three full-time Lieutenants, all of whom shall be designated
officers.
   (b)   (1)   There is hereby established the following additional full-time
positions within the Fire Division:
         A.   Paramedic/Firefighter Class A; and
         B.   Paramedic/Firefighter Class B.
      (2)   The number of employees needed to fill each of these positions
shall be determined by the Fire Chief with the concurrence of the Director of
Public Safety. Upon the completion of the basic required fire training courses
and upon the serving of not less than a 12-month probationary period, a
Paramedic/Firefighter Class B may, upon the recommendation of the Fire Chief
and the concurrence of the Director of Public Safety, be advanced to Paramedic/
Firefighter Class A.
   (c)   The number of part-time employees needed to fill each of these
positions shall be determined by the Fire Chief with the concurrence of the
Director of Public Safety.
   (d)   The duties, responsibilities and job descriptions for each and every
position within the Fire Division shall be determined and established by the
Fire Chief with the concurrence of the Director of Public Safety. Composition
of the Fire Division may be changed from time to time as determined by Council.
All members of the Fire Division shall be under the supervision of the Director
of Public Safety and the Fire Chief and shall perform all functions authorized
and directed by the Director of Public Safety, the Fire Chief and the laws of
the State and the city.
   (e)   The Mayor is hereby authorized to establish a rate of pay for all
members of the Fire Division within the maximum wage schedules established by
Council, and the Director of Finance is hereby authorized and directed to
expend, from the appropriate fund, monies needed to meet the city's Fire
Division payroll requirements.
(Ord. 98-O-10, passed 2-18-1998)
   (f)   In addition to wages and salaries authorized herein, each employee may
be entitled to additional employee benefits as Council may from time to time
establish by ordinance (e.g. sick leave, holidays, vacation days and funeral
leave).
(Res. 99-R-18, passed 3-15-1999; Am. Res. 00-R-45, passed 7-10-2000)
   (g)   (1)   The city hereby authorizes a paramedic incentive, effective
January 1, 1998, in the amount of three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) to be paid
annually for full-time paramedics who meet the following requirements:
         A.   Two years of full-time service with the Fire Department; and
         B.   Five years as a certified paramedic.
      (2)   The city hereby authorizes an incentive, effective January 1, 2000,
in the amount of three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) to be paid annually for
full-time Lt./Paramedics and Lt./Mechanic.
(Res. 00-R-45, passed 7-10-2000)
§ 246.04  FIREFIGHTER/PARAMEDICS.(Repealed)
Editor's note:
   Section
246.04 was repealed by Ord. 93-0-58, passed November 15, 1993. See §
246.03.
§ 246.05  AGE LIMITS FOR NEW APPOINTMENTS.
   New appointments of full-time Fire Division personnel shall be not less than
18 years of age.
(Ord. 91-O-43, passed 7-8-1991)
§ 246.06  SERVICES OUTSIDE THE CITY.
   The Director of Public Safety is hereby authorized, by verbal order or
subject to written regulations, to provide for the response of the City Fire
Division to emergency calls outside of the city even though such responses
shall be into areas not covered by mutual-aid fire protection agreements.
(Ord. 94-O-51, passed 10-3-1994)
§ 246.07  KELLY DAYS.
   As agreeable to the administration of the city, every 19 shifts, a Kelly Day
will occur. The first pick for the Kelly Day is based upon seniority and time
and shall be approved by the Fire Chief.
(Res. 99-R-18, passed 3-15-1999)
§ 246.08  COMPENSATION.
   (a)   The hourly rate for the Lieutenant, the Paramedic Firefighter Class A
and the Paramedic Firefighter Class B in the Kirtland Fire Department, who are
regularly assigned to 24 hours on and 48 hours off shifts, (53 hours/week
average), will equal the employee's annual salary divided by 2,756 hours. No
overtime shall be allowed or taken except as provided in §
254.04.
   (b)   Employees shall be paid their salaries in bi-weekly installments.
   (c)   The Director of Finance is hereby authorized and instructed to expend
such funds as are necessary to pay each employee's wages or salary in such
amounts as are from time to time authorized by contract or by the Mayor.
However, no employee's wages or salary shall exceed the maximum wage or salary
schedules established herein.
(Res. 99-R-18, passed 3-15-1999; Am. Res. 00-R-45, passed 7-10-2000)
CHAPTER 248:  DIVISION OF HEALTH
Section
Editor's note:
   Though the City Charter provides for a Division of Health within the
Department of Public Safety, such a Division is not maintained by the city.
Res. 83-R-62, passed October 17, 1983, provided for a combined Board of Health,
consisting of the City Health Districts and the General Health District,
pursuant to Ohio R.C. 3709.07.
   There are no sections in
Chapter 248. This chapter has been established to provide a place for cross
references and any future legislation.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Emergency medical services - see S.U. & P.S.
Ch. 1066
   Enforcement of orders - see Ohio R.C. 3707.02, 3707.48 et seq., 3707.99
   Establishment - see CHTR.
Art. II-A, § 2
   General duties of health boards - see Ohio R.C. 3709.22 et seq., 3709.36
   Orders, regulations and emergency measures - see Ohio R.C. 3709.21
   Powers of health boards; abatement of nuisances - see Ohio R.C. 3707.01 et
seq.
   Safety, sanitation and health - see GEN. OFF.
Ch. 660
CHAPTER 250:  COMMUNITY IMPROVEMENT CORPORATION
Section
250.01   Designation.
250.02   Agreement and plan.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Community improvement corporations - see Ohio R.C. Ch. 1724
   Community redevelopment corporations - see Ohio R.C. Ch. 1728
   Industrial and economic development - see Ohio R.C. Ch. 761
   Procedure for making public improvements and levying assessments - see CHTR.
Art. I, § 8(e)
   Subdivision improvement requirements - see P. & Z.
Ch. 1248
§ 250.01  DESIGNATION.
   The Community Improvement Corporation of the county, a community improvement
corporation organized as a corporation not for profit in the manner provided in
Ohio R.C. Chapter 1724, is hereby designated as the city's agency and
instrumentality for commercial, distribution and research development in the
city.
(Ord. 81-O-55, passed 8-31-1981)
§ 250.02  AGREEMENT AND PLAN.
   The Mayor is hereby authorized to enter into an agreement and plan of
commercial, distribution and research development with the Community
Improvement Corporation in substantially the form and containing the provisions
attached to original Ord. 81-O-55, passed August 31, 1981, as Exhibit A, and
the terms and provisions of such agreement and plan are hereby confirmed in all
respects insofar as it embodies and constitutes the plan of commercial,
distribution and research development for the city under Ohio R.C. 1724.10.
(Ord. 81-O-55, passed 8-31-1981)
CHAPTER 252:  EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
Section
Editor's note:
   Res. 90-R-62, passed September 4, 1990, authorized the Mayor to enter into
an agreement with the Board of Lake County Commissioners and other political
subdivisions in the county for emergency management. A copy of such agreement
is attached to original Res. 90-R-62, as Exhibit A.
252.01   NIMS adopted.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Aid between political subdivisions - see Ohio R.C. 5502.29
   County-wide and regional organizations - see Ohio R.C. 5502.26, 5502.27
   Lake County Disaster Services Agency - see ADM.
Ch. 276
   Local programs - see Ohio R.C. 5502.271
§ 252.01  NIMS ADOPTED.
   The National Incident Management System is hereby approved and designated as
the City of Kirtland's standard for incident management.
(Res. 05-R-43, passed 9-26-2005)
CHAPTER 254:  EMPLOYEES GENERALLY
Section
Editor's note:
   The city enters into agreements from time to time with the Ohio Patrolmen's
Benevolent Association. Such agreements provide for compensation, benefits and
other incidents of employment for certain employees of the Police Division. In
the event of a conflict between any of the provisions of such agreements and a
provision of these Codified Ordinances or of any other ordinance or resolution
of Council, the provision of the agreement shall control. The provisions of
this
Chapter 254, therefore, apply only to those employees and those subjects not
otherwise provided for in such agreements. Copies of the latest relevant
legislation and of such agreements may be obtained, at cost, from the Clerk of
Council.
   Res. 01-R-24, passed May 21, 2001, and Ord. 01-O-25,  passed June 18, 2001,
establish salary, compensation and rates of pay for the city's non-collective
bargaining employees.
     Copies of the current pay structures may be obtained, at cost, from the
Clerk of Council.
254.01   Full-time and part-time employee defined.
254.02   Holidays.
254.03   Vacations; holiday pay.
254.04   Compensatory time for Fire Division employees.
254.05   Longevity pay.
254.06   Sick leave generally.
254.065   Sick leave transfers.
254.07   Insurance.
254.08   Clothing/uniform allowance.
254.09   Court, range and fitness testing time compensation for police.
254.10   Classification of hourly employees.
254.11   Educational pay for police.
254.12   Accumulated vacation and holiday pay. (Repealed)
254.13   Retirement.
254.14   Merit increases.
254.15   Notification of pay increases.
254.16   Department heads required at Council meetings.
254.17   Reports of board, commission and agency heads to Council.
254.18   Bonds.
254.19   Vehicle allowance.
254.20   Funeral leave.
254.21   Personal days.
254.22   Jury duty.
254.23   Breaks for dispatchers.
254.24   Collective bargaining agreements.
254.25   Deferred compensation.
254.26   City pick-up of employee contributions to Ohio Public Employees
Retirement System and police and firemen's pension funds.
254.27   Affirmative Action Program.
254.28   Harassment policy.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Civil Service Commission - see ADM.
Ch. 270
   Conflicts of interest - see GEN. OFF.
606.17,
606.175
   Elections - see
CHTR. Art. IV; ADM.
Ch. 210
   Mayor's powers to appoint, promote, transfer, reduce or remove officers and
employees - see CHTR.
Art. II, § 7
   Public employees retirement system - see Ohio R.C. Ch. 145
   Recall - see CHTR.
Art. V, § 3
   Strikes by public employees - see Ohio R.C. Ch. 4117
§ 254.01  FULL-TIME AND PART-TIME EMPLOYEE DEFINED.
   As used in this chapter:
   (a)   "Full-time employee" means a regular employee of the city who works
for any department and who, at the time of hiring, is filling a full-time
position as established by Council, including the following:
      (1)   The Chief of Police, the Police Lieutenant, a Class A or Class B
full-time patroler, a Clerk/Dispatcher or a Class A or Class B full-time
dispatcher;
      (2)   The Fire Chief, the Fire Captain, the Fire Lieutenants or a full-
time Paramedic/Firefighter Class A or Class B;
      (3)   The Public Service Administrator, the Cemetery Superintendent, the
full-time Service Department Superintendent, a leader, a mechanic, a Class A,
Class B or Class C full-time employee, the Custodian; and
      (4)   The Administrative Secretary and City Clerk.
   (b)   "Part-time employee" means an employee of the city who, at the time of
hiring, does not fill a regular full-time position as established by Council,
including, but not limited to, all part-time patrolmen and part-time
dispatchers in the Police Division, part-time firefighters, part-time
paramedics, part-time employees of the Service Department, the Clerk of
Council, the Zoning Inspector, a clerk to any board or commission of the city,
a part-time laborer, a part-time road worker, a part-time equipment operator
and all temporary emergency and seasonal employees.
(Ord. 98-O-11, passed 2-18-1998)
§ 254.02  HOLIDAYS.
   Each full-time employee shall be entitled to 12 paid holidays per calendar
year as follows: New Year's Day, Presidents' Day, Good Friday, Memorial Day,
Independence Day, Labor Day, Veterans' Day, Thanksgiving Day, the Friday after
Thanksgiving Day, Christmas Day, the day before or after Christmas (as
appropriate) and one personal day.
(Ord. 82-O-24, passed 3-1-1982)
§ 254.03  VACATIONS; HOLIDAY PAY.
   (a)   Upon the effective date of this section, all prior vacation benefits
for employees of the city are repealed, and each full-time employee of the city
shall be entitled to a vacation with pay as follows.
      (1)   Upon completion of one year of full-time service, each full-time
employee shall be entitled to two weeks paid vacation, for which salaried
employees will be paid for two weeks of salary, and hourly employees will be
paid for 80 hours of wages.
      (2)   Upon completion of 60 continuous months of full-time service, each
full-time employee shall be entitled to three weeks paid vacation, for which
salaried employees will be paid for three weeks of salary, and hourly employees
will be paid for 120 hours of wages.
      (3)   Upon completion of 180 continuous months of full-time service, each
full-time employee shall be entitled to four weeks paid vacation, for which
salaried employees will be paid for four weeks of salary, and hourly employees
will be paid for 160 hours of wages.
      (4)   Upon completion of 240 continuous months of full-time service, each
full-time employee shall be entitled to five weeks paid vacation, for which
salaried employees will be paid for five weeks of salary, and hourly employees
will be paid for 200 hours of wages.
   (b)   Except as provided in subsection (c) hereof, payment for vacation time
shall be based upon the employee's current rate of pay at the time the vacation
is taken. Earned vacation shall be awarded on the employee's anniversary date
in accordance with the schedule set forth in this section, provided that the
employee is employed by the city at that time. Any employee who has accumulated
and earned vacation time from being employed full-time by the state or any
other political subdivision of the state, and who has become employed by the
city within one year from his or her termination from such other public
employer, shall, for the purpose of determining years of service, be credited
for the years of full-time service at the state or other political subdivision,
not to exceed three years.
   (c)   Vacation time shall not be carried over from one year to another. Any
earned vacation time that is not used or paid for within 12 months after it is
earned shall be forfeited.
   (d)   Each employee shall inform the city of a request for cash payment in
lieu of taking a holiday or vacation, within 30 days of such holiday and/or
vacation. If such designation is not made, the employee will automatically be
granted compensatory time. Compensatory time not scheduled as time off by the
employer or taken by the employee prior to December 31 of each year, with the
exception of those holidays occurring in the month of December which can be
carried over to January 31, shall be forfeited.
(Ord. 96-O-42, passed 9-4-1996)
§ 254.04  COMPENSATORY TIME FOR FIRE DIVISION EMPLOYEES.
   Compensatory time will be granted to full-time employees of the Fire
Division for any and all extra duty (call backs, drills, approved schooling and
the like) at a rate of one and a half times for each hour worked and will be
taken as time off in lieu of being paid overtime pay. Compensatory time may be
accumulated up to a maximum of 96 hours (equal to four, 24-hour shifts). A
maximum of 72 hours of compensatory time can be carried over to the next
calendar year. Compensatory time may not be sold back or traded between
employees. Compensatory time off will be granted with a minimum of three hours
taken off at one time if appropriate personnel are available to cover the time
period.
(Res. 00-R-45, passed 7-10-2000)
§ 254.05  LONGEVITY PAY.
   (a)   The city hereby establishes that longevity pay shall be paid to all
full-time salaried and full-time hourly employees and shall be earned and
administered in accordance with the following formula:
 
Completed Years of Service to the City Amount of Additional Yearly Longevity
                                       Pay Earned
5                                      $550.00
10                                     $1,100.00
15                                     $1,650.00
20                                     $2,100.00
 
   (b)   Such longevity pay shall be accumulated for each eligible employee
during the year and shall be paid in a single payment on the first pay period
in January. The first longevity pay payment to an employee shall be prorated
for the period of time between the employee's first eligibility anniversary
date and the following January 1. Thereafter, each eligible employee shall be
paid his or her longevity pay in a single payment on January 1 of each year for
the previous year. For example, an employee who is hired on June 1, 1980, shall
start earning longevity pay on June 1, 1985. That employee shall receive his or
her first longevity pay payment on January 1, 1986, in the amount of two
hundred seventy-five dollars ($275.00). On January 1, 1987, that employee shall
receive a longevity payment of five hundred fifty dollars ($550.00) and shall
thereafter, for each year or portion thereof, receive his or her longevity pay
on January 1 for the preceding year.
(Ord. 84-O-14, passed 4-16-1984)
§ 254.06  SICK LEAVE GENERALLY.
   (a)   Sick leave shall be defined as an absence with pay necessitated by:
      (1)   Illness or injury to the employee;
      (2)   Exposure by the employee to a contagious disease, communicable to
other employees; or
      (3)   Serious illness, injury or death in the employee's immediate
family.
(Ord. 92-O-40, passed 5-18-1992)
   (b)   All full-time employees shall earn sick leave at the rate of four and
six-tenths hours for every eighty hours in a paid status and may accumulate
such sick leave to an unlimited amount, provided that no full-time employee may
earn or accrue more than 120 hours in any calendar year.
   (c)   Any full-time employee who is to be absent on sick leave shall notify
his or her supervisor of such absence and the reason therefor at least one hour
before the start of his or her work shift each day he or she is to be absent.
(Ord. 98-O-83, passed 1-4-1999)
   (d)   Sick leave may be used in segments of not less than one hour.
   (e)   Before an absence may be charged against accumulated sick leave, the
city may require such proof of illness, injury or death as may be satisfactory
to the city, or may require the employee to be examined by a physician
designated by the city and paid for by the city. In any event, an employee
absent for more than three consecutive days may be required to supply a
physician's report to be eligible for paid sick leave.
   (f)   If an employee fails to submit adequate proof of illness, injury or
death upon request, or if, upon such proof as is submitted or upon the report
of medical examination, the city finds that there is not satisfactory evidence
of illness, injury or death sufficient to justify the employee's absence, such
leave may be an unauthorized leave and shall be without pay.
   (g)   Any abuse or pattern use of sick leave shall be just and sufficient
cause for disciplinary action.
   (h)   The city may require an employee who has been absent due to personal
illness or injury, prior to and as a condition of his or her return to duty, to
be examined by a physician designated and paid for by the city, to establish
that the employee is not disabled from the performance of his or her duties and
that his or her return to duty will not jeopardize the health and safety of
other employees.
(Ord. 92-O-40, passed 5-18-1992)
   (i)   When the use of sick leave is due to illness, injury or death in the
immediate family, "immediate family" shall be defined to include the full-time
employee's spouse, child, children, step-child or step-children, parent(s),
parent(s)-in-law, grandparent(s), brother(s) and sister(s) or any person
residing in the employee's household to whom the full-time employee is in loco
parentis.
   (j)   Upon the retirement in good standing of a full-time employee who has
not less than ten years of continuous full-time employment with the city and
who has qualified for retirement from a State Public Employee's Retirement
System, such full-time employee shall be entitled to receive a cash payment
equal to his or her hourly rate of pay at the time of retirement, multiplied by
one-fourth of the total number of accumulated but unused sick hours earned by
the employee, as certified by the Finance Director of the city; provided that,
such resulting number of hours to be paid shall not exceed 240 hours.
(Ord. 98-O-83, passed 1-4-1999)
§ 254.065  SICK LEAVE TRANSFERS.
   (a)   If an employee exhausts sick leave, but has not qualified for
disability retirement benefits, other city employees may donate up to 16 hours
from their own sick leave accumulation to be credited to the sick leave
accumulation of the requesting employee, for a maximum of 128 hours to be given
to any individual employee from any and all sources.
   (b)   Any donation of sick leave hours shall be in writing and signed by the
donating employee, shall specify the employee to whom the hours and/or days are
to be donated and must first be approved by the department head.
   (c)   Transfer of sick leave under this policy is allowed only once a year.
   (d)   The employee to whom the sick leave has been donated must first
exhaust all his or her sick leave, and the donated sick leave hours shall be
used only in accordance with this section and other provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 97-O-20, passed 3-3-1997)
§ 254.07  INSURANCE.
   Each eligible full-time employee and his or her dependents shall be provided
hospital and medical insurance benefits as are from time to time determined by
Council during service to the city. Each full-time employee electing not to be
enrolled in the insurance benefit plan of the city shall receive a sum equal to
one-half of the monthly premium cost to the city for an employee without
dependents in lieu of such insurance benefits. If more than one insurance
benefit package is available to all employees, the payment in lieu of insurance
shall be based upon the lowest cost premium to the city.
(Ord. 84-O-14, passed 4-16-1984)
§ 254.08  CLOTHING/UNIFORM ALLOWANCE.
   The Mayor is hereby authorized to provide a clothing or uniform allowance
from time to time to full-time employees of the city as the Mayor, in his or
her discretion, determines to be necessary.
(Ord. 86-O-37, passed 8-18-1986)
§ 254.09  COURT, RANGE AND FITNESS TESTING TIME COMPENSATION FOR POLICE.
   (a)   A member of the Division of Police who is required to appear in court
as part of his or her official duties, at times other than during his or her
regular scheduled shift, shall be paid a minimum of two hours additional pay
for appearance in Juvenile Court or Common Pleas Court and a minimum of four
hours additional pay for appearance in Municipal Court.
   (b)   A member of the Division who participates in required range training
and/or physical fitness testing, at times other than during his or her regular
scheduled shift, shall be paid at his or her current hourly rate for the time
spent at the range and/or physical fitness testing.
(Ord. 86-O-37, passed 8-18-1986)
§ 254.10  CLASSIFICATIONS OF HOURLY EMPLOYEES.
   (a)   Division of Police. There are hereby established the following pay
grades for the Division: Lieutenant, Patroler Class A and Patroler Class B. In
addition, there are hereby established the pay grades of Dispatcher Class B,
Dispatcher Class A and Clerk/Dispatcher. A patroler in Class P-5 on the
effective date of this section (Ord. 84-O-14, passed April 16, 1984) shall be
placed in Class A. A patrolman in Class P-4, P-3, P-2 or P-1 on the effective
date of this section (Ord. 84-O-14, passed April 16, 1984) shall be placed in
Class B. A patroler who has been placed in Class B on the effective date of
this section (Ord. 84-O-14, passed April 16, 1984) from an original Class P-4,
P-3, P-2 or P-1 placement shall be elevated to Class A on January 1, 1985. A
full-time patroler hired after the effective date of this section (Ord. 84-0-
14, passed April 16, 1984) shall be a Class B Patrolman and shall, upon
completion of 12 months of satisfactory service to the city, be elevated to a
Class A Patroler.
   (b)   Division of Fire. There are hereby established in the Division of Fire
the following classifications for firefighters: Firefighter Class B,
Firefighter Class A and Firefighter/Paramedic.
   (c)   Street personnel. There are hereby established the following street
personnel classifications: Superintendent, Leader, Mechanic, Equipment
Operator, Road Worker Class B and Road Worker Class A.
   (d)   Cemetery personnel. There are hereby established the following
cemetery personnel classifications:  Sexton and Laborer.
(Ord. 84-O-14, passed 4-16-1984)
§ 254.11  EDUCATIONAL PAY FOR POLICE.
   (a)   The city will pay each full-time police officer in the classified
service of the Division of Police ten dollars ($10.00) per certified college
credit hour completed after execution of an agreement, per year, to a maximum
of 96 credit hours. The total payment to each full-time police officer shall be
divided by 26 and shall be paid at each regular pay period.
   (b)   Full-time police officers in the classified service of the Division of
Police shall be entitled to attend related schools and/or seminars of their
choice with the approval of the Chief, without loss of pay. The city shall pay
the full cost of tuition. The following schedule shall apply to the schools
and/or seminars:
 
After 12 months service  3 days per year
After 60 months service  5 days per year
After 120 months service 10 days per year
 
   (c)   Any full-time police officer in the classified service of the Division
of Police who has received a training certificate attesting to the satisfactory
completion of all law enforcement courses towards an associate degree in law
enforcement shall receive an additional one hundred dollars ($100.00) per year
educational allowance.
   (d)   Any full-time police officer in the classified service of the Division
of Police who has received a training certificate attesting to the satisfactory
completion of all law enforcement courses towards a bachelor degree in law
enforcement shall receive an additional one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per
year educational allowance.
   (e)   Any full-time police officer in the classified service of the Division
of Police who has received a training certificate attesting to the satisfactory
completion of all law enforcement courses towards a masters degree in law
enforcement shall receive an additional two hundred dollars ($200.00) per year
educational allowance.
   (f)   Full-time police officers in the classified service of the Division of
Police shall be entitled to the highest allowance as set forth in subsections
(c), (d) and (e) hereof, and there shall be no pyramiding of such allowances.
(Ord. 92-O-40, passed 5-18-1992)
§ 254.12  ACCUMULATED VACATION AND HOLIDAY PAY. (Repealed)
Editor's note:
   Section
254.12 was repealed by Ord. 96-O-42, passed September 4, 1996. See §
254.03.
§ 254.13  RETIREMENT.
   (a)   The city shall abide by statutory law and provide funds to retirement
programs, the Public Employees Retirement System and the Fire and Police
Disability and Pension Fund.
   (b)   In addition, an employee with full-time service of ten years or more
is eligible to receive a cash payment settlement for accumulated sick leave
based on his or her rate of pay at the time of retirement. The employee shall
be paid a maximum sum equal to one-fourth of his or her accrued but unused sick
leave up to a maximum accrual of 120 days. Payment for sick leave on this basis
shall eliminate all sick leave credit accrued by the employee to the time of
retirement. Such payment shall be made only once to an employee.
(Ord. 82-O-24, passed 3-1-1982)
§ 254.14  MERIT INCREASES.
   The city hereby abolishes the merit increase program. A present employee who
is receiving a merit increase shall continue to receive such merit increase as
previously awarded. However, any such merit increase is not a permanent award
but was awarded for superior performance. If an employee's performance drops
below standard, the merit pay increase may then be reduced.
(Ord. 99-O-19, passed 4-19-1999)
§ 254.15  NOTIFICATION OF PAY INCREASES.
   The Mayor, or such other person as is designated by the Mayor, shall notify
Council and the Civil Service Commission, in cases where it has jurisdiction,
of all increases in pay which a city employee receives.
(Ord. 81-O-23, passed 1-19-1981)
§ 254.16  DEPARTMENT HEADS REQUIRED AT COUNCIL MEETINGS.
   (a)   All department heads, as may be specified by Council, shall be
instructed, in writing, to attend one Council meeting per month, as shall be
stipulated by Council, for the purpose of reporting on activities of their
departments and responding to inquiries of Council members and/or members of
the community.
   (b)   Failure of such a department head to attend such a meeting, as
instructed, without reason acceptable to a majority of Council, shall result in
a suspension of the department head for one day without pay for the first
offense, two days without pay for the second offense and immediate dismissal
for the third offense.
(Ord. 74-O-29, passed 2-18-1974)
§ 254.17  REPORTS OF BOARD, COMMISSION AND AGENCY HEADS TO COUNCIL.
   (a)   Each city official, whether elected or appointed, who is the head of a
board, commission or service agency, shall submit reports to Council as
required by this section.
   (b)   Reports shall be submitted to the Clerk of Council, in writing, so as
to be available to Council on the nights of the second meetings of Council in
April, July, October and December.
   (c)   Information to be submitted in reports shall include, as a minimum:
      (1)   The amount of money initially appropriated for the body;
      (2)   The amount of money on hand as of the end of March, June, September
and November; and
      (3)   The planned use of remaining funds.
(Ord. 73-O-56, passed 9-4-1973)
§ 254.18  BONDS.
   (a)   A blanket bond for all employees of the city, except the Director of
Finance and City Clerk, is hereby established at twenty-five thousand dollars
($25,000.00), with a good and sufficient surety, as required by the laws of the
state.
   (b)   The bonds of the Director of Finance and City Clerk are hereby
established at one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) each, with a good and
sufficient surety, as required by the laws of the state.
(Ord 92-O-12, passed 3-2-1992)
§ 254.19  VEHICLE ALLOWANCE.
   When, in the normal course of official business, it is necessary for a
department head of the city, a regular or special full-time employee or part-
time employee of the city or an elected or appointed official of the city, to
use his or her personal vehicle, such party shall obtain prior approval
therefor from his or her department head or immediate supervisor. In the
absence of such department head or immediate supervisor, the party shall be
compensated for such use, upon written application to the Director of Finance,
at a rate to be equal to that amount allowed by the Internal Revenue Service.
(Res. 80-R-64, passed 6-2-1980)
§ 254.20  FUNERAL LEAVE.
   (a)   All full-time employees shall be entitled to paid funeral leave, not
deducted from sick leave, for each death in the employee's immediate family, of
16 hours for hourly employees and of two days for salaried employees.
   (b)   As used in this section, "immediate family" shall have the same
meaning as set forth in §
254.06.
(Ord 92-O-40, passed 5-18-1992)
§ 254.21  PERSONAL DAYS.
   All full-time employees shall be entitled to one personal day per calendar
year, to be deducted from the employee's accumulated sick leave. Personal days
shall not, if not used, carry over into the succeeding year.
(Ord. 86-O-37, passed 8-18-1986)
§ 254.22  JURY DUTY.
   Any employee who is called for jury duty, either federal, county or
municipal, shall be paid his or her regular salary, provided that the employee
signs over to the city any fees received for such jury duty.
(Ord. 86-O-37, passed 8-18-1986)
§ 254.23  BREAKS FOR DISPATCHERS.
   Each dispatcher shall be entitled to two 15-minute breaks during an eight-
hour shift. The time for taking such breaks shall be pursuant to a policy set
from time to time by the Chief of Police.
(Ord. 86-O-37, passed 8-18-1986)
§ 254.24  COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENTS.
   If any of the provisions of this chapter is in conflict with any of the
provisions of a valid, written collective bargaining agreement entered into
between the city and an employee bargaining unit which has been certified or
recognized by the State Employment Relations Board, then the provision of the
collective bargaining agreement which is in conflict with this chapter shall
prevail over this chapter, but only as to those employees covered by such
collective bargaining agreement.
(Ord. 86-O-37, passed 8-18-1986)
§ 254.25  DEFERRED COMPENSATION.
   (a)   The city hereby adopts a plan under the Ohio Public Employees Deferred
Compensation Program and extends to all eligible employees the opportunity to
join.
   (b)   The Mayor is hereby authorized and directed to execute an agreement
with the Ohio Public Employees Deferred Compensation Board on terms and
conditions which the Mayor determines are in the best interest of the city.
Such agreement shall authorize the Board to offer a plan under the Program to
all eligible employees of the city and thereafter to administer the plan on
behalf of such employees.
(Res. 87-R-36, passed 8-24-1987)
§ 254.26  CITY PICK-UP OF EMPLOYEE CONTRIBUTIONS TO OHIO PUBLIC EMPLOYEES
RETIREMENT SYSTEM AND POLICE AND FIREMEN'S PENSION FUNDS.
   (a)   For the categories of city employees listed in subsection (d) hereof,
the  contributions required to be made by each such employee to the Ohio Public
Employees Retirement System (PERS), the Firemen’s Relief and Pension Fund or
the Police Relief and Pension Fund, as an employee contribution under Ohio R.C.
Chapters 145 or 742, shall be paid by the city, on behalf of the employee, in
lieu of a contribution by the employee and in accordance with this section.
   (b)   The total compensation payable by the city to each such employee in
any pay period shall be reduced by the amount payable by the city to PERS, the
Firemen’s Relief and Pension Fund or the Police Relief and Pension Fund on
behalf of each such employee under subsection (a) hereof.
   (c)   This section shall apply to all employees in the categories listed in
subsection (d) hereof, and no such employee shall have the option to receive
direct payment of the amounts contributed by the city to PERS, the Firemen’s
Relief and Pension Fund or the Police Relief and Pension Fund on his or her
behalf instead of having them contributed to PERS, the Firemen’s Relief and
Pension Fund or the Police Relief and Pension Fund.
   (d)   This section shall apply to all officials and/or employees, other than
elected officials, who choose to participate in the program.
   (e)   The Finance Director, or his or her designee, is hereby directed to do
everything necessary and appropriate to initiate implementation of this
section, including, but not limited to, making applications to the Internal
Revenue Service for private letter rulings concerning federal tax treatment of
this plan, and making applications to the appropriate state retirement boards.
   (f)   Subject to any requirement imposed by the Internal Revenue Service,
the Ohio PERS Board, the Fireman’s Relief and Pension Fund Board or the Police
Relief and Pension Fund Board, this section shall apply to all payroll payments
payable by the city to employees after December 31, 1987; provided that, such
payments shall be effective only so long as they are approved by such
retirement boards or their agents.
(Ord. 88-O-75, passed 10-17-1988; Am. Res. 04-R-14, passed 3-15-2004; Am. Res.
04-R-23, passed 5-3-2004; Am. Res. 04-R-24, passed 5-3-2004; Am. Res. 13-R-14,
passed 5-20-2013; Am. Res. 13-R-15, passed 5-20-2013)
§ 254.27  AFFIRMATIVE ACTION PROGRAM.
   (a)   Adoption; purpose. There is hereby established and adopted the
following Affirmative Action Program for the city, comprising a set of specific
and result-oriented procedures to which the city is totally committed. These
procedures, coupled with the city's good faith efforts, will ensure equal
employment opportunity.
   (b)   General statement of policy. It is the policy of the city to hire
well-qualified people to perform the varied tasks the city requires. An
integral part of this policy is to provide equal opportunity for all persons
seeking employment and to recruit and administer hiring, working conditions,
benefits and privileges of employment, compensation, training, advancement,
transfers and terminations for all employees without discrimination because of
race, color, religion, sex, national origin, ancestry, age or disability.
   (c)   Objectives.
      (1)   The objective of this Affirmative Action Program is to achieve,
within a reasonable period of time, an employee breakdown with respect to race,
sex and disability in each major job classification, which breakdown
approximately reflects the availability of each group in the labor pool from
which the city recruits employees.
      (2)   The objective further calls for achieving full utilization of
minorities, women and disabled persons at all levels of management and non-
management positions and by job classification at a faster pace than would
normally occur.
      (3)   An integral part of the city's Affirmative Action Program is the
establishment of goals and intermediate targets designed to change the race,
sex and disability breakdown, particularly in those areas where there has been
underutilization of minorities and women.
      (4)   The city is assuring the full realization of its stated objective
through a continuous procedure of monitoring and reporting.
   (d)   Reaffirmation of EEO Policy. This section represents a reaffirmation
of the city's policy to provide equal employment opportunity in all personnel
actions for all employees regardless of race, color, sex, national origin,
ancestry, religion, disability or age.
   (e)   Policy dissemination.
      (1)   Internal policy dissemination.
         A.   The City's Equal Employment Opportunity (EEO) Policy and
Affirmative Action Program are periodically posted within the city's
departments.
         B.   Special meetings are held with all department heads to inform
them about the city's EEO Policy and Affirmative Action Program. These meetings
include a statement from the Mayor expressing support for the program. In
addition, an individual manager's responsibility for program effectiveness is
precisely spelled out. Records of department head attendance are maintained to
ensure that all management employees have been present at these meetings.
         C.   The city's EEO Policy and Affirmative Action Program are
communicated to all non-management employees at special meetings. At these
meetings, it is fully explained how employees can benefit from the program.
Employees are informed of their responsibilities under the Program and are
given an opportunity to discuss the Program. Employee attendance is documented
to ensure complete coverage.
         D.   The Affirmative Action Program is part of the city's orientation
program for new employees.
         E.   Union officials have been advised orally and in writing about the
city's EEO Policy and Affirmative Action Program and their cooperation has been
confirmed. The Union agreement with the city includes the following non-
discrimination clause: "In a desire to restate their respective policies,
neither the City of Kirtland, nor the Union, shall unlawfully discriminate
against any employee because of race, color, sex, national origin, ancestry,
religion, disability or age."
         F.   The EEO Policy is posted on the city's bulletin boards.
         G.   The Affirmative Action Program is covered in depth with all
employees working in employment-related jobs. In addition, such employees'
individual responsibility in assisting the city to meet its affirmative action
objectives is clearly outlined.
      (2)   External policy dissemination.
         A.   All major recruiting sources, including minorities, females,
disabled persons, all senior citizen organizations, community agencies,
community leaders, high schools, vocational and technical schools, junior
colleges and colleges, are informed both verbally and in writing of our EEO
Policy and Affirmative Action Program. These sources are requested to actively
recruit and refer minorities, females, disabled persons and elderly people for
all positions for which the city normally hires.
         B.   Advertisements for employment are placed in minority and women's
oriented media as well as other media. When employees are featured in
employment advertisements, both minority and non-minority men and women are
pictured. All employment advertising contains the phrase, "an equal opportunity
employer" and where no joint "male-female" column is available, ads are placed
under both the male and female columns.
         C.   The city's service advertising features employees and non-
employees of both sexes and all EEO groups.
         D.   The city communicates to all prospective employees the existence
of the Affirmative Action Program and how they can benefit from it.
         E.   A statement about state and federal equal opportunity
requirements and regulations is made a part of the city's contracts, order
forms, leases and so on. In addition, a more detailed document is executed with
all suppliers providing goods or services amounting to ten thousand dollars
($10,000.00) or more annually.
      (3)   Equal employment opportunity posters. The following posters are
permanently displayed in conspicuous places throughout city facilities,
including employment, testing and reception areas:
         A.   Equal Employment Opportunity Law; and
         B.   State Equal Employment Opportunity Poster.
   (f)   Responsibility.
      (1)   The Mayor has overall responsibility for the implementation of the
Affirmative Action Program. Operating responsibilities for the program are
delegated to the city's Equal Employment Opportunity Manager. These
responsibilities include the following:
         A.   Developing the Affirmative Action Program;
         B.   Ensuring that city policies regarding equal employment
opportunity are communicated to all levels within the city;
         C.   Monitoring the city's affirmative action progress through audit
and reporting systems;
         D.   Ensuring that hiring, promotion, salary administration and other
personnel practices are fair and fully consistent with the city's EEO Policy;
and
         E.   Identifying problem areas and initiating actions to solve them.
      (2)   All management employees in the city's employ have been informed
that their job performance is being evaluated on the basis of their EEO efforts
and results as well as all other job-related criteria.
      (3)   The city informs prime recruiting sources orally and in writing of
the EEO Policy and maintains a file of sources notified and acknowledgments
received. Where possible, briefing sessions include departmental tours,
presentations by minority and women employees, definitive explanations of the
city's employment selection process and recruiting literature. With each
source, the city makes formal arrangements for the referral of applicants.
      (4)   Minorities and women are included as employment interviewers.
      (5)   City representatives who participate in job fairs are authorized to
make tentative commitments on the spot, pending further processing.
      (6)   Minority and female employees participate in career days, youth
motivation programs and related community activities.
   (g)   Tests. The city utilizes test scores on validated tests along with
other job-related criteria in assessing individual qualifications. It is the
city's basic objective to have all tests and their uses conform with the OFCC
Guidelines on Employee Testing and Other Selection Procedures. Copies of tests
that the city uses are kept on file along with their validation studies.
   (h)   Employee selection.
      (1)   The city is reviewing all job specifications to make sure they
consist of only job-related criteria. All criteria that are not job-related
will be eliminated or modified.
      (2)   The city is also analyzing the employee selection process and the
city will modify or eliminate any procedures that disproportionately affect
minorities, women and/or disabled persons and cannot be shown to be job-
related.
      (3)   The city reviews applicant flow periodically to ensure that it is
getting enough applicants in the under-utilized groups.
      (4)   All employees involved in making hiring and selection decisions are
carefully chosen and trained to assure non-discrimination in their decisions.
      (5)   The city's employment application form contains the following
notice in bold type: "Discrimination because of race, color, sex, national
origin, ancestry, religion, disability or age is prohibited. If you believe you
have been discriminated against, you may notify the Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission and/or other appropriate agencies."
   (i)   Plan of action.
      (1)   Recruiting. The city is actively seeking minorities, women and
disabled persons for existing and future employment. To improve recruitment and
increase the flow of minority, female and disabled applicants, the city will
use minority, female and disabled recruiters to regularly contact local, state
and federal employment referral agencies, minority, female and disabled
organizations found within the local area (e.g. Urban League, NAACP, NOW,
Bureau of Vocational Rehabilitation), secondary schools and colleges with high
minority and female enrollments, concerned community leaders and specialized
placement agencies.
      (2)   Promotions and transfers.
         A.   All employees are kept informed of promotional opportunities that
exist throughout the city's organization.
         B.   The city reviews the records of minority and female employees
periodically to assure that qualified persons are given equal consideration as
opportunities for upgrading, promotion and transfer occur. Where additional
training and experience would be helpful for advancement, management shall
counsel and assist minority and female employees.
         C.   The city uses written performance ratings with specific, job-
related criteria to make sure that all candidates for promotion are appraised
objectively.
      (3)   Training for employment. The city is committed to action programs
designed to upgrade the skills of under-qualified people in the community. Each
of these programs combines remedial education and vocational training to help
trainees to qualify for employment in the city.
      (4)   Training for advancement.
         A.   Minority and female employees are given equal opportunity to
participate in training courses that will enhance their ability to take on jobs
of greater responsibility. Minority and female employees with advancement
potential are encouraged to take advantage of this opportunity.
         B.   The city keeps records of participation in its training programs,
broken down by EEO group. These records are kept on file for a minimum of two
years.
      (5)   Facilities.
         A.   All work areas, cafeterias, rest and recreational areas and other
facilities of the city are maintained on a desegregated basis.
         B.   All employees are encouraged to participate in in-hour and off-
hour employee association and club activities.
      (6)   Monitoring system. To keep track of progress as it implements
affirmative action goals and timetables, the city maintains a well-structured
monitoring system. This enables the city to evaluate results and to plan for
the future.
      (7)   External reporting. The city annually files the Employer
Information Report EEO-1.
      (8)   Internal reports. The following reports are generated and monitored
annually:
         A.   Affirmative action progress report (progress toward one-year
targets broken down by department and job classification);
         B.   Applicant flow (broken down by job classification and EEO group);
         C.   Applicant sources (broken down by EEO group);
         D.   Referral flow (broken down by department, job classification and
EEO group);
         E.   Hire flow (broken down by department, job classification and EEO
group);
         F.   Departmental and organizational hire pattern (broken down by
classification and EEO group);
         G.   Job requirements;
         H.   Test validation;
         I.   Training participation (broken down by training program and EEO
group);
         J.   Promotions (broken down by department, job classification and EEO
group);
         K.   Transfer requests (broken down by EEO group);
         L.   Equal pay records; and
         M.   Terminations (broken down by department, job classification and
EEO group).
      These reports are discussed with managers on every level, so that
remedial measures can be taken in problem areas that are revealed by these
reports.
      (9)   Additional reports. In addition to compiling the foregoing reports,
the city regularly monitors the following areas:
         A.   Selection process for hiring, placement, transferring, promoting
and terminating;
         B.   Employment conditions;
         C.   Organization rules and regulations;
         D.   Attitudes of our work force;
         E.   Inclusion of an EEO clause in purchase orders and contracts;
         F.   Dissemination of policy; and
         G.   Proper display of posters and the EEO policy statement.
   (j)   Community action programs. To fulfill its obligations to the
community, the city consistently involves itself in community relations
activities. These include, but are not limited to, the following:
      (1)   Scheduling tours through city facilities for school
representatives, students, minority and women's employment sources, civic
groups and so on;
      (2)   Creating a speakers' bureau which provides city personnel to speak
before school groups and other groups to explain the Affirmative Action
Program, discourage school "drop-outs" and express the city's desire to hire
employees from every group in the community;
      (3)   City executives and managers acting as advisors, members of boards
of directors, fund raisers and in various other capacities to urban, minority
and female-oriented organizations;
      (4)   Participating in and, where practical, sponsoring seminars for the
business community on equal employment opportunity for minorities and women;
and
      (5)   Encouraging city employees to voluntarily devote personal time to
aid in the solution of urban and community problems.
   (k)   Statement of commitment. The city affirms that all of its resources
are being mobilized for a good faith effort to attain its affirmative action
goals.
(Res. 93-R-80, passed 12-20-1993)
§ 254.28  HARASSMENT POLICY.
   (a)   Adoption; purpose. There is hereby established and adopted the
following sexual harassment policy for the city, the purpose of which is to
maintain a healthy work environment and to provide procedures for reporting,
investigation and resolution of complaints of workplace harassment, sexual or
otherwise.
   (b)   General statement of policy. It is the policy of the city that all
employees have the right to work in an environment free of all forms of
harassment. The city does not condone and will not tolerate any harassment.
Therefore, the city shall take direct and immediate action to prevent such
behavior and to remedy all reported instances of workplace harassment, sexual
or otherwise.
   (c)   Sexual harassment defined. As used in this section, "sexual
harassment" means unwelcome sexual advances, requests for sexual favors and
other verbal or physical conduct of a sexual nature when:
      (1)   Submission to such conduct is made either explicitly or implicitly
a term or condition of employment;
      (2)   Submission to or rejection of such conduct by an employee is used
as the basis for employment decisions affecting the employee; or
      (3)   Such conduct has the purpose or effect of unreasonably interfering
with an employee's work performance or creating an intimidating, hostile or
offensive working environment.
   (d)   Discussion of policy.
      (1)   Prohibited activity.
         A.   No city employee shall either explicitly or implicitly ridicule,
mock, deride or belittle any person.
         B.   Employees shall not make offensive or derogatory comments based
on race, color, sex, religion or national origin either directly or indirectly
to another person. Such harassment is a prohibited form of discrimination under
state and federal employment law and is also considered misconduct subject to
disciplinary action by the city.
      (2)   Supervisors' and employees' responsibilities.
         A.   Each supervisor shall be responsible for preventing acts of
harassment. This responsibility includes the following:
            1.   Monitoring the unit work environment on a daily basis for
signs that harassment may be occurring;
            2.   Counseling all employees on the types of behavior prohibited
and the city's procedures for reporting and resolving complaints of harassment;
            3.   Stopping any observed acts that may be considered harassment
and taking appropriate steps to intervene, whether or not the involved
employees are within the particular supervisor's line of supervision; and
            4.   Where there has been a complaint of harassment, taking
immediate action to limit the work contact between two employees, pending
investigation.
         B.   Each supervisor has the responsibility to assist any city
employee who comes to that supervisor with a complaint of harassment to
document and file such complaint with the Mayor.
         C.   Each employee of the city is responsible for assisting in the
prevention of harassment through the following acts:
            1.   Refraining from participation in, or encouragement of, actions
that could be perceived as harassment;
            2.   Reporting acts of harassment to a supervisor; and
            3.   Encouraging any employee, who confides that he or she is being
harassed, to report these acts to a supervisor.
         D.   Failure to take action to stop known harassment shall be grounds
for discipline.
      (3)   Complaint procedures.
         A.   Employees encountering harassment shall tell the harasser that
his or her actions are unwelcome and offensive. The employee shall document all
incidents of harassment in order to provide the fullest basis for
investigation.
         B.   Any employee who believes that he or she is being harassed shall
report the incident(s) to his or her supervisor as soon as possible so that
steps may be taken to protect the employee from further harassment and
appropriate investigative and disciplinary measures may be initiated. Where
this is not practical, the employee may instead file a complaint with another
supervisor, the internal investigations authority or the Mayor.
            1.   The supervisor or other person to whom a complaint is given
shall meet with the employee and document the incidents complained of, the
person(s) performing or participating in the harassment and the dates on which
it occurred.
            2.   The city employee taking the complaint shall expeditiously
deliver the complaint to the Mayor.
         C.   The Mayor or his or her designee shall be responsible for the
investigation of any complaint alleging harassment.
            1.   The Mayor shall immediately notify the Law Director if the
complaint contains evidence of criminal activity, such as battery, rape or
attempted rape.
            2.   The Mayor shall include a determination as to whether or not
other employees are being harassed by the person and as to whether or not other
city employees participated in or encouraged the harassment.
            3.   The Mayor shall inform the parties involved of the outcome of
the investigation.
            4.   The city shall maintain a file of harassment complaints in a
secure location. Council shall be provided with an annual summary of these
complaints.
         D.   There shall be no retaliation against any employee for filing a
harassment complaint or assisting, testifying or participating in the
investigation of such a complaint.
      (4)   Grievance procedure. Complainants or employees accused of
harassment may file a grievance/appeal in accordance with city procedures when
they disagree with the investigation or disposition of a harassment claim. This
section does not preclude any employee from filing a complaint or grievance
with an appropriate outside agency.
(Res. 93-R-81, passed 12-20-1993)
TITLE EIGHT - BOARDS, COMMISSIONS, AGENCIES AND COMMITTEES
CHAPTER 260:  PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION
Section
Editor's note:
   Provisions relating to the Planning and Zoning Commission are codified in
Chapter 1220 of Part Twelve - the Planning and Zoning Code.
CHAPTER 262:  BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS
Section
Editor's note:
   Provisions relating to the Board of Zoning Appeals are codified in
Chapter 1264 of Part Twelve - the Planning and Zoning Code.
CHAPTER 264:  RECORDS COMMISSION
Section
264.01   Establishment; composition; compensation.
264.02   Meetings; duties.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Photostat or microfilm recording - see Ohio R.C. 9.01
   Procedure for disposal of records - see Ohio R.C. 149.39
   Public records - see ADM.
Ch. 208
§ 264.01  ESTABLISHMENT; COMPOSITION; COMPENSATION.
   There is hereby established, in accordance with Ohio R.C. 149.39, a Records
Commission, which shall consist of the Mayor (who shall be the Chairperson),
the Director of Finance, the Director of Law and a citizen appointed by the
Mayor, who shall serve a term on the Commission which coincides with the term
of Office of the Mayor. The Commission shall appoint a Secretary, who shall not
be a member of the Commission, to serve at the pleasure of the Commission. The
Commission members and the Secretary shall serve without compensation.
(Ord. 82-O-30, passed 3-15-1982)
§ 264.02  MEETINGS; DUTIES.
   The Records Commission shall meet every six months and upon call of the
Chairperson and shall perform the duties set forth in Ohio R.C. 149.39. In
addition to such duties, the Commission shall, when deemed advisable by the
membership, initiate and promulgate plans for the reproduction of city records,
by lawful means, for the purposes of more economical storage and improved
safety thereof.
(Ord. 82-O-30, passed 3-15-1982)
CHAPTER 266:  BOARD OF TAX REVIEW
Section
266.01   Establishment; membership.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Board of Review of the Earned Income Tax - see B.R. & T.
882.34
   Earned Income Tax - see B.R. & T.
Ch. 882
   Taxation - see
CHTR. Art. VI
§ 266.01  ESTABLISHMENT; MEMBERSHIP.
   There is hereby established a Board of Tax Review in and for the city. The
membership and jurisdiction of such Board shall be as set forth in Section
883.21 of the Codified Ordinances. The Board of Tax Review is authorized and
empowered to hear and determine, as set forth in Section 883.21, matters that
relate to all income taxes, including, but not limited to, those that relate to
or involve tax years beginning on or before December 31, 2015.
(Res. 74-O-103, passed 8-26-1974; Am. Ord. 16-O-6, passed 2-1-2016)
CHAPTER 268:  VOLUNTEER FIREFIGHTERS DEPENDENTS FUND BOARD
Section
268.01   Establishment.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Division of Fire - see ADM.
Ch. 246
   Volunteer Firefighters Dependents Fund - see Ohio R.C. Ch. 146
§ 268.01  ESTABLISHMENT.
   Pursuant to Ohio R.C. 146.02, there is hereby established a Volunteer
Firefighters Dependents Fund Board in and for the city. The membership and
functions of the Board shall be as provided in Ohio R.C. 146.02 et seq.
(Res. 72-O-71, passed 7-31-1972)
CHAPTER 270:  CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION
Section
270.01   Establishment.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Application to police and fire personnel - see Ohio R.C. 737.051, 737.10,
737.11
   Civil service law - see Ohio R.C. Ch. 124
   Civil service - see Ohio Const., Art. XV, § 10
   Civil Service Commission- see CHTR.
Art. III, § 4
   Employees generally - see ADM.
Ch. 254
§ 270.01  ESTABLISHMENT.
   Pursuant to
Article III, § 4, of the City Charter, there are hereby established a Civil
Service Commission and a civil service system in and for the city.
(Ord. 71-O-83, passed 9-13-1971)
CHAPTER 272:  BOARD OF CEMETERY TRUSTEES(REPEALED)
Editor’s note:
   Chapter 272 was repealed by Ord. 15-O-22, passed May 18, 2015.
CHAPTER 274:  PARK AND RECREATION COMMISSION
Section
Editor's note:
   There are no sections in
Chapter 274. This chapter has been established to provide a place for cross
references and any future legislation.
CHAPTER 276:  LAKE COUNTY DISASTER SERVICES AGENCY
Section
Editor's note:
   Res. 74-O-60, passed March 18, 1974, certified the city's membership in the
Lake County Disaster Services Agency and authorized the Mayor, on behalf of the
city, to participate in activities of such agency.
   There are no sections in
Chapter 276. This chapter has been established to provide a place for cross
references and any future legislation.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Emergency Management - see ADM.
Ch. 252
   Flood damage reduction- see B. & H.
Ch. 1446
   Inducing panic - see GEN. OFF.
648.07
   Misconduct at an emergency - see GEN. OFF.
648.06
   Responsibilities upon discovery of unfriendly fires - see F.P.
1610.08
CHAPTER 278:  CHARTER REVIEW COMMITTEE
Section
Editor's note:
   There are no sections in
Chapter 278. This chapter has been established to provide a place for cross
references and any future legislation.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Charter Review Committee - see CHTR.
Art. VII, § 2
CHAPTER 280:  PUBLIC UTILITIES COMMISSION
Section
280.01   Establishment; composition; compensation.
280.02   Duties.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Electricity - see S.U. & P.S.
Ch. 1046
   Gas - see S.U. & P.S.
Ch. 1044
   Ohio Public Utilities Commission - see Ohio R.C. Ch. 4901.01 et seq.
   Sewers and private disposal systems - see S.U. & P.S.
Ch. 1042
   Tampering with and theft of utilities - see GEN. OFF.
642.26
   Water - see S.U. & P.S.
Ch. 1040
§ 280.01  ESTABLISHMENT; COMPOSITION; COMPENSATION.
   There is hereby established a Public Utilities Commission which shall
consist of the Mayor, the Public Service Administrator, the City Engineer, the
Director of Finance, the President of Council and one other Council member
selected by the President and approved by Council. The Commission shall appoint
a Secretary, who shall not be a member of the Commission, to serve at the
pleasure of the Commission. Commission members shall serve without
compensation. The Mayor and the President shall serve as co-Chairperson and the
Commission shall meet upon the call of Council or either co-Chairperson.
(Ord. 83-O-73, passed 12-19-1983)
§ 280.02  DUTIES.
   (a)   The Public Utilities Commission shall determine the rates for premises
served by a sanitary sewerage system within the jurisdiction of the Sewage
Treatment Division and shall otherwise comply with the requirements of §
1042.02.
   (b)   The Commission, upon the request of Council, shall investigate and
recommend water rates and rules and regulations which may be adopted pursuant
to
Chapter 1040.
(Ord. 83-O-73, passed 12-19-1983)
TITLE TEN - JUDICIARY
CHAPTER 290:  MUNICIPAL COURT
Section
Editor's note:
   The city does not maintain a Mayor's Court. Violations of city law are
prosecuted in the Willoughby Municipal Court. Equitable remedies are pursued in
the Lake County Court of Common Pleas.
   There are no sections in
Chapter 290. This chapter has been established to provide a place for cross
references and any future legislation.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Judicial powers of the Mayor - see CHTR.
Art. II, § 4
   Juvenile Court jurisdiction; arrest of child - see Ohio R.C. 2151.01,
2151.23, 2152.03
   Municipal Court - see Ohio R.C. Ch. 1901
   Notification to Director of liquor law convictions - see Ohio R.C. 4301.991
   Obstructing justice - see GEN. OFF.
606.15
   Record of traffic violations - see Ohio R.C. 4513.37
   Release of Court Clerk's liability for loss of funds - see Ohio R.C. 131.18
et seq.
   Suspension or revocation of driver's license - see TRAF.
408.03; GEN. OFF.
698.07
   Using sham legal process - see GEN. OFF.
606.28
PART FOUR: TRAFFIC CODE
   Chapter
      TITLE TWO - ADMINISTRATION, ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES
         
402.   Definitions.
         
404.   Enforcement; Impounding.
         
406.   Traffic Control.
         
408.   Penalties.
      TITLE FOUR - PUBLIC WAYS AND TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES
         
412.   Obstruction and Special Uses of Public Ways.
         
414.   Traffic Control Devices.
         
416.   Pedestrians.
      TITLE SIX - OPERATION AND VEHICLES
         
432.   Operation Generally.
         
434.   O.V.I.; Reckless Operation; Speed.
         
436.   Licensing; Accidents.
         
438.   Safety and Equipment.
         
440.   Commercial and Heavy Vehicles.
         
442.   Drivers of Commercial Vehicles.
         
444.   Offenses Relating to Theft and Fraud.
         
446.   Lakeland Community College.
         
448.   The Holden Arboretum.
      TITLE EIGHT - PARKING
         
452.   Parking Generally.
         
454.   Fire Lanes.
      TITLE TEN - BICYCLES, MOTORCYCLES AND SNOWMOBILES
         
474.   Bicycles and Motorcycles Generally.
         
476.   Snowmobiles, Off-Highway Motorcycles and All-Purpose Vehicles.
TITLE TWO - ADMINISTRATION, ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES
CHAPTER 402:  DEFINITIONS
Section
402.01   Meaning of words and phrases.
402.02   Agricultural tractor; multi-wheel agricultural tractor.
402.03   Alley.
402.04   Arterial street.
402.045   Beacon.
402.05   Bicycle.
402.06   Bus.
402.07   Business district.
402.075   Chauffeured limousine.
402.077   Child day-care center or Type A family day-care home.
402.08   Commercial tractor.
402.09   Controlled-access highway.
402.10   Crosswalk.
402.11   Driver or operator.
402.12   Emergency vehicle.
402.13   Explosives.
402.14   Expressway.
402.15   Flammable liquid.
402.16   Freeway.
402.165   Funeral escort vehicle.
402.17   Gross weight.
402.173   Highway maintenance vehicle.
402.175   Highway traffic signal.
402.177   Hybrid beacon.
402.18   Intersection.
402.19   Laned highway.
402.195   Local authorities.
402.197   Median.
402.20   Motor vehicle.
402.21   Motorcycle.
402.22   Motorized bicycle or moped.
402.225   Motorized wheelchair.
402.227   Operate.
402.23   Parking.
402.24   Pedestrian.
402.25   Person.
402.26   Pole trailer.
402.27   Police officer.
402.275   Predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense.
402.277   Private road open to public travel.
402.28   Private road or driveway.
402.29   Public safety vehicle.
402.30   Railroad.
402.31   Railroad sign or signal.
402.32   Railroad train.
402.33   Residence district.
402.335   Ridesharing arrangement.
402.34   Right-of-way.
402.345   Road service vehicle.
402.35   Roadway.
402.355   Rural mail delivery vehicle.
402.36   Safety zone.
402.37   School bus.
402.38   Semitrailer.
402.385   Shared-use path.
402.39   Sidewalk.
402.395   State highway.
402.40   State route.
402.41   Stop.
402.42   Stop intersection.
402.43   Stopping and standing.
402.44   Street or highway.
402.45   Through street or highway.
402.46   Thruway.
402.47   Traffic.
402.48   Traffic control device.
402.49   Traffic control signal.
402.50   Trailer.
402.51   Truck.
402.52   Urban district.
402.53   Vehicle.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Blind person defined - see TRAF.
416.02
   Commercial car defined - see TRAF.
442.01
   Funeral procession defined - see TRAF.
432.23
   See section histories for similar state law
   Snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle and all-purpose vehicle defined - see
TRAF.
446.01
§ 402.01  MEANING OF WORDS AND PHRASES.
   (a)   Except as otherwise provided, the definitions set forth in Ohio R.C.
4501.01 shall apply to this Traffic Code and the penal laws of the
Municipality.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided, the following words and phrases, when
used in this Traffic Code, shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to
them in this chapter.
§ 402.02  AGRICULTURAL TRACTOR; MULTI-WHEEL AGRICULTURAL TRACTOR.
   (a)   "Agricultural tractor" means every self-propelled vehicle designed or
used for drawing other vehicles or wheeled machinery, but having no provision
for carrying loads independently of such other vehicles, and used principally
for agricultural purposes.
(ORC 4511.01(J))
   (b)    "Multi-wheel agricultural tractor" means a type of agricultural
tractor that has two or more wheels or tires on each side of one axle at the
rear of the tractor, is designed or used for drawing other vehicles or wheeled
machinery, has no provision for carrying loads independently of the drawn
vehicles or machinery, and is used principally for agricultural purposes.
(ORC 4511.01(GGG))
§ 402.03  ALLEY.
   "Alley" means a street or highway intended to provide access to the rear or
side of lots or buildings in urban districts, and not intended for the purpose
of through vehicular traffic, and any street or highway that has been declared
an "alley" by the Council.
(ORC 4511.01(XX))
§ 402.04  ARTERIAL STREET.
   "Arterial street" means any United States or state numbered route,
controlled-access highway, or other major radial or circumferential street or
highway designated by local authorities within their respective jurisdictions
as part of a major arterial system of streets or highways.
(ORC 4511.01(CCC))
§ 402.045  BEACON.
   “Beacon” means a highway traffic signal with one or more signal sections
that operate in a flashing mode.
(ORC 4511.01(KKK))
§ 402.05  BICYCLE.
   “Bicycle” means every device, other than a device that is designed solely
for use as a play vehicle by a child, that is propelled solely by human power
upon which a person may ride, and that has two or more wheels, any of which is
more than 14 inches in diameter.
(ORC 4511.01(G))
§ 402.06  BUS.
   "Bus" means every motor vehicle designed for carrying more than nine
passengers, and used for the transportation of persons other than in a
ridesharing arrangement, and every motor vehicle, automobile for hire, or
funeral car, other than a taxicab or motor vehicle used in a ridesharing
arrangement, designed and used for the transportation of persons for
compensation.
(ORC 4511.01(L))
§ 402.07  BUSINESS DISTRICT.
   "Business district" means the territory fronting upon a street or highway,
including the street or highway, between successive intersections within the
municipality, where 50% or more of the frontage between successive
intersections is occupied by buildings in use for business, or within or
outside the municipality where 50% or more of the frontage for a distance of
300 feet or more is occupied by buildings in use for business, and the
character of the territory is indicated by official traffic-control devices.
(ORC 4511.01(NN))
§ 402.075  CHAUFFEURED LIMOUSINE.
   “Chauffeured limousine” means a motor vehicle that is designed to carry nine
or fewer passengers and is operated for hire pursuant to a prearranged contract
for the transportation of passengers on public roads and highways along a route
under the control of the person hiring the vehicle and not over a defined and
regular route. “Prearranged contract” means an agreement, made in advance of
boarding, to provide transportation from a specific location in a chauffeured
limousine. “Chauffeured limousine” does not include any vehicle that is used
exclusively in the business of funeral directing.
(ORC 4501.01(LL))
§ 402.077  CHILD DAY-CARE CENTER OR TYPE A FAMILY DAY-CARE HOME.
   "Child day-care center" and "Type A family day-care home" have the same
meanings as set forth in Ohio R.C. 5104.01.
(ORC 4511.01(FFF))
§ 402.08  COMMERCIAL TRACTOR.
   "Commercial tractor" means every motor vehicle having motive power designed
or used for drawing other vehicles, and not so constructed as to carry any load
thereon, or designed or used for drawing other vehicles while carrying a
portion of the other vehicles, or the load thereon, or both.
(ORC 4511.01(I))
§ 402.09  CONTROLLED-ACCESS HIGHWAY.
   "Controlled-access highway" means every street or highway in respect to
which owners or occupants of abutting lands and other persons have no legal
right or access to or from the same except at certain points only and in a
manner as may be determined by the public authority having jurisdiction over
the street or highway.
(ORC 4511.01(CC))
§ 402.10  CROSSWALK.
   "Crosswalk" means:
   (a)   That part of a roadway at intersections ordinarily included within the
real or projected prolongation of property lines and curb lines or, in the
absence of curbs, the edges of the traversable roadway;
   (b)   Any portion of a roadway at an intersection or elsewhere, distinctly
indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other markings on the surface;
   (c)   Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this definition, there
shall not be a crosswalk where the Legislative Authority has placed signs
indicating no crossing.
(ORC 4511.01(LL))
§ 402.11  DRIVER OR OPERATOR.
   "Driver" or "operator" means every person who drives or is in actual
physical control of a vehicle.
(ORC 4511.01(Y))
§ 402.12  EMERGENCY VEHICLE.
   "Emergency vehicle" means emergency vehicles of municipal, township or
county departments or public utility corporations, when identified as such as
required by law, the Director of Public Safety, or local authorities, and motor
vehicles when commandeered by a police officer.
(ORC 4511.01(D))
§ 402.13  EXPLOSIVES.
   "Explosives" means any chemical compound or mechanical mixture that is
intended for the purpose of producing an explosion that contains any oxidizing
and combustible units or other ingredients in such proportions, quantities, or
packing that an ignition by fire, by friction, by concussion, by percussion, or
by a detonator of any part of the compound or mixture may cause a sudden
generation of highly heated gases, such that the resultant gaseous pressures
are capable of producing destructive effects on contiguous objects, or of
destroying life or limb. Manufactured articles shall not be held to be
explosives when the individual units contain explosives in limited quantities
of such nature or in such packing that it is impossible to procure a
simultaneous or a destructive explosion of the units, to the injury of life,
limb, or property by fire, friction, concussion, percussion, or by a detonator,
such as fixed ammunition for small arms, firecrackers, or safety fuse matches.
(ORC 4511.01(T))
§ 402.14  EXPRESSWAY.
   "Expressway" means a divided arterial highway for through traffic with full
or partial control of access with an excess of 50% of all crossroads separated
in grade.
(ORC 4511.01(ZZ))
§ 402.15  FLAMMABLE LIQUID.
   "Flammable liquid" means any liquid which has a flash point of 70°F or less,
as determined by a tagliabue or equivalent closed cup test device.
(ORC 4511.01(U))
§ 402.16  FREEWAY.
   "Freeway" means a divided multi-lane highway for through traffic with
crossroads separated in grade and with full control of access.
(ORC 4511.01(YY))
§ 402.165  FUNERAL ESCORT VEHICLE.
   "Funeral escort vehicle" means any motor vehicle, including a funeral
hearse, while used to facilitate the movement of a funeral procession.
(ORC 4511.01(WW))
§ 402.17  GROSS WEIGHT.
   "Gross weight" means the weight of a vehicle plus the weight of any load
thereon.
(ORC 4511.01(V))
§ 402.173  HIGHWAY MAINTENANCE VEHICLE.
   “Highway maintenance vehicle” means a vehicle used in snow and ice removal
or road surface maintenance, including a snow plow, traffic line striper, road
sweeper, mowing machine, asphalt distributing vehicle, or other such vehicle
designed for use in specific highway maintenance activities.
(R.C. § 4511.01(QQQ))
§ 402.175  HIGHWAY TRAFFIC SIGNAL.
   “Highway traffic signal” means a power-operated traffic control device by
which traffic is warned or directed to take some specific action. The term does
not include a power-operated sign, steadily illuminated pavement marker,
warning light, or steady burning electric lamp.
(ORC 4511.01(MMM))
§ 402.177  HYBRID BEACON.
   “Hybrid beacon” means a type of beacon that is intentionally placed in a
dark mode between periods of operation where no indications are displayed and,
when in operation, displays both steady and flashing traffic control signal
indications.
(ORC 4511.01(LLL))
§ 402.18  INTERSECTION.
   “Intersection” means:
      (1)   The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the
lateral curb lines, or, if none, the lateral boundary lines of the roadways of
two highways that join one another at, or approximately at, right angles, or
the area within which vehicles traveling upon different highways that join at
any other angle might come into conflict. The junction of an alley or driveway
with a roadway or highway does not constitute an intersection unless the
roadway or highway at the junction is controlled by a traffic control device.
      (2)   If a highway includes two roadways that are 30 feet or more apart,
then every crossing of each roadway of such divided highway by an intersecting
highway constitutes a separate intersection. If both intersecting highways
include two roadways 30 feet or more apart, then every crossing of any two
roadways of such highways constitutes a separate intersection.
      (3)   At a location controlled by a traffic control signal, regardless of
the distance between the separate intersections as described in subsection (2)
of this definition:
         A.   If a stop line, yield line, or crosswalk has not been designated
on the roadway within the median between the separate intersections, the two
intersections and the roadway and median constitute one intersection.
         B.   Where a stop line, yield line, or crosswalk line is designated on
the roadway on the intersection approach, the area within the crosswalk and any
area beyond the designated stop line or yield line constitute part of the
intersection.
         C.   Where a crosswalk is designated on a roadway on the departure
from the intersection, the intersection includes the area that extends to the
far side of the crosswalk.
(ORC 4511.01(KK))
§ 402.19  LANED HIGHWAY.
   "Laned highway" means a highway the roadway of which is divided into two or
more clearly marked lanes for vehicular traffic.
(ORC 4511.01(GG))
§ 402.195  LOCAL AUTHORITIES.
   "Local authorities" means every county, municipal, and other local board or
body having authority to adopt police regulations under the Constitution and
laws of this State.
(ORC 4511.01(AA))
§ 402.197  MEDIAN.
   “Median” means the area between two roadways of a divided highway, measured
from edge of traveled way to edge of traveled way, but excluding turn lanes.
The width of a median may be different between intersections, between
interchanges, and at opposite approaches of the same intersection.
(ORC 4511.01(NNN))
§ 402.20  MOTOR VEHICLE.
   "Motor vehicle" means every vehicle propelled or drawn by power other than
muscular power or power collected from overhead electric trolley wires, except
motorized bicycles, road rollers, traction engines, power shovels, power cranes
and other equipment used in construction work, and not designed for or employed
in general highway transportation, hole-digging machinery, well-drilling
machinery, ditch-digging machinery, farm machinery, and trailers designed and
used exclusively to transport a boat between a place of storage and a marina,
or in and around a marina, when drawn or towed on a street or highway for a
distance of no more than ten miles and at a speed of 25 miles per hour or less.
(ORC 4511.01(B))
§ 402.21  MOTORCYCLE.
   “Motorcycle” means every motor vehicle, other than a tractor, having a seat
or saddle for the use of the operator and designed to travel on not more than
three wheels in contact with the ground, including, but not limited to, motor
vehicles known as “motor-driven cycle”, “motor scooter”, “autocycle”, “cab-
enclosed motorcycle”, or “motorcycle” without regard to weight or brake
horsepower.
(ORC 4511.01(C))
§ 402.22  MOTORIZED BICYCLE OR MOPED.
   “Motorized bicycle or moped” means any vehicle having either two tandem
wheels or one wheel in the front and two wheels in the rear, that may be
capable of being pedaled, and that is equipped with a helper motor of not more
than 50 cubic centimeters piston displacement that produces not more than one
brake horsepower, and is capable of propelling the vehicle at a speed of not
greater than 20 miles per hour on a level surface.
(ORC 4511.01(H))
§ 402.225  MOTORIZED WHEELCHAIR.
   "Motorized wheelchair" means any self-propelled vehicle designed for, and
used by, a person with a disability and that is incapable of a speed in excess
of eight miles per hour.
(ORC 4511.01(EEE))
§ 402.227  OPERATE.
   "Operate" means to cause or have caused movement of a vehicle.
(ORC 4511.01(HHH))
§ 402.23  PARKING.
   "Parking", when prohibited, means the standing of a vehicle, whether
occupied or not, otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while
actually engaged in loading or unloading merchandise or passengers.
§ 402.24  PEDESTRIAN.
   “Pedestrian” means any natural person afoot.  The term includes a personal
delivery device as defined in R.C. § 4511.513 unless the context clearly
suggests otherwise.
(ORC 4511.01(X))
§ 402.25  PERSON.
   "Person" means every natural person, firm, partnership, association or
corporation.
(ORC 4511.01(W))
§ 402.26  POLE TRAILER.
   "Pole trailer" means every trailer or semitrailer attached to the towing
vehicle by means of a reach, pole, or by being boomed or otherwise secured to
the towing vehicle, and ordinarily used for transporting long or irregular
shaped loads such as poles, pipes, or structural members capable, generally, of
sustaining themselves as beams between the supporting connections.
(ORC 4511.01(O))
§ 402.27  POLICE OFFICER.
   "Police officer" means every officer authorized to direct or regulate
traffic, or to make arrests for violations of traffic regulations.
(ORC 4511.01(Z))
§ 402.275  PREDICATE MOTOR VEHICLE OR TRAFFIC OFFENSE.
   “Predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense” means any of the following:
   (a)   A violation of Ohio R.C. 4511.03, 4511.051, 4511.12, 4511.132,
4511.16, 4511.20, 4511.201, 4511.21, 4511.211, 4511.213, 4511.214, 4511.22,
4511.23, 4511.25, 4511.26, 4511.27, 4511.28, 4511.29, 4511.30, 4511.31,
4511.32, 4511.33, 4511.34, 4511.35, 4511.36, 4511.37, 4511.38, 4511.39,
4511.40, 4511.41, 4511.42, 4511.43, 4511.431, 4511.432, 4511.44, 4511.441,
4511.451, 4511.452, 4511.46, 4511.47, 4511.48, 4511.481, 4511.49, 4511.50,
4511.511, 4511.53, 4511.54, 4511.55, 4511.56, 4511.57, 4511.58, 4511.59,
4511.60, 4511.61, 4511.64, 4511.66, 4511.661, 4511.68, 4511.70, 4511.701,
4511.71, 4511.711, 4511.712, 4511.713, 4511.72, 4511.73, 4511.763, 4511.771,
4511.78, or 4511.84;
   (b)   A violation of Ohio R.C. 4511.17(A)(2), 4511.51(A) to (D), or 4511.74
(A);
   (c)   A violation of any provision of Ohio R.C. 4511.01 to 4511.76 for which
no penalty otherwise is provided in the section that contains the provision
violated;
   (d)   A violation of a municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent
to any section or provision set forth or described in subsection (a), (b), or
(c) of this definition.
(ORC 4511.01(III))
§ 402.277  PRIVATE ROAD OPEN TO PUBLIC TRAVEL.
   “Private road open to public travel” means a private toll road or road,
including any adjacent sidewalks that generally run parallel to the road,
within a shopping center, airport, sports arena, or other similar business or
recreation facility that is privately owned but where the public is allowed to
travel without access restrictions. The term includes a gated toll road but
does not include a road within a private gated property where access is
restricted at all times, a parking area, a driving aisle within a parking area,
or a private grade crossing.
(ORC 4511.01(OOO))
§ 402.28  PRIVATE ROAD OR DRIVEWAY.
   "Private road or driveway" means every way or place in private ownership
used for vehicular travel by the owner, and those having express or implied
permission from the owner, but not by other persons.
(ORC 4511.01(DD))
§ 402.29  PUBLIC SAFETY VEHICLE.
   "Public safety vehicle" means any of the following:
   (a)   Ambulances, including private ambulance companies under contract to a
municipality, township, or county, and private ambulances and nontransport
vehicles bearing license plates issued under Ohio R.C. 4503.49;
   (b)   Motor vehicles used by public law enforcement officers or other
persons sworn to enforce the criminal and traffic laws of the state;
   (c)   Any motor vehicle when properly identified as required by the Director
of Public Safety, when used in response to fire emergency calls or to provide
emergency medical service to ill or injured persons, and when operated by a
duly qualified person who is a member of a volunteer rescue service or a
volunteer fire department, and who is on duty pursuant to the rules or
directives of that service. The state Fire Marshal shall be designated by the
Director of Public Safety as the certifying agency for all public safety
vehicles described herein;
   (d)   Vehicles used by fire departments, including motor vehicles when used
by volunteer firefighters responding to emergency calls in the fire department
service when identified as required by the Director of Public Safety;
   (e)   Any vehicle used to transport or provide emergency medical service to
an ill or injured person, when certified as a "public safety vehicle", shall be
considered such a vehicle when transporting an ill or injured person to a
hospital, regardless of whether such vehicle has already passed a hospital;
   (f)   Vehicles used by the Motor Carrier Enforcement Unit for the
enforcement of orders and rules of the Public Utilities Commission as specified
in Ohio R.C. 5503.34.
(ORC 4511.01(E))
§ 402.30  RAILROAD.
   "Railroad" means a carrier of persons or property operating upon rails
placed principally on a private right-of-way.
(ORC 4511.01(P))
§ 402.31  RAILROAD SIGN OR SIGNAL.
   "Railroad sign or signal" means any sign, signal, or device erected by
authority of a public body or official or by a railroad, and intended to give
notice of the presence of railroad tracks or the approach of a railroad train.
(ORC 4511.01(SS))
§ 402.32  RAILROAD TRAIN.
   "Railroad train" means a steam engine or an electric or other motor, with or
without cars coupled thereto, operated by a railroad.
(ORC 4511.01(Q))
§ 402.33  RESIDENCE DISTRICT.
   "Residence district" means the territory, not comprising a business
district, fronting on a street or highway, including the street or highway,
where, for a distance of 300 feet or more, the frontage is improved with
residences or residences and buildings in use for business.
(ORC 4511.01(OO))
§ 402.335  RIDESHARING ARRANGEMENT.
   "Ridesharing arrangement" includes the transportation of persons in a motor
vehicle where the transportation is incidental to another purpose of a
volunteer driver, and includes ridesharing arrangements known as carpools,
vanpools, and buspools.
(ORC 4511.01(DDD))
§ 402.34  RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   "Right-of-way" means either of the following, as the context requires:
   (a)   The right of a vehicle or pedestrian to proceed uninterruptedly in a
lawful manner in the direction in which it, he or she is moving, in preference
to another vehicle or pedestrian approaching from a different direction into
its, his or her path;
   (b)   A general term denoting land, property, or the interest therein,
usually in the configuration of a strip, acquired for or devoted to
transportation purposes. When used in this context, "right-of-way" includes the
roadway, shoulders or berm, ditch, and slopes extending to the right-of-way
limits under the control of the state or local authority.
(ORC 4511.01(UU))
§ 402.345  ROAD SERVICE VEHICLE.
   “Road service vehicle” means wreckers, utility repair vehicles and state,
county and municipal service vehicles equipped with visual signals by means of
flashing, rotating or oscillating lights.
(ORC 4511.01(JJJ))
§ 402.35  ROADWAY.
   "Roadway" means that portion of a highway improved, designed, or ordinarily
used for vehicular travel, except the berm or shoulder. If a highway includes
two or more separate roadways, the term "roadway" means any roadway separately,
but not all the roadways collectively.
(ORC 4511.01(EE))
§ 402.355  RURAL MAIL DELIVERY VEHICLE.
   "Rural mail delivery vehicle" means every vehicle used to deliver United
States mail on a rural mail delivery route.
(ORC 4511.01(VV))
§ 402.36  SAFETY ZONE.
   "Safety zone" means the area or space officially set apart within a roadway
for the exclusive use of pedestrians, and protected or marked or indicated by
adequate signs so as to be plainly visible at all times.
(ORC 4511.01(MM))
§ 402.37  SCHOOL BUS.
   "School bus" means every bus designed for carrying more than nine passengers
which is owned by a public, private, or governmental agency or institution of
learning, and operated for the transportation of children to or from a school
session or a school function, or owned by a private person and operated for
compensation for the transportation of children to or from a school session or
a school function; provided "school bus" does not include a bus operated by a
municipally owned transportation system, a mass transit company operating
exclusively within the territorial limits of a municipality, or within such
limits and the territorial limits of municipalities immediately contiguous to
the municipality, nor a common passenger carrier certified by the Public
Utilities Commission unless the bus is devoted exclusively to the
transportation of children to and from a school session or a school function,
and "school bus" does not include a van or bus used by a licensed child day-
care center or Type A family day-care home to transport children from the child
day-care center or Type A family day-care home to a school if the van or bus
does not have more than 15 children in the van or bus at any time.
(ORC 4511.01(F))
§ 402.38  SEMITRAILER.
   "Semitrailer" means every vehicle designed or used for carrying persons or
property with another and separate motor vehicle so that in operation a part of
its own weight or that of its load, or both, rests upon and is carried by
another vehicle.
(ORC 4511.01(N))
§ 402.385  SHARED-USE PATH.
   “Shared-use path” means a bikeway outside the traveled way and physically
separated from motorized vehicular traffic by an open space or barrier and
either within the highway right-of-way or within an independent alignment. A
shared-use path also may be used by pedestrians, including skaters, joggers,
users of manual and motorized wheelchairs, and other authorized motorized and
non-motorized users.
(ORC 4511.01(PPP))
§ 402.39  SIDEWALK.
   "Sidewalk" means that portion of a street between the curb lines, or the
lateral line of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines, intended for the
use of pedestrians.
(ORC 4511.01(FF))
§ 402.395  STATE HIGHWAY.
   "State highway" means a highway under the jurisdiction of the Department of
Transportation, outside the limits of municipalities, provided that the
authority conferred upon the Director of Transportation in Ohio R.C. 5511.01 to
erect state highway route markers and signs directing traffic shall not be
modified by Ohio R.C. 4511.01 through 4511.79 and 4511.99.
(ORC 4511.01(II))
§ 402.40  STATE ROUTE.
   "State route" means every highway which is designated with an official state
route number and so marked.
(ORC 4511.01(JJ))
§ 402.41  STOP.
   "Stop", when required, means a complete cessation of movement.
§ 402.42  STOP INTERSECTION.
   "Stop intersection" means any intersection at one or more entrances of which
stop signs are erected.
(ORC 4511.01(BBB))
§ 402.43  STOPPING AND STANDING.
   "Stopping" and "standing", when prohibited, mean any halting of a vehicle,
even momentarily, whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid
conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police
officer or traffic control device.
§ 402.44  STREET OR HIGHWAY.
   "Street" or "highway" means the entire width between the boundary lines of
every way open to the use of the public as a thoroughfare for purposes of
vehicular travel.
(ORC 4511.01(BB))
§ 402.45  THROUGH STREET OR HIGHWAY.
   "Through street or highway" means every street or highway as provided in
Ohio R.C. 4511.65, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
(ORC 4511.01(HH))
§ 402.46  THRUWAY.
   "Thruway" means a through street or highway whose entire roadway is reserved
for through traffic and on which roadway parking is prohibited.
(ORC 4511.01(AAA))
§ 402.47  TRAFFIC.
   “Traffic” means pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles, streetcars,
and other devices, either singly or together, while using for purposes of
travel any highway or private road open to public travel.
(ORC 4511.01(TT))
§ 402.48  TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICE.
   “Traffic control devices” means a flagger, sign, signal, marking, or other
device used to regulate, warn, or guide traffic, placed on, over, or adjacent
to a street, highway, private road open to public travel, pedestrian facility,
or shared-use path by authority of a public agency or official having
jurisdiction, or, in the case of a private road open to public travel, by
authority of the private owner or private official having jurisdiction.
(ORC 4511.01(QQ))
§ 402.49  TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNAL.
   “Traffic control signal” means any highway traffic signal by which traffic
is alternately directed to stop and permitted to proceed.
(ORC 4511.01(RR))
§ 402.50  TRAILER.
   "Trailer" means every vehicle designed or used for carrying persons or
property wholly on its own structure, and for being drawn by a motor vehicle,
including any vehicle when formed by or operated as a combination of a
semitrailer and a vehicle of the dolly type, such as that commonly known as a
trailer dolly, a vehicle used to transport agricultural produce or agricultural
production materials between a local place of storage or supply and the farm
when drawn or towed on a street or highway at a speed greater than 25 miles per
hour and a vehicle designed and used exclusively to transport a boat between a
place of storage and a marina, or in and around a marina, when drawn or towed
on a street or highway for a distance of more than ten miles or at a speed of
more than 25 miles per hour.
(ORC 4511.01(M))
§ 402.51  TRUCK.
   "Truck" means every motor vehicle, except trailers and semitrailers,
designed and used to carry property.
(ORC 4511.01(K))
§ 402.52  URBAN DISTRICT.
   "Urban district" means the territory contiguous to and including any street
or highway which is built up with structures devoted to business, industry, or
dwelling houses situated at intervals of less than 100 feet for a distance of
one-quarter of a mile or more, and the character of the territory is indicated
by official traffic-control devices.
(ORC 4511.01(PP))
§ 402.53  VEHICLE.
   “Vehicle” means every device, including a motorized bicycle, in, upon, or by
which any person or property may be transported or drawn upon a highway, except
that “vehicle” does not include any motorized wheelchair, any electric personal
assistive mobility device, any personal delivery device as defined in R.C. §
4511.513, any device that is moved by power collected from overhead electric
trolley wire or that is used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks, or
any device, other than a bicycle, that is moved by human power.
(ORC 4511.01(A))
CHAPTER 404:  ENFORCEMENT; IMPOUNDING
Section
404.01   Compliance with lawful order of police officer; fleeing. (Recodified)
404.02   Resisting an enforcing official.
404.03   Road workers, motor vehicles and equipment excepted.
404.035   Emergency, public safety and coroners' vehicles excepted.
404.04   Application to persons riding, driving animals upon roadway.
404.05   Impounding of vehicles; redemption.
404.06   Traffic direction in emergencies; obedience to school guards.
404.07   Application to drivers of government vehicles.
404.08   Furnishing false information incident to traffic citation.
404.99   Penalty.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Arrest without warrant for misdemeanor - see Ohio R.C. 2935.03
   Authority of arresting officer when radar, electrical or mechanical timing
device used -  see Ohio R.C. 4511.091
   Burden of proof - see Ohio R.C. 2901.05
   Dereliction of duty - see GEN. OFF.
606.19
   Discharge for delay in trial - see Ohio R.C. 2945.73
   Disposition of property held by Police Division - see GEN. OFF.
606.24
   Disposition of unclaimed vehicles - see Ohio R.C. 737.32, 4513.61 et seq.
   Distinctive uniform required for traffic officers - see Ohio R.C. 4549.15
   Exceptions for emergency or public safety vehicles - see TRAF.
432.18,
434.06
   Extension of time for hearing or trial - see Ohio R.C. 2945.72
   Failure to aid a law enforcement officer - see GEN. OFF.
606.13
   Limitation on criminal prosecutions - see GEN. OFF.
606.06
   Marking motor vehicles used by traffic officers - see Ohio R.C. 4549.13
   Obstructing justice - see GEN. OFF.
606.16
   Obstructing official business - see GEN. OFF.
606.14
   Parking violations waiver - see TRAF.
452.14
   Power of trial court of record to suspend or revoke license for certain
violations - see Ohio R.C. 4510.05, 4510.15
   Resisting arrest - see GEN. OFF.
606.16
   Right of trial by jury - see Ohio R.C. 2945.17
   See section histories for similar state law
   Soliciting or receiving improper compensation - see GEN. OFF.
606.18
   State point system suspension - see Ohio R.C. 4510.037
   Suspension of riding privileges; impounding of bicycles - see TRAF.
474.10
   Time within which hearing or trial must be held - see Ohio R.C. 2945.71
   Uniform application of Ohio Traffic Law - see Ohio R.C. 4511.06
   Use of private property for vehicular travel - see Ohio R.C. 4511.08
§ 404.01  COMPLIANCE WITH LAWFUL ORDER OF POLICE OFFICER; FLEEING. (Recodified)
Editor's note:
   Section
404.01 was recodified as part of the 1989 updating and revision of these
Codified Ordinances. See §
606.165 of the General Offenses Code.
§ 404.02  RESISTING AN ENFORCING OFFICIAL.
   (a)   No person shall resist, hinder, obstruct, or abuse any sheriff,
constable, or other official while that official is attempting to arrest
offenders under any provision of this Traffic Code. No person shall interfere
with any person charged under any provision of this Traffic Code with the
enforcement of the law relative to public highways.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4513.36)
   (c)   It is a defense to prosecution under this section that the hindrance,
obstruction, resistance, or interference alleged consisted of constitutionally
protected speech only.
§ 404.03  ROAD WORKERS, MOTOR VEHICLES AND EQUIPMENT EXCEPTED.
   (a)   The provisions of this Traffic Code, except for §
434.01, do not apply to persons, teams, motor vehicles, and other equipment
while actually engaged in work upon the surface of a highway within an area
designated by traffic-control devices, but apply to those persons and vehicles
when traveling to or from such work.
   (b)   The driver of a highway maintenance vehicle owned by this state or any
political subdivision of this state, while the driver is engaged in the
performance of official duties upon a street or highway, provided the highway
maintenance vehicle is equipped with flashing lights and such other markings as
are required by law and such lights are in operation when the driver and
vehicle are so engaged, shall be exempt from criminal prosecution for
violations of Ohio R.C. 4511.22, 4511.25, 4511.26, 4511.27, 4511.28, 4511.30,
4511.31, 4511.33, 4511.35, 4511.66, 4513.02, and 5577.01 to 5577.09, and any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (c)   (1)   This section does not exempt a driver of a highway maintenance
vehicle from civil liability arising from a violation of Ohio R.C. 4511.22,
4511.25, 4511.26, 4511.27, 4511.28, 4511.30, 4511.31, 4511.33, 4511.35,
4511.66, or 4513.02 or Ohio R.C. 5577.01 to 5577.09, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance.
      (2)   This section does not exempt a driver of a vehicle who is not a
state employee and who is engaged in the transport of highway maintenance
equipment from criminal liability for a violation of R.C. §§ 5577.01 through
5577.09, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (d)   As used in this section, “engaged in the performance of official
duties” includes driving a highway maintenance vehicle to and from the
manufacturer or vehicle maintenance provider and transporting a highway
maintenance vehicle, equipment, or materials to and from a work location.
(ORC 4511.04)
§ 404.035  EMERGENCY, PUBLIC SAFETY AND CORONERS' VEHICLES EXCEPTED.
   (a)   The provisions of Ohio R.C. 4511.12, 4511.13, 4511.131, 4511.132,
4511.14, 4511.202, 4511.21, 4511.211, 4511.22, 4511.23, 4511.25, 4511.26,
4511.27, 4511.28, 4511.29, 4511.30, 4511.31, 4511.32, 4511.33, 4511.34,
4511.35, 4511.36, 4511.37, 4511.38, 4511.39, 4511.40, 4511.41, 4511.42,
4511.43, 4511.431, 4511.432, 4511.44, 4511.441, 4511.57, 4511.58, 4511.59,
4511.60, 4511.61, 4511.62, 4511.66, 4511.68, 4511.681, and 4511.69, and any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinances, do not apply to the driver of an
emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle if the emergency vehicle or public
safety vehicle is responding to an emergency call, is equipped with and
displaying at least one flashing, rotating, or oscillating light visible under
normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of 500 feet to the front of the
vehicle and if the driver of the vehicles is giving an audible signal by siren,
exhaust whistle, or bell. This section does not relieve the driver of an
emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle from the duty to drive with due
regard for the safety of all persons and property upon the highway.
(ORC 4511.041)
   (b)   The provisions of Ohio R.C. 4511.25, 4511.26, 4511.27, 4511.28,
4511.29, 4511.30, 4511.31, 4511.32, 4511.33, 4511.35, 4511.36, 4511.37,
4511.38, and 4511.66, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinances, do
not apply to a coroner, deputy coroner or coroner's investigator operating a
motor vehicle in accordance with Ohio R.C. 4513.171 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance. This subsection does not relieve a coroner,
deputy coroner or coroner's investigator operating a motor vehicle from the
duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons and property upon
the highway.
(ORC 4511.042)
§ 404.04  APPLICATION TO PERSONS RIDING, DRIVING ANIMALS UPON ROADWAY.
   Every person riding, driving, or leading an animal upon a roadway is subject
to the provisions of this Traffic Code, applicable to the driver of a vehicle,
except those provisions of this Traffic Code which by their nature are
inapplicable.
(ORC 4511.05)
§ 404.05  IMPOUNDING OF VEHICLES; REDEMPTION.
   (a)   Police officers are authorized to provide for the removal and
impounding of a vehicle under the following circumstances:
      (1)   When any vehicle is left unattended upon any street, bridge or
causeway and is so illegally parked so as to constitute a hazard or obstruction
to the normal movement of traffic, or so as to unreasonably interfere with
street cleaning or snow removal operations;
      (2)   When any motor vehicle, including an abandoned junk motor vehicle,
as defined in Ohio R.C. 4513.63, is left on private residential property, as
defined in Ohio R.C. 4513.60, or on private agricultural property, for at least
four consecutive hours without the permission of the person having the right to
the possession of the property, or on a public street or other property open to
the public for purposes of vehicular travel, or upon or within the right-of-way
of any road or highway, for 48 consecutive hours or longer, without
notification to the Police Chief of the reasons for leaving such vehicle in
such place, except that when such a motor vehicle constitutes an obstruction to
traffic, it may be ordered into storage immediately;
      (3)   When any vehicle has been stolen or operated without the consent of
the owner;
      (4)   When any vehicle displays illegal license plates or fails to
display the current lawfully required license plates;
      (5)   When any vehicle has been used in or connected with the commission
of a felony;
      (6)   When any vehicle has been damaged or wrecked so as to be inoperable
or violates equipment provisions of this Traffic Code whereby its continued
operation would constitute a condition hazardous to life, limb or property;
      (7)   When any vehicle is left unattended due to the removal of an ill,
injured or arrested operator;
      (8)   When any vehicle has been operated by any person who has failed to
stop in case of an accident or collision;
      (9)   When any vehicle has been operated by any person who is driving
without a lawful license or while his or her license has been suspended or
revoked;
      (10)   When any vehicle is found for which two or more citation tags for
violations of this Traffic Code have been issued and the owner or operator
thereof has failed to respond to such citation tags as lawfully required.
      (11)   When any vehicle is parked, left, or abandoned in violation of §
452.16 of the Codified Ordinances of the City of Kirtland, Ohio.
(Ord. 03-O-47, passed 10-20-2003)
   (b)   Any vehicle removed under authority of subsection (a)(2) of this
section shall be ordered into storage and/or disposed of as provided under Ohio
R.C. 4513.60 et seq. Any other vehicle removed under authority of this section
shall be ordered into storage and the Police Division shall forthwith notify
the registered vehicle owner of the fact of such removal and impounding,
reasons therefor and the place of storage. Any person desiring to redeem an
impounded vehicle shall appear at the Police Division to furnish satisfactory
evidence of identity and ownership or right to possession. Prior to issuance of
a release form, the claimant, owner or operator shall either pay the amount due
for any fines for violations on account of which such vehicle was impounded or,
as the court may require, post a bond in an amount set by the court, to appear
to answer to such violations. The pound operator shall release such vehicle
upon the receipt of the release form and payment of all towage and storage
charges.
   (c)   No owner or operator shall remove an impounded vehicle from the place
of storage without complying with the above procedure. Possession of a vehicle
which has been impounded and unlawfully taken from the place of storage, by the
owner or operator, shall constitute prima facie evidence that it was so removed
by the owner or operator.
§ 404.06  TRAFFIC DIRECTION IN EMERGENCIES; OBEDIENCE TO SCHOOL GUARDS.
   (a)   Police officers shall direct or regulate traffic in accordance with
the provisions of this Traffic Code, provided that in the event of fire or
other emergency or to expedite traffic or safeguard pedestrians, they are
authorized to direct traffic as conditions may require notwithstanding the
provisions of this Traffic Code. Firefighters, when at the scene of a fire, may
direct or assist the police in directing traffic thereat or in the immediate
vicinity. The direction of traffic may be by word or audible signal, by gesture
or visible signal or by any combination thereof. No person shall fail to comply
with any lawful order or direction of any police officer or firefighter issued
pursuant to this section.
   (b)   No person shall fail to comply with any lawful order or direction of
any school crossing guard invested with authority to direct, control or
regulate traffic in the vicinity of the school to which such guard may be
assigned.
§ 404.07  APPLICATION TO DRIVERS OF GOVERNMENT VEHICLES.
   The provisions of this Traffic Code applicable to the drivers of vehicles
shall apply to the drivers of all vehicles owned or operated by the United
States, any state or any political subdivision thereof, including this
Municipality, except as may be otherwise provided by law and subject to such
specific exceptions as are set forth with reference to authorized emergency and
public safety vehicles.
§ 404.08  FURNISHING FALSE INFORMATION INCIDENT TO TRAFFIC CITATION.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly present, display, or orally communicate a
false name, social security number, or date of birth to a law enforcement
officer who is in the process of issuing to the person a traffic ticket or
complaint.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(ORC 4513.361)
§ 404.99  PENALTY.
Editor's note:
   See §§
408.01 and
408.02 for general Traffic Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 406:  TRAFFIC CONTROL
Section
406.01   Authority and considerations for placement of devices.
406.02   Conformity with state Manual.
406.03   Powers of designated person.
406.04   Posting of signs and signals required.
406.05   Designated person's powers not limited.
406.06   Records of designated person.
406.07   Reservation of power to Council.
406.08   Violations subject to general Code penalty.
406.09   Authority of Director of Public Safety.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Alteration of prima facie speed limits - see Ohio R.C. 4511.21, 4511.22,
4511.23
   Designation of through streets and erection of stop or yield signs - see
Ohio R.C. 4511.65
   Placing and maintaining local traffic control devices- see Ohio R.C.
4511.10, 4511.11
   Power to designate highway as a freeway, expressway or thruway - see Ohio
R.C. 4511.011
   Power to erect stop signs at grade crossings - see Ohio R.C. 4511.61
   Traffic control devices defined - see TRAF.
402.48
   Uniform system of traffic control devices - see Ohio R.C. 4511.09, 4511.11
§ 406.01  AUTHORITY AND CONSIDERATIONS FOR PLACEMENT OF DEVICES.
   Council may designate a person to place and maintain traffic control devices
upon any street or highway under municipal jurisdiction as are necessary to
effectuate the provisions of this Traffic Code, or to regulate, warn or guide
traffic, and such other traffic control devices as such person shall deem
necessary for the proper control of traffic. Such designated person shall
determine the location, timing and coordination of such traffic control devices
upon the basis of an applicable engineering or traffic investigation and shall
consider the following:
   (a)   The maximum safety and protection of vehicular and pedestrian traffic
from physical injury or property damage;
   (b)   The existing and potential traffic movement, volume and conditions;
   (c)   The location and frequency of accidents, including studies of remedial
measures;
   (d)   The recommendations of the Chief of Police and Fire Chief;
   (e)   The acceleration of transportation of persons and property by vehicles
so as to expedite travel and promote public safety;
   (f)   The convenience and welfare of the general public in parking,
standing, loading and unloading, and the use of the streets as affecting
business concerns and places of assembly; and
   (g)   Economy in the expenditure of money.
§ 406.02  CONFORMITY WITH STATE MANUAL.
   All traffic control devices placed pursuant to the provisions of this
Traffic Code shall conform to the Ohio Manual and Specifications for a Uniform
System of Traffic-Control Devices, as set forth in Ohio R.C.
§ 406.03  POWERS OF DESIGNATED PERSON.
   The person designated by Council pursuant to §
406.01 is hereby authorized to:
   (a)   Designate any street or highway as a through street or highway and
require that all vehicles stop or yield the right-of-way as may be required
before entering the same;
   (b)   Designate any intersection as a stop intersection and require all
vehicles to stop at one or more entrances to such intersection;
   (c)   Designate any intersection as a yield intersection and require all
vehicles to yield the right-of-way as required;
   (d)   Designate any street as a one-way street and require that all vehicles
thereon be moved in one specific direction;
   (e)   Designate and mark lanes to be used by traffic moving in a particular
direction regardless of the centerline of the roadway;
   (f)   Erect signs directing slow-moving traffic to use a designated lane or
allocating specified lanes to traffic moving in the same direction;
   (g)   Designate those portions of any street, where overtaking and passing
other traffic or driving to the left of the center or centerline of the roadway
would be especially hazardous, by appropriate signs or markings on the street
to indicate the beginning and end of such zones. Such zones may be marked by an
auxiliary yellow line placed parallel and to the right of the normal centerline
or offset marked lane line;
   (h)   Place markers, buttons or signs within or adjacent to intersections
and require that a specific course of direction be traveled by vehicles
proceeding in lanes by either permitting, prohibiting or requiring turns at
such intersections;
   (i)   Install traffic control devices, signals and signs at any location to
regulate traffic;
   (j)   Establish safety zones, crosswalks, zones of quiet and play streets;
   (k)   Close any street or portion thereof to vehicular traffic which is in
the process of construction, reconstruction or repair;
   (l)   Determine the location of any necessary bus stops and taxicab stands;
   (m)   Determine the location and limiting hours of truck loading zones;
   (n)   Designate dangerous railroad crossings and erect stop signs thereat;
   (o)   Erect "No U Turn" signs at any location to prohibit a vehicle from
being turned so as to proceed in the opposite direction;
   (p)   Regulate or prohibit the stopping, standing and parking of vehicles on
streets, alleys or public property by erecting signs plainly indicating the
prohibitions, restrictions or limitations;
   (q)   Designate individual parking spaces by markings, which may either be
parallel or at a prescribed angle to the curb or edge of the roadway.
§ 406.04  POSTING OF SIGNS AND SIGNALS REQUIRED.
   No provision of this chapter shall be effective until signs, signals,
markings or other devices giving notice of such local traffic regulations are
posted upon or at the entrance to the street or part thereof affected, as may
be most appropriate, so that in a proper position they are sufficiently legible
to be seen by an ordinarily observant person.
§ 406.05  DESIGNATED PERSON'S POWERS NOT LIMITED.
   The powers of the person designated by Council pursuant to §
406.01 shall not be limited by the specific enumeration of subjects contained
in this chapter.
§ 406.06  RECORDS OF DESIGNATED PERSON.
   The person designated by Council pursuant to §
406.01 shall keep a record of all rules, regulations and proceedings
promulgated in connection with this chapter.
§ 406.07  RESERVATION OF POWER TO COUNCIL.
   Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, Council may override any
decision of the person designated by Council pursuant to §
406.01 and may assume any of the powers delegated to such person, by a
resolution adopted by a vote of a majority of the members duly elected thereto.
Upon the adoption of any such resolution, the same may be changed only by an
amending or repealing resolution adopted by Council.
§ 406.08  VIOLATIONS SUBJECT TO GENERAL CODE PENALTY.
   Any person violating the rules and regulations promulgated in connection
with this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction
thereof shall be subject to the penalties provided for in §§
408.01 and
408.02.
§ 406.09  AUTHORITY OF DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC SAFETY.
   The Director of Public Safety is hereby authorized and directed to approve
the placing upon the right-of-way of city roads and highways such traffic or
other municipal signs, legal notices, danger signs, directional and information
signs and temporary, emergency or nonadvertising signs as may be required to
provide for proper traffic flow, guidance and information necessary to protect
the public health, safety and general welfare.
(Res. 85-R-45, passed 7-1-1985)
CHAPTER 408:  PENALTIES
Section
408.01   Penalties for misdemeanor.
408.02   General Code penalty.
408.03   Suspension of driver's license.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Criteria for probation; conditions for probation - see Ohio R.C. 2951.02
   Definition of "dangerous offender" - see GEN. OFF.
698.01
   Definition of "imprisoned" - see Ohio R.C. 1.05
   Definition of "repeat offender" - see GEN. OFF.
698.01
   Ignition interlock devices - see TRAF.
438.29
   Imposing sentence for misdemeanor - see GEN. OFF.
698.03
   Modification of sentence - see GEN. OFF.
698.06
   Multiple sentences - see GEN. OFF.
698.05
   Organizational penalties - see GEN. OFF.
698.04
   Satisfaction of fine; credit for time served - see Ohio R.C. 2947.14
   See section histories for similar state law
§ 408.01  PENALTIES FOR MISDEMEANOR.
   Whoever is convicted of or pleads guilty to a misdemeanor, or minor
misdemeanor shall be sentenced in accordance with §
698.02.
§ 408.02  GENERAL CODE PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any provision of this Traffic Code for which no penalty
otherwise is provided in the section violated is guilty of one of the
following:
   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in subsection (b) or (c) of this section,
a minor misdemeanor;
   (b)   If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic
offense, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree;
   (c)   If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more predicate motor vehicle or
traffic offenses, a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(ORC 4511.99)
§ 408.03  SUSPENSION OF DRIVER'S LICENSE.
   Except as otherwise provided in Ohio R.C. 4510.07 or in any other provision
of the Revised Code, whenever an offender is convicted of or pleads guilty to a
violation of any provision of this Traffic Code that is substantially
equivalent to a provision of the Revised Code, and a court is permitted or
required to suspend a person's driver's or commercial driver's license or
permit for a violation of that provision, a court, in addition to any other
penalties authorized by law, may suspend the offender's driver's or commercial
driver's license or permit or nonresident operating privilege for the period of
time the court determines appropriate, but the period of suspension imposed for
the violation of the provision of this Traffic Code shall not exceed the period
of suspension that is permitted or required to be imposed for the violation of
the provision of the Revised Code to which the provision of this Traffic Code
is substantially equivalent.
(ORC 4510.05)
TITLE FOUR - PUBLIC WAYS AND TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES
CHAPTER 412:  OBSTRUCTION AND SPECIAL USES OF PUBLIC WAYS
Section
412.01   Placing injurious material or obstruction in street.
412.02   Zones of quiet.
412.03   Play streets.
412.04   Toy vehicles on roadway.
412.05   Freeway use prohibited by pedestrians, bicycles and animals.
412.06   Deposit of snow on streets prohibited.
412.99   Penalty.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Loads dropping or leaking; tracking mud; removal required - see TRAF.
440.06
   Parking in alleys or narrow streets; exceptions - see TRAF.
452.11
   Power to regulate processions or assemblages - see Ohio R.C. 4511.07
   See section histories for similar state law
   Selling, washing or repairing vehicle upon roadway - see TRAF.
452.08
   Sidewalk obstructions; damage or injury - see GEN. OFF.
660.10
§ 412.01  PLACING INJURIOUS MATERIAL OR OBSTRUCTION IN STREET.
   (a)   (1)   No person shall place or knowingly drop upon any part of a
highway, lane, road, street, or alley any tacks, bottles, wire, glass, nails,
or other articles which may damage or injure any person, vehicle, or animal
traveling along or upon the highway, except such substances that may be placed
upon the roadway by proper authority for the repair or construction thereof.
      (2)   Any person who drops or permits to be dropped or thrown upon any
highway any destructive or injurious material shall immediately remove the
same.
      (3)   Any person authorized to remove a wrecked or damaged vehicle from a
highway shall remove any glass or other injurious substance dropped upon the
highway from such vehicle.
      (4)   No person shall place any obstruction in or upon a highway without
proper authority.
   (b)   No person, with intent to cause physical harm to a person or a
vehicle, shall place or knowingly drop upon any part of a highway, lane, road,
street, or alley any tacks, bottles, wire, glass, nails, or other articles
which may damage or injure any person, vehicle, or animal traveling along or
upon such highway, except such substances that may be placed upon the roadway
by proper authority for the repair or construction thereof.
   (c)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever
violates subsection (a) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If,
within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of
or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever
violates subsection (a) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses,
whoever violates subsection (a) is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (2)   Whoever violates subsection (b) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(ORC 4511.74)
§ 412.02  ZONES OF QUIET.
   Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating a zone of quiet, no person
operating a vehicle within any such zone shall sound the horn or other warning
device of such vehicle except in an emergency.
§ 412.03  PLAY STREETS.
   Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that any street or part
thereof is a play street, no person shall drive a vehicle upon any such street
or portion thereof except drivers of vehicles having business or whose
residences are within such closed area and then such drivers shall exercise the
greatest care in driving upon any such street or portion thereof.
§ 412.04  TOY VEHICLES ON ROADWAY.
   No person riding upon any coaster, roller skates, sled, toy vehicle or other
similar device shall go upon any roadway except while crossing a street on a
crosswalk and when so crossing such person shall be granted all of the rights
and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to pedestrians. This
section shall not apply to any street set aside as a play street.
§ 412.05  FREEWAY USE PROHIBITED BY PEDESTRIANS, BICYCLES AND ANIMALS.
   (a)   No person, unless otherwise directed by a police officer, shall:
      (1)   As a pedestrian, occupy any space within the limits of the right-
of-way of a freeway, except: in a rest area; on a facility that is separated
from the roadway and shoulders of the freeway and is designed and appropriately
marked for pedestrian use; in the performance of public works or official
duties; as a result of an emergency caused by an accident or breakdown of a
motor vehicle; or to obtain assistance.
      (2)   Occupy any space within the limits of the right-of-way of a
freeway, with an animal-drawn vehicle, a ridden or led animal, herded animals,
a pushcart, a bicycle, except on a facility that is separated from the roadway
and shoulders of the freeway and is designed and appropriately marked for
bicycle use, a bicycle with motor attached, a motor-driven cycle with a motor
which produces not to exceed five brake horsepower, an agricultural tractor, or
farm machinery, except in the performance of public works or official duties.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within on year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(ORC 4511.051)
§ 412.06  DEPOSIT OF SNOW ON STREETS PROHIBITED.
   (a)   No person removing snow or causing snow to be removed from any device
or parking lot shall deposit snow or debris on the street or roadway pavement
or in the ditch of a public thoroughfare.
   (b)   It is the intent of this section to eliminate hazards created by
plowing snow across public thoroughfares leaving ridges of snow in the street,
to eliminate larger piles of snow along public roads that may create sight
hazards or immovable objects that may be hit by city snow plows or private
vehicles, and to eliminate blockage of ditches or impediment to the normal flow
of water. It is not the intent of this section to penalize persons using
streets temporarily to aid in cleaning driveways.
(Ord. 92-O-27, passed 5-4-1992)
§ 412.99  PENALTY.
Editor's note:
   See §§
408.01 and
408.02 for general Traffic Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 414:  TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES
Section
414.01   Obedience to traffic control devices.
414.02   Through streets; stop and yield right-of-way signs.
414.03   Traffic control signal terms and lights.
414.04   Signal to control lane direction of travel.
414.05   Pedestrian control signals.
414.06   Flashing traffic signals. (Repealed)
414.07   Unauthorized signs and signals, hiding from view, advertising.
414.08   Alteration, injury, removal of traffic control devices.
414.09   Unauthorized possession or sale of devices.
414.10   Signal preemption devices; prohibitions.
414.99   Penalty.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Authority and considerations for placing of devices - see TRAF.
406.01
   Criminal mischief (tampering) - see GEN. OFF.
642.11
   Designation of through streets or stop intersections - see Ohio R.C.
4511.07, 4511.65
   Intersections at which traffic control signals fail or malfunction - see
TRAF.
432.155
   Placing and maintaining local traffic control devices - see Ohio R.C.
4511.10, 4511.11
   Posting of signs and signals required - see TRAF.
406.04
   See section histories for similar state law
   Traffic control devices defined - see TRAF.
402.48
   Traffic law photo-monitoring devices, state regulations, see Ohio R.C.
4511.092 et seq.
   Uniform system of traffic control devices - see Ohio R.C. 4511.09, 4511.11;
TRAF.
406.02
§ 414.01  OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES.
   (a)   (1)   No pedestrian or driver of a vehicle shall disobey the
instructions of any traffic-control device placed in accordance with the
provisions of this Traffic Code, unless at the time otherwise directed by a
police officer.
      (2)   No provision of this Traffic Code for which signs are required
shall be enforced against an alleged violator if, at the time and place of the
alleged violation, an official sign is not in proper position and sufficiently
legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person. Whenever a particular
section of this Traffic Code does not state that signs are required, that
section shall be effective even though no signs are erected or in place.
(ORC 4511.12(A))
   (b)   (1)   Except as provided in subsection (c) of this section, any
operator of a commercial motor vehicle, upon approaching a scale location
established for the purpose of determining the weight of the vehicle and its
load, shall comply with any traffic control device or the order of a peace
officer directing the vehicle to proceed to be weighed or otherwise inspected.
      (2)   Any operator of a commercial motor vehicle, upon bypassing a scale
location in accordance with subsection (c) of this section, shall comply with
an order of a peace officer to stop the vehicle to verify the use and operation
of an electronic clearance device.
   (c)   Any operator of a commercial motor vehicle that is equipped with an
electronic clearance device authorized by the Superintendent of the state
Highway Patrol under Ohio R.C. 4549.081 may bypass a scale location, regardless
of the instruction of a traffic control device to enter the scale facility, if
either of the following apply:
      (1)   The in-cab transponder displays a green light or other affirmative
visual signal and also sounds an affirmative audible signal;
      (2)   Any other criterion established by the Superintendent of the state
Highway Patrol is met.
   (d)   Any peace officer may order the operator of a commercial motor vehicle
that bypasses a scale location to stop the vehicle to verify the use and
operation of an electronic clearance device.
   (e)   As used in this section, "commercial motor vehicle" means any
combination of vehicles with a gross vehicle weight rating or an actual gross
vehicle weight of more than 10,000 pounds if the vehicle is used in interstate
or intrastate commerce to transport property and also means any vehicle that is
transporting hazardous materials for which placarding is required pursuant to
49 C.F.R. Parts 100 to 180.
(ORC 4511.121(A)-(C), (E))
   (f)   No person shall use an electronic clearance device if the device or
its use is not in compliance with rules of the Superintendent of the state
Highway Patrol.
(ORC 4549.081(B))
   (g)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever
violates subsection (a) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If,
within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of
or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever
violates subsection (a) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses,
whoever violates subsection (a) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the third degree.
(ORC 4511.12(B))
      (2)   Whoever violates subsection (b) of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously
has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of subsection (b) of
this section or any substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance,
whoever violates subsection (b) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously
has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations of subsection
(b) of this section or any substantially equivalent state law or municipal
ordinance, whoever violates subsection (b) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(ORC 4511.121(D))
      (3)   Whoever violates subsection (f) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree on a first offense and a misdemeanor of the
third degree on each subsequent offense.
(ORC 4549.081(C))
§ 414.02  THROUGH STREETS; STOP AND YIELD RIGHT-OF-WAY SIGNS.
   (a)   All state routes are hereby designated as through highways, provided
that stop signs, yield signs, or traffic-control signals shall be erected at
all intersections with such through highways by the Department of
Transportation as to highways under its jurisdiction and by local authorities
as to highways under their jurisdiction, except as otherwise provided in this
section. Where two or more state routes that are through highways intersect,
and no traffic-control signal is in operation, stop signs or yield signs shall
be erected at one or more entrances thereto by the Department or by local
authorities having jurisdiction, except as otherwise provided in this section.
Whenever the Director of Transportation determines on the basis of an
engineering and traffic investigation that stop signs are necessary to stop
traffic on a through highway for safe and efficient operation, nothing in this
section shall be construed to prevent such installations. When circumstances
warrant, the Director also may omit stop signs on roadways intersecting through
highways under his or her jurisdiction. Before the Director either installs or
removes a stop sign under this subsection, he or she shall give notice, in
writing, of that proposed action to the affected local authority at least 30
days before installing or removing the stop sign.
   (b)   Other streets or highways, or portions thereof, are hereby designated
as through highways if they are within the municipality, if they have a
continuous length of more than one mile between the limits of the street or
highway or portion thereof, and if they have stop or yield signs or traffic-
control signals at the entrances of the majority of intersecting streets or
highways. For purposes of this section, the limits of the street or highway, or
portion thereof, shall be the municipal corporation line, the physical terminus
of the street or highway, or any point on the streets or highway at which
vehicular traffic thereon is required by regulatory signs to stop or yield to
traffic on the intersecting street; provided that, in residence districts, the
municipality may by ordinance designate such street or highway, or portion
thereof, not to be a through highway and thereafter the affected residence
district shall be indicated by official traffic-control devices. Where two or
more through highways designated under this subsection intersect and no
traffic-control signal is in operation, stop signs or yield signs shall be
erected at one or more entrances thereto by the department or by local
authorities having jurisdiction, except as otherwise provided in this section.
   (c)   The department or local authorities having jurisdiction need not erect
stop signs at intersections they find to be so constructed as to permit traffic
to safely enter a through highway without coming to a stop. Signs shall be
erected at such intersections indicating that the operator of a vehicle shall
yield the right-of-way to or merge with all traffic proceeding on the through
highway.
   (d)   Local authorities, with reference to highways under their
jurisdiction, may designate additional through highways, and shall erect stop
signs, yield signs, or traffic-control signals at all streets and highways
intersecting such through highways, or may designate any intersection as a stop
or yield intersection, and shall erect like signs at one or more entrances to
the intersection.
(ORC 4511.65)
§ 414.03  TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNAL TERMS AND LIGHTS.
   Highway traffic signal indications for vehicles and pedestrians shall have
the following meanings:
   (a)   Steady Green Signal Indication.
      (1)   A.   Vehicular traffic facing a circular green signal indication
are permitted to proceed straight through or turn right or left or make a u-
turn movement except as such movement is modified by a lane-use sign, turn
prohibition sign, lane marking, roadway design, separate turn signal
indication, or other traffic control device. Such vehicular traffic, including
vehicles turning right or left or making a u-turn movement, shall yield the
right-of-way to both of the following:
            1.   Pedestrians lawfully within an associated crosswalk;
            2.   Other vehicles lawfully within the intersection.
         B.   In addition, vehicular traffic turning left or making a u-turn
movement to the left shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles approaching
from the opposite direction so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard
during the time when such turning vehicle is moving across or within the
intersection.
      (2)   Vehicular traffic facing a green arrow signal indication, displayed
alone or in combination with another signal indication, are permitted to
cautiously enter the intersection only to make the movement indicated by such
arrow, or such other movement as is permitted by other indications displayed at
the same time. Such vehicular traffic, including vehicles turning right or left
or making a u-turn movement, shall yield the right-of-way to both of the
following:
         A.   Pedestrians lawfully within an associated crosswalk;
         B.   Other traffic lawfully using the intersection.
      (3)   A.   Unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian signal indication,
as provided in Ohio R.C. 4511.14, pedestrians facing a circular green signal
indication are permitted to proceed across the roadway within any marked or
unmarked associated crosswalk. The pedestrian shall yield the right-of-way to
vehicles lawfully within the intersection or so close as to create an immediate
hazard at the time that the green signal indication is first displayed.
         B.   Pedestrians facing a green arrow signal indication, unless
otherwise directed by a pedestrian signal indication or other traffic control
device, shall not cross the roadway.
   (b)   Steady Yellow Signal Indication.
      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing a steady circular yellow signal indication
are thereby warned that the related green movement or the related flashing
arrow movement is being terminated or that a steady red signal indication will
be exhibited immediately thereafter when vehicular traffic shall not enter the
intersection. The provisions governing vehicular operation under the movement
being terminated shall continue to apply while the steady circular yellow
signal indication is displayed.
      (2)   Vehicular traffic facing a steady yellow arrow signal indication is
thereby warned that the related green arrow movement or the related flashing
arrow movement is being terminated. The provisions governing vehicular
operation under the movement being terminated shall continue to apply while the
steady yellow arrow signal indication is displayed.
      (3)   Pedestrians facing a steady circular yellow or yellow arrow signal
indication, unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian signal indication as
provided in Ohio R.C. 4511.14 or other traffic control device, shall not start
to cross the roadway.
   (c)   Steady Red Signal Indication.
      (1)   A.   Vehicular traffic facing a steady circular red signal
indication, unless entering the intersection to make another movement permitted
by another signal indication, shall stop at a clearly marked stop line; but if
there is no stop line, traffic shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the
near side of the intersection; or if there is no crosswalk, then before
entering the intersection; and shall remain stopped until a signal indication
to proceed is displayed except as provided in subsections (c)(1), (c)(2), and
(c)(3) of this section.
         B.   Except when a traffic control device is in place prohibiting a
turn on red or a steady red arrow signal indication is displayed, vehicular
traffic facing a steady circular red signal indication is permitted, after
stopping, to enter the intersection to turn right, or to turn left from a one-
way street into a one-way street. The right to proceed with the turn shall be
subject to the provisions that are applicable after making a stop at a stop
sign.
      (2)   A.   Vehicular traffic facing a steady red arrow signal indication
shall not enter the intersection to make the movement indicated by the arrow
and, unless entering the intersection to make another movement permitted by
another signal indication, shall stop at a clearly marked stop line; but if
there is no stop line, before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the
intersection; or if there is no crosswalk, then before entering the
intersection; and shall remain stopped until a signal indication or other
traffic control device permitting the movement indicated by such red arrow is
displayed.
         B.   When a traffic control device is in place permitting a turn on a
steady red arrow signal indication, vehicular traffic facing a steady red arrow
indication is permitted, after stopping, to enter the intersection to  turn
right, or to turn left from a one-way street into a one-way street. The right
to proceed with the turn shall be limited to the direction indicated by the
arrow and shall be subject to the provisions that are applicable after making a
stop at a stop sign.
      (3)   Unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian signal indication as
provided in Ohio R.C. 4511.14 or other traffic control device, pedestrians
facing a steady circular red or steady red arrow signal indication shall not
enter the roadway.
      (4)   Local authorities by ordinance, or the Director of Transportation
on state highways, may prohibit a right or a left turn against a steady red
signal at any intersection, which shall be effective when signs giving notice
thereof are posted at the intersection.
   (d)   Flashing Green Signal Indication.  A flashing green signal indication
has no meaning and shall not be used.
   (e)   Flashing Yellow Signal Indication.
      (1)   A.   Vehicular traffic, on an approach to an intersection, facing a
flashing circular yellow signal indication, is permitted to cautiously enter
the intersection to proceed straight through or turn right or left or make a u-
turn movement except as such movement is modified by lane-use signs, turn
prohibition signs, lane markings, roadway design, separate turn signal
indications, or other traffic control devices. Such vehicular traffic,
including vehicles turning right or left or making a u-turn movement, shall
yield the right-of-way to both of the following:
            1.   Pedestrians lawfully within an associated crosswalk;
            2.   Other vehicles lawfully within the intersection.
         B.   In addition, vehicular traffic turning left or making a u-turn to
the left shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles approaching from the
opposite direction so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard during the
time when such turning vehicle is moving across or within the intersection.
      (2)   A.   Vehicular traffic, on an approach to an intersection, facing a
flashing yellow arrow signal indication, displayed alone or in combination with
another signal indication, is permitted to cautiously enter the intersection
only to make the movement indicated by such arrow, or other such movement as is
permitted by other signal indications displayed at the same time. Such
vehicular traffic, including vehicles turning right or left or making a u-turn,
shall yield the right-of-way to both of the following:
            1.   Pedestrians lawfully within an associated crosswalk;
            2.   Other vehicles lawfully within the intersection.
         B.   In addition, vehicular traffic turning left or making a u-turn to
the left shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles approaching from the
opposite direction so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard during the
time when such turning vehicle is moving across or within the intersection.
      (3)   Pedestrians facing any flashing yellow signal indication at an
intersection, unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian signal indication or
other traffic control device, are permitted to proceed across the roadway
within any marked or unmarked associated crosswalk. Pedestrians shall yield the
right-of-way to vehicles lawfully within the intersection at the time that the
flashing yellow signal indication is first displayed.
      (4)   When a flashing circular yellow signal indication is displayed as a
beacon to supplement another traffic control device, road users are notified
that there is a need to pay additional attention to the message contained
thereon or that the regulatory or warning requirements of the other traffic
control device, which might not be applicable at all times, are currently
applicable.
   (f)   Flashing Red Signal Indication.
      (1)   Vehicular traffic, on an approach to an intersection, facing a
flashing circular red signal indication, shall stop at a clearly marked stop
line; but if there is no stop line, before entering the crosswalk on the near
side of the intersection; or if there is no crosswalk, at the point nearest the
intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the
intersecting roadway before entering the intersection. The right to proceed
shall be subject to the provisions that are applicable after making a stop at a
stop sign.
      (2)   Pedestrians facing any flashing red signal indication at an
intersection, unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian signal indication or
other traffic control device, are permitted to proceed across the roadway
within any marked or unmarked associated crosswalk. Pedestrians shall yield the
right-of-way to vehicles lawfully within the intersection at the time that the
flashing red signal indication is first displayed.
      (3)   When a flashing circular red signal indication is displayed as a
beacon to supplement another traffic control device, road users are notified
that there is a need to pay additional attention to the message contained
thereon or that the regulatory requirements of the other traffic control
device, which might not be applicable at all times, are currently applicable.
Use of this signal indication shall be limited to supplementing stop, do not
enter, or wrong way signs, and to applications where compliance with the
supplemented traffic control device requires a stop at a designated point.
   (g)   In the event an official traffic-control signal is erected and
maintained at a place other than an intersection, the provisions of this
section shall be applicable except as to those provisions which by their nature
can have no application. Any stop required shall be made at a sign or marking
on the pavement indicating where the stop shall be made, but in the absence of
any such sign or marking the stop shall be made at the signal.
   (h)   This section does not apply at railroad grade crossings. Conduct of
drivers of vehicles approaching railroad grade crossings shall be governed by
Ohio R.C. 4511.61 and 4511.62.
(ORC 4511.13)
§ 414.04  SIGNAL TO CONTROL LANE DIRECTION OF TRAVEL.
   The meanings of lane-use control signal indications are as follows:
   (a)   A Steady Downward Green Arrow.  A road user is permitted to drive in
the lane over which the arrow signal indication is located.
   (b)   A Steady Yellow “X”. A road user is to prepare to vacate the lane over
which the signal indication is located because a lane control change is being
made to a steady red “X” signal indication.
   (c)   A Steady White Two-Way Left-Turn Arrow.  A road user is permitted to
use a lane over which the signal indication is located for a left turn, but not
for through travel, with the understanding that common use of the lane by
oncoming road users for left turns also is permitted.
   (d)   A Steady White One-Way Left-Turn Arrow. A road user is permitted to
use a lane over which the signal indication is located for a left turn, without
opposing turns in the same lane, but not for through travel.
   (e)   A Steady Red “X”. A road user is not permitted to use the lane over
which the signal indication is located and that this signal indication shall
modify accordingly the meaning of other traffic controls present.
(ORC 4511.131)
§ 414.05  PEDESTRIAN CONTROL SIGNALS.
   Whenever special pedestrian-control signals exhibiting the words “walk” or
“don’t walk”, or the symbol of a walking person or an upraised palm are in
place, these signals shall indicate the following instructions:
   (a)   A steady walking person signal indication, which symbolizes “walk”,
means that a pedestrian facing the signal indication is permitted to start to
cross the roadway in the direction of the signal indication, possibly in
conflict with turning vehicles. The pedestrian shall yield the right-of-way to
vehicles lawfully within the intersection at the time that the walking person
signal indication is first shown.
   (b)   A flashing upraised hand signal indication, which symbolizes “don't
walk”, means that a pedestrian shall not start to cross the roadway in the
direction of the signal indication, but that any pedestrian who has already
started to cross on a steady walking person signal indication shall proceed to
the far side of the traveled way of the street or highway, unless otherwise
directed by a traffic control device to proceed only to the median of a divided
highway or only to some other island or pedestrian refuge area.
   (c)   A steady upraised hand signal indication means that a pedestrian shall
not enter the roadway in the direction of the signal indication.
   (d)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to invalidate the continued
use of pedestrian control signals utilizing the word “wait” if those signals
were installed prior to March 28, 1985.
   (e)   A flashing walking person signal indication has no meaning and shall
not be used.
(ORC 4511.14)
§ 414.06  FLASHING TRAFFIC SIGNALS.
(Repealed)
Editor’s note:
   Section 414.06 was repealed as part of the 2013 updating and revision of
this Municipal Code because substantially equivalent state law (Ohio R.C.
4511.15) was repealed by the Ohio General Assembly.
§ 414.07  UNAUTHORIZED SIGNS AND SIGNALS, HIDING FROM VIEW, ADVERTISING.
   (a)   (1)   No person shall place, maintain, or display upon or in view of
any highway any unauthorized sign, signal, marking, or device which purports to
be, is an imitation of, or resembles a traffic-control device or railroad sign
or signal, or which attempts to direct the movement of traffic, or hides from
view or interferes with the effectiveness of any traffic-control device or any
railroad sign or signal, and no person shall place or maintain, nor shall any
public authority permit, upon any highway any traffic sign or signal bearing
thereon any commercial advertising. This section does not prohibit either the
erection upon private property adjacent to highways of signs giving useful
directional information and of a type that cannot be mistaken for traffic-
control devices, or the erection upon private property of traffic-control
devices by the owner of real property in accordance with Ohio R.C. 4511.211 and
4511.432.
      (2)   Every prohibited sign, signal, marking, or device is a public
nuisance, and the authority having jurisdiction over the highway may remove the
same or cause it to be removed.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(ORC 4511.16)
§ 414.08  ALTERATION, INJURY, REMOVAL OF TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES.
   (a)   No person, without lawful authority, shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Knowingly move, deface, damage, destroy, or otherwise improperly
tamper with any traffic-control device, any railroad sign or signal, or any
inscription, shield, or insignia on the device, sign, or signal, or any part of
the device, sign, or signal;
      (2)   Knowingly drive upon or over any freshly applied pavement marking
material on the surface of a roadway while the marking material is in an
undried condition, and is marked by flags, markers, signs, or other devices
intended to protect it;
      (3)   Knowingly move, damage, destroy, or otherwise improperly tamper
with a manhole cover.
   (b)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever
violates subsection (a)(1) or (3) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the third degree. If a violation of subsection (a)(1) or (3) of this section
creates a risk of physical harm to any person, the offender is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If a violation of subsection (a)(1) or (3) of
this section causes serious physical harm to property that is owned, leased, or
controlled by a state or local authority, the offender is guilty of a felony to
be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates
subsection (a)(2) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within
one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or
pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever
violates subsection (a)(2) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses,
whoever violates subsection (a)(2) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor
of the third degree.
(ORC 4511.17)
§ 414.09  UNAUTHORIZED POSSESSION OR SALE OF DEVICES.
   (a)   As used in this section, "traffic control device" means any sign,
traffic control signal or other device conforming to and placed or erected in
accordance with the manual adopted under Ohio R.C. 4511.09 by authority of a
public body or official having jurisdiction, for the purpose of regulating,
warning or guiding traffic, including signs denoting the names of streets and
highways, but does not mean any pavement marking.
   (b)   No individual shall buy or otherwise possess, or sell, a traffic
control device, except when one of the following applies:
      (1)   In the course of the individual's employment by the state or a
local authority for the express or implied purpose of manufacturing, providing,
erecting, moving or removing such a traffic control device;
      (2)   In the course of the individual's employment by any manufacturer of
traffic control devices other than a state or local authority;
      (3)   For the purpose of demonstrating the design and function of a
traffic control device to state or local officials;
      (4)   When the traffic control device has been purchased from the state
or a local authority at a sale of property that is no longer needed or is unfit
for use; or
      (5)   When the traffic control device has been properly purchased from a
manufacturer for use on private property and the person possessing the device
has a sales receipt for the device or other acknowledgment of sale issued by
the manufacturer.
   (c)   This section does not preclude, and shall not be construed as
precluding, prosecution for theft in violation of Ohio R.C. 2913.02, or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, or for receiving stolen property
in violation of Ohio R.C. 2913.51, or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance.
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third
degree.
(ORC 4511.18)
§ 414.10  SIGNAL PREEMPTION DEVICES; PROHIBITIONS.
   (a)   (1)   No person shall possess a portable signal preemption device.
      (2)   No person shall use a portable signal preemption device to affect
the operation of a traffic-control device.
   (b)   Division (a)(1) of this section does not apply to any of the following
persons and subsection (a)(2) of this section does not apply to any of the
following persons when responding to an emergency call:
      (1)   A peace officer, as defined in Ohio R.C. 109.17(A)(1), (A)(12), (A)
(14), or (A)(19);
      (2)   A state highway patrol officer;
      (3)   A person while occupying a public safety vehicle as defined in Ohio
R.C. 4511.01(E)(1), (E)(3), or (E)(4).
   (c)   Whoever violates subsection (a)(1) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree. Whoever violates subsection (a)(2) of this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
   (d)   As used in this section, "portable signal preemption device" means a
device that, if activated by a person, is capable of changing a traffic-control
signal to green out of sequence.
(ORC 4511.031)
§ 414.99  PENALTY.
Editor's note:
   See §§
408.01 and
408.02 for general Traffic Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 416:  PEDESTRIANS
Section
416.01   Duties of pedestrians and drivers at crosswalks.
416.02   Right-of-way of blind person.
416.03   Right-of-way yielded by pedestrian; crossing roadways.
416.04   Moving in crosswalks.
416.05   Walking on sidewalks and streets.
416.06   Soliciting rides or business; riding on outside of vehicle or in cargo
storage area.
416.07   Passing through bridge signals or railroad barriers.
416.08   Right-of-way of public safety vehicles.
416.09   Right-of-way on sidewalks.
416.10   Intoxication.
416.11   Motorized wheelchair operators.
416.12   Operation of electric personal assistive mobility devices.
416.13   Operation of personal delivery device on sidewalks and crosswalks.
416.99   Penalty.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Obedience to traffic control devices - see TRAF.
414.01
   Opening doors on side available to traffic - see TRAF.
452.08
   Pedestrian control signals - see TRAF.
414.05
   Pedestrians prohibited on freeways - see TRAF.
412.05
   See section histories for similar state law
§ 416.01  DUTIES OF PEDESTRIANS AND DRIVERS AT CROSSWALKS.
   (a)   When traffic-control signals are not in place, not in operation, or
are not clearly assigning the right-of-way, the driver of a vehicle shall yield
the right-of-way, slowing down or stopping if need be to so yield, or if
required by Ohio R.C. 4511.132 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, to a pedestrian crossing the roadway within a crosswalk when the
pedestrian is upon the half of the roadway upon which the vehicle is traveling,
or when the pedestrian is approaching so closely from the opposite half of the
roadway as to be in danger.
   (b)   No pedestrian shall suddenly leave a curb or other place of safety and
walk or run into the path of a vehicle which is so close as to constitute an
immediate hazard.
   (c)   Division (a) of this section does not apply under the conditions
stated in Ohio R.C. 4511.48(B), or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance.
   (d)   Whenever any vehicle is stopped at a marked crosswalk or at any
unmarked crosswalk at an intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross the
roadway, the driver of any other vehicle approaching from the rear shall not
overtake and pass the stopped vehicle.
   (e)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(ORC 4511.46)
§ 416.02  RIGHT-OF-WAY OF BLIND PERSON.
   (a)   (1)   As used in this section "blind person" or "blind pedestrian"
means a person having not more than 20/200 visual acuity in the better eye with
correcting lenses, or visual acuity greater than 20/200, but with a limitation
in the fields of vision such that the widest diameter of the visual field
subtends an angle no greater than 20°.
      (2)   The driver of every vehicle shall yield the right-of-way to every
blind pedestrian guided by a guide dog, or carrying a cane which is
predominantly white or metallic in color, with or without a red tip.
   (b)   No person, other than a blind person, while on any public highway,
street, alley, or other public thoroughfare, shall carry a white or metallic
cane, with or without a red tip.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(ORC 4511.47)
§ 416.03  RIGHT-OF-WAY YIELDED BY PEDESTRIAN; CROSSING ROADWAYS.
   (a)   Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than within a
marked crosswalk or within an unmarked crosswalk at an intersection shall yield
the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway.
   (b)   Any pedestrian crossing a roadway at a point where a pedestrian tunnel
or overhead pedestrian crossing has been provided shall yield the right-of-way
to all traffic upon the roadway.
   (c)   Between adjacent intersections at which traffic-control signals are in
operation, pedestrians shall not cross at any place except in a marked
crosswalk.
   (d)   No pedestrian shall cross a roadway intersection diagonally unless
authorized by official traffic-control devices; and when authorized to cross
diagonally, pedestrians shall cross only in accordance with the official
traffic-control devices pertaining to such crossing movements.
   (e)   This section does not relieve the operator of a vehicle from
exercising due care to avoid colliding with any pedestrian upon any roadway.
   (f)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(ORC 4511.48)
§ 416.04  MOVING IN CROSSWALKS.
   (a)   Pedestrians shall move, whenever practicable, upon the right half of
crosswalks.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(ORC 4511.49)
§ 416.05  WALKING ON SIDEWALKS AND STREETS.
   (a)   Where a sidewalk is provided and its use is practicable, it shall be
unlawful for any pedestrian to walk along and upon an adjacent roadway.
   (b)   Where a sidewalk is not available, any pedestrian walking along and
upon a highway shall walk only on a shoulder, as far as practicable from the
edge of the roadway.
   (c)   Where neither a sidewalk nor a shoulder is available, any pedestrian
walking along and upon a highway shall walk as near as practicable to an
outside edge of the roadway, and, if on a two-way roadway, shall walk only on
the left side of the roadway.
   (d)   Except as otherwise provided in Ohio R.C. 4511.13 and 4511.46, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinances, any pedestrian upon a roadway
shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway.
   (e)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(ORC 4511.50)
§ 416.06  SOLICITING RIDES OR BUSINESS; RIDING ON OUTSIDE OF VEHICLE OR IN
CARGO STORAGE AREA.
   (a)   No person while on a roadway outside a safety zone shall solicit a
ride from the driver of any vehicle.
   (b)   (1)   Except as provided in subsection (b)(2) of this section, no
person shall stand on a highway for the purpose of soliciting employment,
business, or contributions from the occupant of any vehicle.
      (2)   The Council, by ordinance, may authorize the issuance of a permit
to a charitable organization to allow a person acting on behalf of the
organization to solicit charitable contributions from the occupant of a vehicle
by standing on a highway, other than a freeway as provided in Ohio R.C.
4511.051(A), that is under the jurisdiction of the municipality. The permit
shall be valid for only one period of time, which shall be specified in the
permit, in any calendar year. The Council also may specify the locations where
contributions may be solicited and may impose any other restrictions on or
requirements regarding the manner in which the solicitations are to be
conducted that the Council considers advisable.
      (3)   As used in subsections (b)(2) of this section, "charitable
organization" means an organization that has received from the Internal Revenue
Service a currently valid ruling or determination letter recognizing the tax-
exempt status of the organization pursuant to IRC 501(c)(3).
   (c)   No person shall hang onto or ride on the outside of any motor vehicle
while it is moving upon a roadway, except mechanics or test engineers making
repairs or adjustments, or workers performing specialized highway or street
maintenance or construction under authority of a public agency.
   (d)   No operator shall knowingly permit any person to hang onto or ride on
the outside of any motor vehicle while it is moving upon a roadway, except
mechanics or test engineers making repairs or adjustments, or workers
performing specialized highway or street maintenance or construction under
authority of a public agency.
   (e)   No driver of a truck, trailer, or semitrailer shall knowingly permit
any person who has not attained the age of 16 years to ride in the unenclosed
or unroofed cargo storage area of the driver's vehicle if the vehicle is
traveling faster than 25 miles per hour, unless either of the following
applies:
      (1)   The cargo storage area of the vehicle is equipped with a properly
secured seat to which is attached a seat safety belt that is in compliance with
Federal standards for an occupant restraining device as defined in Ohio R.C.
4513.263(A)(2), the seat and seat safety belt were installed at the time the
vehicle was originally assembled, and the person riding in the cargo storage
area is in the seat and is wearing the seat safety belt; or
      (2)   An emergency exists that threatens the life of the driver or the
person being transported in the cargo storage area of the truck, trailer, or
semitrailer.
   (f)   No driver of a truck, trailer, or semitrailer shall permit any person,
except for those workers performing specialized highway or street maintenance
or construction under authority of a public agency, to ride in the cargo
storage area or on a tailgate of the driver's vehicle while the tailgate is
unlatched.
   (g)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever
violates any provision of subsections (a) to (d) of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously
has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or
traffic offense, whoever violates any provision of subsections (a) to (d) of
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates any provision of
subsections (a) to (d) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third
degree.
      (2)   Whoever violates subsection (e) or (f) of this section is guilty of
a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4511.51)
§ 416.07  PASSING THROUGH BRIDGE SIGNALS OR RAILROAD BARRIERS.
   (a)   No pedestrian shall enter or remain upon any bridge or approach
thereto beyond the bridge signal, gate, or barrier after a bridge operation
signal indication has been given.
   (b)   No pedestrian shall pass through, around, over, or under any crossing
gate or barrier at a railroad grade crossing or bridge while the gate or
barrier is closed or is being opened or closed.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(ORC 4511.511)
§ 416.08  RIGHT-OF-WAY OF PUBLIC SAFETY VEHICLES.
   (a)   Upon the immediate approach of a public safety vehicle, as stated in
Ohio R.C. 4511.45 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, every
pedestrian shall yield the right-of-way to the public safety vehicle.
   (b)   This section shall not relieve the driver of a public safety vehicle
from the duty to exercise due care to avoid colliding with any pedestrian.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(ORC 4511.452)
§ 416.09  RIGHT-OF-WAY ON SIDEWALKS.
   (a)   The driver of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian
on a sidewalk.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(ORC 4511.441)
§ 416.10  INTOXICATION.
   (a)   A pedestrian who is under the influence of alcohol, any drug of abuse,
or any combination of them, to a degree that renders the pedestrian a hazard
shall not walk or be upon a highway.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(ORC 4511.481)
§ 416.11  MOTORIZED WHEELCHAIR OPERATORS.
   Every person operating a motorized wheelchair shall have all of the rights
and duties applicable to a pedestrian that are contained in this chapter,
except those provisions which by their nature can have no application.
(ORC 4511.491)
§ 416.12  OPERATION OF ELECTRIC PERSONAL ASSISTIVE MOBILITY DEVICES.
   (a)   (1)   Electric personal assistive mobility devices may be operated on
the public streets, highways, sidewalks, and paths and portions of roadways set
aside for the exclusive use of bicycles in accordance with this section.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, those sections of
this Traffic Code that by their nature are applicable to an electric personal
assistive mobility device apply to the device and the person operating it
whenever it is operated upon any public street, highway, sidewalk, or path or
upon any portion of a roadway set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles.
      (3)   The municipality may regulate or prohibit the operation of electric
personal assistive mobility devices on public streets, highways, sidewalks, and
paths, or portions of roadways set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles,
under its jurisdiction.
   (b)   No operator of an electric personal assistive mobility device shall do
any of the following:
      (1)   Fail to yield the right-of-way to all pedestrians and human-powered
vehicles at all times;
      (2)   Fail to give an audible signal before overtaking and passing a
pedestrian;
      (3)   Operate the device at night unless the device or its operator is
equipped with or wearing both of the following:
         A.   A lamp pointing to the front that emits a white light visible
from a distance of not less than 500 feet;
         B.   A red reflector facing the rear that is visible from all
distances from 100 feet to 600 feet when directly in front of lawful lower
beams of head lamps on a motor vehicle.
      (4)   Operate the device on any portion of a street or highway that has
an established speed limit of 55 miles per hour or more;
      (5)   Operate the device upon any path set aside for the exclusive use of
pedestrians or other specialized use when an appropriate sign giving notice of
the specialized use is posted on the path;
      (6)   If under 18 years of age, operate the device unless wearing a
protective helmet on the person's head with the chin strap properly fastened;
      (7)   If under 16 years of age, operate the device unless, during the
operation, the person is under the direct visual and audible supervision of
another person who is 18 years of age or older and is responsible for the
immediate care of the person under 16 years of age.
   (c)   No person who is under 14 years of age shall operate an electric
personal assistive mobility device.
   (d)   No person shall distribute or sell an electric personal assistive
mobility device unless the device is accompanied by a written statement that is
substantially equivalent to the following: "WARNING: TO REDUCE THE RISK OF
SERIOUS INJURY, USE ONLY WHILE WEARING FULL PROTECTIVE EQUIPMENT – HELMET,
WRIST GUARDS, ELBOW PADS, AND KNEE PADS."
   (e)   Nothing in this section affects or shall be construed to affect any
rule of the Director of Natural Resources or a board of park district
commissioners governing the operation of vehicles on lands under the control of
the Director or board, as applicable.
   (f)   Penalty.
      (1)   Whoever violates subsection (b) or (c) of this section is guilty of
a minor misdemeanor and shall be punished as follows:
         A.   The offender shall be fined ten dollars ($10.00);
         B.   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of subsection (b) or (c) of this section, or any
substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, the court, in
addition to imposing the fine required under subsection (f)(1)A. of this
section, shall do one of the following:
            1.   Order the impoundment for not less than one day but no more
than 30 days of the electric personal assistive mobility device that was
involved in the current violation of that subsection. The court shall order the
device to be impounded at a safe indoor location designated by the court and
may assess storage fees of not more than five dollars ($5.00) per day; provided
the total storage, processing, and release fees assessed against the offender
or the device in connection with the device's impoundment or subsequent release
shall not exceed fifty dollars ($50.00).
            2.   If the court does not issue an impoundment order pursuant to
subsection (f)(1)B.1. of this section, issue an order prohibiting the offender
from operating any electric personal assistive mobility device on the public
streets, highways, sidewalks, and paths and portions of roadways set aside for
the exclusive use of bicycles for not less than one day but not more than 30
days.
      (2)   Whoever violates subsection (d) of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4511.512)
   (g)   As used in this code, "electric personal assistive mobility device"
means a self-balancing two non-tandem wheeled device that is designed to
transport only one person, has an electric propulsion system of an average of
750 watts, and when ridden on a paved level surface by an operator who weighs
170 pounds has a maximum speed of less than 20 miles per hour.
(ORC 4501.01(TT))
§ 416.13  OPERATION OF PERSONAL DELIVERY DEVICE ON SIDEWALKS AND CROSSWALKS.
   (a)   As used in this section:
      (1)   “Eligible entity.” Means a corporation, partnership, association,
firm, sole proprietorship, or other entity engaged in business.
      (2)   “Personal delivery device.” Means an electrically powered device to
which all of the following apply:
         A.   The device is intended primarily to transport property on
sidewalks and crosswalks.
         B.   The device weighs less than 90 pounds excluding any property
being carried in the device.
         C.   The device has a maximum speed of ten miles per hour.
         D.   The device is equipped with technology that enables the operation
of the device with active control or monitoring by a person, without active
control or monitoring by a person, or both with or without active control or
monitoring by a person.
      (3)   “Personal delivery device operator.” Means an agent of an eligible
entity who exercises direct physical control over, or monitoring of, the
navigation and operation of a personal delivery device. The phrase does not
include, with respect to a delivery or other service rendered by a personal
delivery device, the person who requests the delivery or service. The phrase
also does not include a person who only arranges for and dispatches a personal
delivery device for a delivery or other service.
   (b)   An eligible entity may operate a personal delivery device on sidewalks
and crosswalks so long as all of the following requirements are met:
      (1)   The personal delivery device is operated in accordance with all
regulations, if any, established by each local authority within which the
personal delivery device is operated.
      (2)   A personal delivery device operator is actively controlling or
monitoring the navigation and operation of the personal delivery device.
      (3)   The eligible entity maintains an insurance policy that includes
general liability coverage of not less than one hundred thousand dollars
($100,000) for damages arising from the operation of the personal delivery
device by the eligible entity and any agent of the eligible entity.
      (4)   The device is equipped with all of the following:
         A.   A marker that clearly identifies the name and contact information
of the eligible entity operating the personal delivery device and a unique
identification number;
         B.   A braking system that enables the personal delivery device to
come to a controlled stop;
         C.   If the personal delivery device is being operated between sunset
and sunrise, a light on both the front and rear of the personal delivery device
that is visible in clear weather from a distance of at least 500 feet to the
front and rear of the personal delivery device when directly in front of low
beams of headlights on a motor vehicle.
   (c)   No personal delivery device operator shall allow a personal delivery
device to do any of the following:
      (1)   Fail to comply with traffic or pedestrian control devices and
signals;
      (2)   Unreasonably interfere with pedestrians or traffic;
      (3)   Transport any hazardous material that would require a permit issued
by the Public Utilities Commission;
      (4)   Operate on a street or highway, except when crossing the street or
highway within a crosswalk.
   (d)   A personal delivery device has all of the rights and obligations
applicable to a pedestrian under the same circumstances, except that a personal
delivery device shall yield the right-of-way to human pedestrians on sidewalks
and crosswalks.
   (e)   (1)   No person shall operate a personal delivery device unless the
person is authorized to do so under this section and complies with the
requirements of this section.
      (2)   An eligible entity is responsible for both of the following:
         A.   Any violation of this section that is committed by a personal
delivery device operator; and
         B.   Any other circumstance, including a technological malfunction, in
which a personal delivery device operates in a manner prohibited by subsections
(c)(1) to (c)(4) of this section.
(R.C. § 4511.513)
§ 416.99  PENALTY.
Editor's note:
   See §§
408.01 and
408.02 for general Traffic Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
TITLE SIX - OPERATION AND VEHICLES
CHAPTER 432: OPERATION GENERALLY
Section
432.01   Driving upon right side of roadway; exceptions.
432.02   Passing to right when proceeding in opposite directions.
432.03   Overtaking, passing to left; driver's duties.
432.04   Overtaking, passing to right of vehicle.
432.05   Overtaking, passing to left of centerline.
432.06   Driving upon left side of roadway.
432.07   Hazardous or no passing zones.
432.08   Driving within lanes or continuous lines of traffic.
432.09   Following too closely.
432.10   Turning at intersections.
432.11   "U" turns restricted.
432.12   Starting and backing vehicles.
432.13   Signals before changing course, turning or stopping.
432.14   Hand and arm signals.
432.15   Right-of-way at intersections.
432.155   Intersections at which traffic control signals fail or malfunction.
432.16   Right-of-way when turning left.
432.17   Operation of vehicle at stop and yield signs.
432.18   Emergency or public safety vehicles at stop signals or signs.
432.19   Right-of-way of public safety or coroner's vehicle.
432.195   Driving while approaching stationary public service vehicle with
flashing lights.
432.20   Right-of-way at private driveway, alley or building.
432.205   Stop signs on private roads and driveways.
432.21   Right-of-way of funeral procession.
432.22   Driving upon sidewalks, tree lawns or curbs.
432.23   Driver's view and control to be unobstructed by load or  persons.
432.24   Driving upon street posted as closed for repair.
432.25   Following and parking near emergency or safety vehicles.
432.26   Driving over fire hose.
432.27   Driving through safety zone.
432.28   One-way streets and rotary traffic islands.
432.29   Driving upon divided roadways.
432.30   Stopping for school bus; actuating visual signals; discharging
children.
432.31   Use of earphones while driving
432.32   Reserved.
432.33   Reserved.
432.34   Obstructing intersections, crosswalks or grade crossings.
432.35   "Peeling"; cracking exhaust noises.
432.36   Shortcutting across private property.
432.37   Entering and exiting controlled-access highway.
432.38   Failure to control; weaving.
432.39   Operation on paths set aside for bicycles.
432.40   Littering from motor vehicles.
432.41   Driving across grade crossings.
432.42   Texting while driving prohibited.
432.43   Use of electronic wireless communication devices by minors or
probationary drivers while driving prohibited.
432.99   Penalty.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Obedience to traffic control devices - see TRAF.
414.01
   Operation of bicycles and motorcycles generally - see TRAF.
474.01et seq.
   Operation of snowmobiles, off-highway motorcycles and all-purpose vehicles -
see TRAF.
476.03,
476.04
   See section histories for similar state law
   Yielding right-of-way to pedestrians on sidewalks - see TRAF.
416.09
§ 432.01  DRIVING UPON RIGHT SIDE OF ROADWAY; EXCEPTIONS.
   (a)   Upon all roadways of sufficient width, a vehicle shall be driven upon
the right half of the roadway, except as follows:
      (1)   When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same
direction, or when making a left turn under the rules governing such movements;
      (2)   When an obstruction exists making it necessary to drive to the left
of the center of the highway; provided, any person so doing shall yield the
right-of-way to all vehicles traveling in the proper direction upon the
unobstructed portion of the highway within such distance as to constitute an
immediate hazard;
      (3)   When driving upon a roadway divided into three or more marked lanes
for traffic under the rules applicable thereon;
      (4)   When driving upon a roadway designated and posted with signs for
one-way traffic;
      (5)   When otherwise directed by a police officer or traffic-control
device.
   (b)   (1)   Upon all roadways any vehicle proceeding at less than the
prevailing and lawful speed of traffic at the time and place and under the
conditions then existing shall be driven in the right-hand lane then available
for traffic, and far enough to the right to allow passing by faster vehicles if
such passing is safe and reasonable, except under any of the following
circumstances:
         A.   When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the
same direction;
         B.   When preparing for a left turn;
         C.   When the driver must necessarily drive in a lane other than the
right-hand lane to continue on the driver's intended route.
      (2)   Nothing in subsection (b)(1) of this section requires a driver of a
slower vehicle to compromise the driver's safety to allow overtaking by a
faster vehicle.
   (c)   Upon any roadway having four or more lanes for moving traffic and
providing for two-way movement of traffic, no vehicle shall be driven to the
left of the center line of the roadway, except when authorized by official
traffic-control devices designating certain lanes to the left of the center of
the roadway for use by traffic not otherwise permitted to use the lanes, or
except as permitted under subsection (a)(2) of this section. This subsection
shall not be construed as prohibiting the crossing of the center line in making
a left turn into or from an alley, private road, or driveway.
   (d)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(ORC 4511.25)
§ 432.02  PASSING TO RIGHT WHEN PROCEEDING IN OPPOSITE DIRECTIONS.
   (a)   Operators of vehicles proceeding in opposite directions shall pass
each other to the right, and upon roadways having width for not more than one
line of traffic in each direction, each operator shall give to the other one-
half of the main traveled portion of the roadway or as nearly one-half as is
reasonably possible.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(ORC 4511.26)
§ 432.03  OVERTAKING, PASSING TO LEFT; DRIVER'S DUTIES.
   (a)   The following rules govern the overtaking and passing of vehicles
proceeding in the same direction:
      (1)   The operator of a vehicle overtaking another vehicle proceeding in
the same direction shall, except as provided in subsection (a)(3) of this
section, signal to the vehicle to be overtaken, shall pass to the left thereof
at a safe distance, and shall not again drive to the right side of the roadway
until safely clear of the overtaken vehicle.  When a motor vehicle overtakes
and passes a bicycle, three feet or greater is considered a safe passing
distance.
      (2)   Except when overtaking and passing on the right is permitted, the
operator of an overtaken vehicle shall give way to the right in favor of the
overtaking vehicle at the latter's audible signal, and the operator shall not
increase the speed of the operator's vehicle until completely passed by the
overtaking vehicle.
      (3)   The operator of a vehicle overtaking and passing another vehicle
proceeding in the same direction on a divided highway as defined in Ohio R.C.
4511.35, a limited access highway as defined in Ohio R.C. 5511.02, or a highway
with four or more traffic lanes is not required to signal audibly to the
vehicle being overtaken and passed.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(ORC 4511.27)
§ 432.04  OVERTAKING, PASSING TO RIGHT OF VEHICLE.
   (a)   The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass on the right of another
vehicle only under the following conditions:
      (1)   When the vehicle overtaken is making or about to make a left turn;
or
      (2)   Upon a roadway with unobstructed pavement of sufficient width for
two or more lines of vehicles moving lawfully in the direction being traveled
by the overtaking vehicle.
   (b)   The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass another vehicle only
under conditions permitting the movement in safety. The movement shall not be
made by driving off the roadway.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(ORC 4511.28)
§ 432.05  OVERTAKING, PASSING TO LEFT OF CENTERLINE.
   (a)   No vehicle shall be driven to the left of the center of the roadway in
overtaking and passing traffic proceeding in the same direction, unless the
left side is clearly visible and is free of oncoming traffic for a sufficient
distance ahead to permit the overtaking and passing to be completely made
without interfering with the safe operation of any traffic approaching from the
opposite direction or any traffic overtaken. In every event, the overtaking
vehicle must return to an authorized lane of travel as soon as practicable, and
in the event the passing movement involves the use of a lane authorized for the
traffic approaching from the opposite direction, before coming within 200 feet
of any approaching vehicle.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(ORC 4511.29)
§ 432.06  DRIVING UPON LEFT SIDE OF ROADWAY.
   (a)   No vehicle shall be driven upon the left side of the roadway under the
following conditions:
      (1)   When approaching the crest of a grade or upon a curve in the
highway, where the operator's view is obstructed within such a distance as to
create a hazard in the event traffic might approach from the opposite
direction;
      (2)   When the view is obstructed upon approaching within 100 feet of any
bridge, viaduct, or tunnel; or
      (3)   When approaching within 100 feet of or traversing any intersection
or railroad grade crossing.
   (b)   This section does not apply to vehicles upon a one-way roadway, upon a
roadway where traffic is lawfully directed to be driven to the left side, or
under the conditions described in Ohio R.C. 4511.25(A)(2) or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(ORC 4511.30)
§ 432.07  HAZARDOUS OR NO PASSING ZONES.
   (a)   The Department of Transportation may determine those portions of any
state highway where overtaking and passing other traffic or driving to the left
of the center or center line of the roadway would be especially hazardous, and
may, by appropriate signs or markings on the highway, indicate the beginning
and end of such zones. When signs or markings are in place and clearly visible,
every operator of a vehicle shall obey the directions of the signs or markings,
notwithstanding the distances set out in Ohio R.C. 4511.30.
   (b)   Division (a) of this section does not apply when all of the following
apply:
      (1)   The slower vehicle is proceeding at less than half the speed of the
speed limit applicable to that location.
      (2)   The faster vehicle is capable of overtaking and passing the slower
vehicle without exceeding the speed limit.
      (3)   There is sufficient clear sight distance to the left of the center
or center line of the roadway to meet the overtaking and passing provisions of
Ohio R.C. 4511.29, considering the speed of the slower vehicle.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(ORC 4511.31)
§ 432.08  DRIVING WITHIN LANES OR CONTINUOUS LINES OF TRAFFIC.
   (a)   Whenever any roadway has been divided into two or more clearly marked
lanes for traffic, or wherever within the municipality traffic is lawfully
moving in two or more substantially continuous lines in the same direction, the
following rules apply:
      (1)   A vehicle shall be driven, as nearly as is practicable, entirely
within a single lane or line of traffic and shall not be moved from the lane or
line until the driver has first ascertained that the movement can be made with
safety.
      (2)   Upon a roadway which is divided into three lanes and provides for
the two-way movement of traffic, a vehicle shall not be driven in the center
lane, except when overtaking and passing another vehicle where the roadway is
clearly visible and the center lane is clear of traffic within a safe distance,
or when preparing for a left turn, or where the center lane is at the time
allocated exclusively to traffic moving in the direction the vehicle is
proceeding, and is posted with signs to give notice of such allocation.
      (3)   Official signs may be erected directing specified traffic to use a
designated lane or designating those lanes to be used by traffic moving in a
particular direction, regardless of the center of the roadway, or restricting
the use of a particular lane to only buses during certain hours or during all
hours, and drivers of vehicles shall obey the directions of such signs.
      (4)   Official traffic-control devices may be installed prohibiting the
changing of lanes on sections of roadway, and drivers of vehicles shall obey
the directions of every such device.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(ORC 4511.33)
§ 432.09  FOLLOWING TOO CLOSELY.
   (a)   (1)   The operator of a motor vehicle shall not follow another vehicle
more closely than is reasonable and prudent, having due regard for the speed of
the vehicle and the traffic upon and the condition of the highway.
      (2)   The driver of any truck, or motor vehicle drawing another vehicle,
when traveling upon a roadway outside a business or residence district, shall
maintain a sufficient space, whenever conditions permit, between the vehicle
and another vehicle ahead so an overtaking motor vehicle may enter and occupy
the space without danger. This subsection (a) does not prevent overtaking and
passing nor does it apply to any lane specially designated for use by trucks.
      (3)   Motor vehicles being driven upon any roadway outside of a business
or residence district in a caravan or motorcade shall maintain a sufficient
space between the vehicles so an overtaking vehicle may enter and occupy the
space without danger. This subsection shall not apply to funeral processions.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(ORC 4511.34)
§ 432.10  TURNING AT INTERSECTIONS.
   (a)   The driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an intersection shall be
governed by the following rules:
      (1)   Approach for a right turn and a right turn shall be made as close
as practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway.
      (2)   At any intersection where traffic is permitted to move in both
directions on each roadway entering the intersection, an approach for a left
turn shall be made in that portion of the right half of the roadway nearest the
center line thereof and by passing to the right of the center line where it
enters the intersection, and, after entering the intersection, the left turn
shall be made so as to leave the intersection to the right of the center line
of the roadway being entered. Whenever practicable, the left turn shall be made
in that portion of the intersection to the left of the center of the
intersection.
      (3)   At any intersection where traffic is restricted to one direction on
one or more of the roadways, the driver of a vehicle intending to turn left at
any such intersection shall approach the intersection in the extreme left-hand
lane lawfully available to traffic moving in the direction of travel of the
vehicle, and, after entering the intersection, the left turn shall be made so
as to leave the intersection, as nearly as practicable, in the left hand lane
of the roadway being entered lawfully available to traffic moving in that lane.
   (b)   The Department of Transportation and local authorities may cause
markers, buttons, or signs to be placed within or adjacent to intersections,
and thereby require and direct that a different course from that specified in
this section be traveled by vehicles turning at an intersection, and when
markers, buttons, or signs are so placed, no operator of a vehicle shall turn
the vehicle at an intersection other than as directed and required by the
markers, buttons, or signs.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(ORC 4511.36)
§ 432.11  "U" TURNS RESTRICTED.
   (a)   Except as provided in Ohio R.C. 4511.13 and subsection (b) of this
section, no vehicle shall be turned so as to proceed in the opposite direction
upon any curve, or upon the approach to or near the crest of a grade, if such
vehicle cannot be seen within 500 feet by the driver of any other vehicle
approaching from either direction.
   (b)   The driver of an emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle, when
responding to an emergency call, may turn the vehicle so as to proceed in the
opposite direction. This subsection applies only when the emergency vehicle or
public safety vehicle is responding to an emergency call, is equipped with and
displaying at least one flashing, rotating, or oscillating light visible under
normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of 500 feet to the front of the
vehicle, and when the driver of the vehicle is giving an audible signal by
siren, exhaust whistle, or bell. This subsection does not relieve the driver of
an emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle from the duty to drive with due
regard for the safety of all persons and property upon the highway.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(ORC 4511.37)
   (d)   Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, no vehicle shall
be turned so as to proceed in the opposite direction within an intersection, or
upon any street in a business district, or upon a freeway, expressway or
controlled-access highway, or where authorized signs are erected to prohibit
such movement, or at any other location unless such movement can be made with
reasonable safety to other users of the public way and without interfering with
the safe operation of any traffic that may be affected by such movement.
§ 432.12  STARTING AND BACKING VEHICLES.
   (a)   (1)   No person shall start a vehicle which is stopped, standing, or
parked until the movement can be made with reasonable safety.
      (2)   Before backing, operators of vehicles shall give ample warning, and
while backing they shall exercise vigilance not to injure person or property on
the street or highway.
      (3)   No person shall back a motor vehicle on a freeway, except:
         A.   In a rest area;
         B.   In the performance of public works or official duties;
         C.   As a result of an emergency caused by an accident or breakdown of
a motor vehicle.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(ORC 4511.38)
§ 432.13  SIGNALS BEFORE CHANGING COURSE, TURNING OR STOPPING.
   (a)   (1)   No person shall turn a vehicle or move right or left upon a
highway unless and until the person has exercised due care to ascertain that
the movement can be made with reasonable safety, nor without giving an
appropriate signal in the manner hereinafter provided.
      (2)   When required, a signal of intention to turn or move right or left
shall be given continuously during not less than the last 100 feet traveled by
the vehicle before turning, except that in the case of a person operating a
bicycle, the signal shall be made not less than one time but is not required to
be continuous. A bicycle operator is not required to make a signal if the
bicycle is in a designated turn lane, and a signal shall not be given when the
operator's hands are needed for the safe operation of the bicycle.
      (3)   No person shall stop or suddenly decrease the speed of a vehicle
without first giving an appropriate signal in the manner provided herein to the
driver of any vehicle immediately to the rear, when there is opportunity to
give a signal.
      (4)   Any stop or turn signal required by this section shall be given
either by means of the hand and arm, or by signal lights that clearly indicate
to both approaching and following traffic the intention to turn or move right
or left, except that any motor vehicle in use on a highway shall be equipped
with, and the required signal shall be given by, signal lights when the
distance from the center of the top of the steering post to the left outside
limit of the body, cab or load of such motor vehicle exceeds 24 inches, or when
the distance from the center of the top of the steering post to the rear limit
of the body or load thereof exceeds 14 feet, whether a single vehicle or a
combination of vehicles.
      (5)   The signal lights required by this section shall not be flashed on
one side only on a disabled vehicle, flashed as a courtesy or "do pass" signal
to operators of other vehicles approaching from the rear, nor be flashed on one
side only of a parked vehicle except as may be necessary for compliance with
this section.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(ORC 4511.39)
§ 432.14  HAND AND ARM SIGNALS.
   (a)   Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, all signals
required by the provisions of this Traffic Code, when given by hand and arm,
shall be given from the left side of the vehicle in the following manner, and
the signals shall indicate as follows:
      (1)   Left turn, hand and arm extended horizontally;
      (2)   Right turn, hand and arm extended upward;
      (3)   Stop or decrease speed, hand and arm extended downward.
   (b)   As an alternative to subsection (a)(2) of this section, a person
operating a bicycle may give a right turn signal by extending the right hand
and arm horizontally and to the right side of the bicycle.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(ORC 4511.40)
§ 432.15  RIGHT-OF-WAY AT INTERSECTIONS.
   (a)   When two vehicles approach or enter an intersection from different
streets or highways at approximately the same time, the driver of the vehicle
on the left shall yield the right-of-way to the vehicle on the right.
   (b)   The right-of-way rule declared in subsection (a) of this section is
modified at through highways and otherwise as stated in this Traffic Code or
Ohio R.C. Chapter 4511.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(ORC 4511.41)
§ 432.155  INTERSECTIONS AT WHICH TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNALS FAIL OR MALFUNCTION.
   (a)   The driver of a vehicle who approaches an intersection where traffic
is controlled by traffic control signals shall do all of the following if the
signal facing the driver exhibits no colored lights or colored lighted arrows,
exhibits a combination of such lights or arrows that fails to clearly indicate
the assignment of right-of-way, or, if the vehicle is a bicycle, the signals
are otherwise malfunctioning due to the failure of a vehicle detector to detect
the presence of the bicycle:
      (1)   Stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if none, stop before
entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or, if none, stop
before entering the intersection;
      (2)   Yield the right-of-way to all vehicles in the intersection or
approaching on an intersecting road, if the vehicles will constitute an
immediate hazard during the time the driver is moving across or within the
intersection or junction of roadways;
      (3)   Exercise ordinary care while proceeding through the intersection.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(ORC 4511.132)
§ 432.16  RIGHT-OF-WAY WHEN TURNING LEFT.
   (a)   The operator of a vehicle intending to turn to the left within an
intersection or into an alley, private road, or driveway shall yield the right-
of-way to any vehicle approaching from the opposite direction which is within
the intersection or so close thereto as to constitute an immediate hazard.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(ORC 4511.42)
§ 432.17  OPERATION OF VEHICLE AT STOP AND YIELD SIGNS.
   (a)   Except when directed to proceed by a law enforcement officer, every
driver of a vehicle approaching a stop sign shall stop at a clearly marked stop
line, but if none, before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the
intersection, or, if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway
where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway
before entering it. After having stopped, the driver shall yield the right-of-
way to any vehicle in the intersection or approaching on another roadway so
closely as to constitute an immediate hazard during the time the driver is
moving across or within the intersection or junction of roadways.
   (b)   The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign shall slow down to a
speed reasonable for the existing conditions, and if required for safety to
stop, shall stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if none, before entering
the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or if none, then at the
point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of
approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway before entering it. After
slowing, the driver shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle in the
intersection or approaching on another roadway so closely as to constitute an
immediate hazard during the time the driver is moving across or within the
intersection or junction of roadways. Whenever a driver is involved in a
collision with a vehicle in the intersection or junction of roadways, after
driving past a yield sign without stopping, the collision shall be prima facie
evidence of the driver's failure to yield the right-of-way.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(ORC 4511.43)
§ 432.18  EMERGENCY OR PUBLIC SAFETY VEHICLES AT STOP SIGNALS OR SIGNS.
   (a)   The driver of any emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle, when
responding to an emergency call, upon approaching a red or stop signal or any
stop sign, shall slow down as necessary for safety to traffic, but may proceed
cautiously past the red or stop sign or signal with due regard for the safety
of all persons using the street or highway.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(ORC 4511.03)
§ 432.19  RIGHT-OF-WAY OF PUBLIC SAFETY OR CORONER'S VEHICLE.
   (a)   Upon the approach of a public safety vehicle or coroner's vehicle,
equipped with at least one flashing, rotating, or oscillating light visible
under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of 500 feet to the front of
the vehicle, and the driver is giving an audible signal by siren, exhaust
whistle, or bell, no driver of any other vehicle shall fail to yield the right-
of-way, immediately drive, if practical, to a position parallel to, and as
close as possible to, the right edge or curb of the highway clear of any
intersection, and stop and remain in that position until the public safety
vehicle or coroner's vehicle has passed, except when otherwise directed by a
police officer.
   (b)   This section does not relieve the driver of a public safety vehicle or
coroner's vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all
persons and property upon the highway.
   (c)   This section applies to a coroner's vehicle only when the vehicle is
operated in accordance with Ohio R.C. 4513.171, or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance. As used in this section, "coroner's vehicle" means a
vehicle used by a coroner, deputy coroner or coroner's investigator that is
equipped with a flashing, oscillating or rotating red or blue light and a
siren, exhaust whistle or bell capable of giving an audible signal.
   (d)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection or subsection (e),
whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree
on a first offense. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously
has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or
traffic offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the third degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously
has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses,
whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree.
(ORC 4511.45)
   (e)   (1)   When the failure of a motor vehicle operator to yield the right-
of-way to a public safety vehicle as required by subsection (a) of this section
impedes the ability of the public safety vehicle to respond to an emergency,
any emergency personnel in the public safety vehicle may report the license
plate number and a general description of the vehicle and the operator of the
vehicle to the law enforcement agency exercising jurisdiction over the area
where the alleged violation occurred.
      (2)   A.   Upon receipt of a report under subsection (e)(1) of this
section, the law enforcement agency may conduct an investigation to attempt to
determine or confirm the identity of the operator of the vehicle at the time of
the alleged violation.
         B.   If the identity of the operator at the time of an alleged
violation of subsection (a) of this section is established, the law enforcement
agency has probable cause to issue either a written warning or a citation for
that violation, and the agency shall issue a written warning or a citation to
the operator.
         C.   If the identity of the operator of the vehicle at the time of the
alleged violation cannot be established, the law enforcement agency may issue a
written warning to the person who owned the vehicle at the time of the alleged
violation. However, in the case of a leased or rented vehicle, the law
enforcement agency shall issue the written warning to the person who leased or
rented the vehicle at the time of the alleged violation.
      (3)   A.   Whoever violates subsection (a) of this section based on a
report filed under subsection (e)(1) of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor and shall be fined one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00).
         B.   If a person who is issued a citation for a violation of
subsection (a) of this section based on a report filed under subsection (e)(1)
of this section does not enter a written plea of guilty and does not waive the
person’s right to contest the citation but instead appears in person in the
proper court to answer the charge, the trier of fact cannot find beyond a
reasonable doubt that the person committed that violation unless the emergency
personnel who filed the report appears in person in the court and testifies.
      (4)   As used in this subsection (e):
         A.   “License plate.” Includes any temporary license placard issued
under R.C. § 4503.182 or similar law of another jurisdiction.
         B.   “Public safety vehicle.” Does not include an unmarked public
safety vehicle or a vehicle used by a public law enforcement officer or other
person sworn to enforce the criminal and traffic laws of the state or a vehicle
used by the motor carrier enforcement unit for the enforcement of orders and
rules of the public utilities commission.
(R.C. § 4511.454)
§ 432.195  DRIVING WHILE APPROACHING STATIONARY PUBLIC SAFETY VEHICLE WITH
FLASHING LIGHTS.
   (a)   The driver of a motor vehicle, upon approaching a stationary public
safety vehicle, emergency vehicle, road service vehicle, vehicle used by the
Public Utilities Commission to conduct motor vehicle inspections in accordance
with R.C. §§ 4923.04 and 4923.06, or a highway maintenance vehicle that is
displaying the appropriate visual signals by means of flashing, oscillating, or
rotating lights, as prescribed in R.C. § 4513.17, shall do either of the
following:
      (1)   If the driver of the motor vehicle is traveling on a highway that
consists of at least two lanes that carry traffic in the same direction of
travel as that of the driver’s motor vehicle, the driver shall proceed with due
caution and, if possible and with due regard to the road, weather, and traffic
conditions, shall change lanes into a lane this is not adjacent to that of the
stationary public safety vehicle, emergency vehicle, road service vehicle,
vehicle used by the Public Utilities Commission to conduct motor vehicle
inspections in accordance with R.C. §§ 4923.04 and 4923.06, or a highway
maintenance vehicle.
      (2)   If the driver is not traveling on a highway of a type described in
subsection (a)(1) of this section, or if the driver is traveling on a highway
of that type but it is not possible to change lanes or if to do so would be
unsafe, the driver shall proceed with due caution, reduce the speed of the
motor vehicle, and maintain a safe speed for the road, weather, and traffic
conditions.
   (b)   This section does not relieve the driver of a public safety vehicle,
emergency vehicle, road service vehicle, vehicle used by the Public Utilities
Commission to conduct motor vehicle inspections in accordance with R.C. §§
4923.04 and 4923.06, or a highway maintenance vehicle from the duty to drive
with due regard for the safety of all persons and property upon the highway.
   (c)   No person shall fail to drive a motor vehicle in compliance with
subsections (a)(1) or (a)(2) of this section when so required by subsection (a)
of this section.
   (d)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of
the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to
one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section
is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (2)   Notwithstanding §
698.02 or Ohio R.C. 2929.28, upon a finding that a person operated a motor
vehicle in violation of subsection (c) of this section, the court, in addition
to all other penalties provided by law, shall impose a fine of two times the
usual amount imposed for the violation.
(ORC 4511.213)
§ 432.20  RIGHT-OF-WAY AT PRIVATE DRIVEWAY, ALLEY OR BUILDING.
   (a)   (1)   The operator of a vehicle about to enter or cross a highway from
any place other than another roadway shall yield the right-of-way to all
traffic approaching on the roadway to be entered or crossed.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates
subsection (a) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
subsection (a) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted
of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates
subsection (a) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(ORC 4511.44)
   (b)   (1)   The driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, building,
private road, or driveway within a business or residence district shall stop
the vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or onto the sidewalk
area extending across the alley, building entrance, road, or driveway, or in
the event there is no sidewalk area, shall stop at the point nearest the street
to be entered where the driver has a view of approaching traffic thereon.
(ORC 4511.431(A))
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates
subsection (b) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
subsection (b) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted
of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates
subsection (b) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(ORC 4511.431(B))
   (c)   The driver of a vehicle intending to turn into a private road or
driveway, alley or building from a public street or highway shall be governed
by the following rules:
      (1)   Approach for a right turn and a right turn shall be made as close
as practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway.
      (2)   Upon a roadway where traffic is proceeding in opposite directions,
approach for a left turn and a left turn shall be made from that portion of the
right half of the roadway nearest the centerline thereof.
      (3)   Upon a roadway where traffic is restricted to one direction,
approach for a left turn and a left turn shall be made as close as practicable
to the left-hand curb or edge of the roadway.
   (d)   It shall be the duty of the driver of any vehicle entering a private
road or driveway, alley or building to yield the right-of-way to pedestrians
lawfully using the sidewalk or sidewalk area extending across the private road
or driveway, alley or building.
§ 432.205  STOP SIGNS ON PRIVATE ROADS AND DRIVEWAYS.
   (a)   The owner of a private road or driveway located in a private
residential area containing 20 or more dwelling units may erect stop signs at
places where the road or driveway intersects with another private road or
driveway in the residential area, in compliance with all of the following
requirements:
      (1)   The stop sign is sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily
observant person and meets the specifications of and is placed in accordance
with the manual adopted by the Department of Transportation pursuant to Ohio
R.C. 4511.09.
      (2)   The owner has posted a sign at the entrance of the private road or
driveway that is in plain view and clearly informs persons entering the road or
driveway that they are entering private property, stop signs have been posted
and must be obeyed, and the signs are enforceable by law enforcement officers
under state law. The sign required by this subsection, where appropriate, may
be incorporated with the sign required by Ohio R.C. 4511.211(A)(2), or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (b)   Ohio R.C. 4511.43(A) and Ohio R.C. 4511.46, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, shall be deemed to apply to the driver of a
vehicle on a private road or driveway where a stop sign is placed in accordance
with subsection (a) of this section and to a pedestrian crossing such a road or
driveway at an intersection where a stop sign is in place.
   (c)   When a stop sign is placed in accordance with subsection (a) of this
section, any law enforcement officer may apprehend a person found violating the
stop sign and may stop and charge the person with violating the stop sign.
   (d)   As used in this section, and for the purpose of applying Ohio R.C.
4511.43(A) and Ohio R.C. 4511.46, or any substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, to conduct under this section:
      (1)   "Intersection" means:
         A.   The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the
lateral curb lines, or, if none, then the lateral boundary lines of the
roadways of two private roads or driveways which join one another at, or
approximately at, right angles, or the area within which vehicles traveling
upon different private roads or driveways joining at any other angle may come
in conflict.
         B.   Where a private road or driveway includes two roadways 30 feet or
more apart, then every crossing of two roadways of such private roads or
driveways shall be regarded as a separate intersection.
      (2)   "Owner" and "private residential area containing 20 or more
dwelling units" have the same meanings as in Ohio R.C. 4511.211.
      (3)   "Roadway" means that portion of a private road or driveway
improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular travel, except the berm or
shoulder. If a private road or driveway includes two or more separate roadways,
the term "roadway" means any such roadway separately but not all such roadways
collectively.
   (e)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(ORC 4511.432)
§ 432.21  RIGHT-OF-WAY OF FUNERAL PROCESSION.
   (a)   As used in this section, "funeral procession" means two or more
vehicles accompanying the cremated remains or the body of a deceased person in
the daytime when each of the vehicles has its headlights lighted and is
displaying a purple and white or an orange and white pennant attached to each
vehicle in such a manner as to be clearly visible to traffic approaching from
any direction.
   (b)   Excepting public safety vehicles proceeding in accordance with Ohio
R.C. 4511.45 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, or when
directed otherwise by a police officer, pedestrians and the operators of all
vehicles shall yield the right-of-way to each vehicle that is a part of a
funeral procession. Whenever the lead vehicle in a funeral procession lawfully
enters an intersection, the remainder of the vehicles in the procession may
continue to follow the lead vehicle through the intersection, notwithstanding
any traffic-control devices or right-of-way provisions of the Revised Code,
provided that the operator of each vehicle exercises due care to avoid
colliding with any other vehicle or pedestrian.
   (c)   No person shall operate any vehicle as a part of a funeral procession
without having the headlights of the vehicle lighted and without displaying a
purple and white or an orange and white pennant in such a manner as to be
clearly visible to traffic approaching from any direction.
   (d)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(ORC 4511.451)
§ 432.22  DRIVING UPON SIDEWALKS, TREE LAWNS OR CURBS.
   (a)   (1)   No person shall drive any vehicle, other than a bicycle, upon a
sidewalk or sidewalk area, except upon a permanent or duly authorized temporary
driveway.
      (2)   Nothing in this section shall be construed as prohibiting local
authorities from regulating the operation of bicycles, except that no local
authority may require that bicycles be operated on sidewalks.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(ORC 4511.711)
   (c)   No person shall drive a vehicle on a tree lawn area or the curb of a
street, except upon a permanent or duly authorized temporary driveway or when
otherwise lawfully authorized.
§ 432.23  DRIVER'S VIEW AND CONTROL TO BE UNOBSTRUCTED BY LOAD OR PERSONS.
   (a)   No person shall drive a vehicle when it is so loaded, or when there
are in the front seat such number of persons, as to obstruct the view of the
driver to the front or sides of the vehicle, or to interfere with the driver's
control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle.
   (b)   No passenger in a vehicle shall ride in a position as to interfere
with the driver's view ahead or to the sides, or to interfere with the driver's
control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle.
   (c)   No person shall open the door of a vehicle on the side available to
moving traffic unless and until it is reasonably safe to do so, and can be done
without interfering with the movement of other traffic, nor shall any person
leave a door open on the side of a vehicle available to moving traffic for a
period of time longer than necessary to load or unload passengers.
   (d)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(ORC 4511.70)
§ 432.24  DRIVING UPON STREET POSTED AS CLOSED FOR REPAIR.
   (a)   No person shall drive upon, along, or across a street or highway, or
any part of a street or highway that has been closed in the process of its
construction, reconstruction, or repair, and posted with appropriate signs by
the authority having jurisdiction to close the highway.
(R.C. § 4511.71(A))
   (b)   (1)   No person shall operate a vehicle on or onto a public street or
highway that is temporarily covered by a rise in water level, including
groundwater or an overflow of water, and that is clearly marked by a sign that
specifies that the road is closed due to the rise in water level and that any
person who uses the closed portion of the road may be fined up to $2,000.
      (2)   A person who is issued a citation for a violation of division (B)
(1) of this section is not permitted to enter a written plea of guilty and
waive the person’s right to contest the citation in court, but instead must
appear in person in the proper court to answer the charge.
(R.C. § 4511.714(A), (B))
   (c)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (a) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
division (a) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted
of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates
division (a) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.71(B))
      (2)   A.   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.
         B.   In addition to the financial sanctions authorized or required
under R.C. § 2929.28 and to any costs otherwise authorized or required under
any provision of law, the court imposing the sentence upon an offender who is
convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of division (b) of this section
shall order the offender to reimburse one or more rescuers for the cost any
such rescuer incurred in rescuing the person, excluding any cost of
transporting the rescued person to a hospital or other facility for treatment
of injuries, up to a cumulative maximum of $2,000. If more than one rescuer was
involved in the emergency response, the court shall allocate the reimbursement
proportionately, according to the cost each rescuer incurred. A financial
sanction imposed under this section is a judgment in favor of the rescuer and,
subject to a determination of indigency under R.C. § 2929.28(B), a rescuer may
collect the financial sanction in the same manner as provided in R.C. §
2929.28.
(R.C. § 4511.714(C))
   (d)   As used in this section:
      (1)   “Emergency medical service organization.” Has the same meanings as
in R.C. § 9.60.
      (2)   “Firefighting agency.” Has the same meanings as in R.C. § 9.60.
      (3)   “Private fire company.” Has the same meanings as in R.C. § 9.60.
      (4)   “Rescuer.” Means a state agency, political subdivision,
firefighting agency, private fire company, or emergency medical service
organization.
(R.C. § 4511.714(D))
§ 432.25  FOLLOWING AND PARKING NEAR EMERGENCY OR SAFETY VEHICLES.
   (a)   The driver of any vehicle, other than an emergency vehicle or public
safety vehicle on official business, shall not follow any emergency vehicle or
public safety vehicle traveling in response to an alarm closer than 500 feet,
or drive into or park the vehicle within the block where the fire apparatus has
stopped in answer to a fire alarm, unless directed to do so by a police officer
or a firefighter.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(ORC 4511.72)
§ 432.26  DRIVING OVER FIRE HOSE.
   (a)   No vehicle shall, without the consent of the fire department official
in command, be driven over any unprotected hose of a fire department that is
laid down on any street or private driveway to be used at any fire or alarm of
fire.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(ORC 4511.73)
§ 432.27  DRIVING THROUGH SAFETY ZONE.
   (a)   No vehicle shall at any time be driven through or within a safety
zone.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(ORC 4511.60)
§ 432.28  ONE-WAY STREETS AND ROTARY TRAFFIC ISLANDS.
   (a)   (1)   Upon a roadway designated and posted with signs for one-way
traffic, a vehicle shall be driven only in the direction designated.
      (2)   A vehicle passing around a rotary traffic island shall be driven
only to the right of the rotary traffic island.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(ORC 4511.32)
§ 432.29  DRIVING UPON DIVIDED ROADWAYS.
   (a)   Whenever any highway has been divided into two roadways by an
intervening space, or by a physical barrier, or a clearly indicated dividing
section so constructed as to impede vehicular traffic, every vehicle shall be
driven only upon the right-hand roadway, and no vehicle shall be driven over,
across, or within any dividing space, barrier, or section, except through an
opening, crossover, or intersection established by public authority. This
section does not prohibit the occupancy of the dividing space, barrier, or
section for the purpose of an emergency stop, or in compliance with an order of
a police officer.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(ORC 4511.35)
§ 432.30  STOPPING FOR SCHOOL BUS; ACTUATING VISUAL SIGNALS; DISCHARGING
CHILDREN.
   (a)   The driver of a vehicle, upon meeting or overtaking from either
direction any school bus stopped for the purpose of receiving or discharging
any school child, person attending programs offered by community boards of
mental health and county boards of developmental disabilities, or child
attending a program offered by a head start agency, shall stop at least ten
feet from the front or rear of the school bus and shall not proceed until such
school bus resumes motion, or until signaled by the school bus driver to
proceed. It is no defense to a charge under this subsection that the school bus
involved failed to display or be equipped with an automatically extended stop
warning sign as required by subsection (b) of this section.
   (b)   Every school bus shall be equipped with amber and red visual signals
meeting the requirements of Ohio R.C. 4511.771 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, and an automatically extended stop warning sign of a type
approved by the state Board of Education, which shall be actuated by the driver
of the bus whenever but only whenever the bus is stopped or stopping on the
roadway for the purpose of receiving or discharging school children, persons
attending programs offered by community boards of mental health and county
boards of developmental disabilities, or children attending programs offered by
head start agencies. A school bus driver shall not actuate the visual signals
or the stop warning sign in designated school bus loading areas where the bus
is entirely off the roadway or at school buildings when children or persons
attending programs offered by community boards of mental health and county
boards of developmental disabilities are loading or unloading at curbside or at
buildings when children attending programs offered by head start agencies are
loading or unloading at curbside. The visual signals and stop warning sign
shall be synchronized or otherwise operated as required by rule of the Board.
   (c)   Where a highway has been divided into four or more traffic lanes, a
driver of a vehicle need not stop for a school bus approaching from the
opposite direction which has stopped for the purpose of receiving or
discharging any school child, persons attending programs offered by community
boards of mental health and county boards of developmental disabilities, or
children attending programs offered by head start agencies. The driver of any
vehicle overtaking the school bus shall comply with subsection (a) above.
   (d)   School buses operating on divided highways or on highways with four or
more traffic lanes shall receive and discharge all school children, persons
attending programs offered by community boards of mental health and county
boards of developmental disabilities, and children attending programs offered
by head start agencies on their residence side of the highway.
   (e)   No school bus driver shall start the driver’s bus until after any
child, person attending programs offered by community boards of mental health
and county boards of developmental disabilities, or child attending a program
offered by a head start agency who may have alighted therefrom has reached a
place of safety on the child’s or person’s residence side of the road.
   (f)   (1)   Whoever violates subsection (a) of this section may be fined an
amount not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). A person who is issued a
citation for a violation of subsection (a) of this section is not permitted to
enter a written plea of guilty and waive the person’s right to contest the
citation in a trial but instead must appear in person in the proper court to
answer the charge.
      (2)   In addition to and independent of any other penalty provided by
law, the court or Mayor may impose upon an offender who violates this section a
class seven suspension of the offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s
license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license or nonresident
operating privilege from the range specified in Ohio R.C. 4510.02(A)(7). When a
license is suspended under this section, the court or Mayor shall cause the
offender to deliver the license to the court, and the court or Clerk of the
Court immediately shall forward the license to the Registrar of Motor Vehicles,
together with notice of the court’s action.
   (g)   As used in this section:
      (1)   “Head start agency” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 3301.32.
      (2)   “School bus” as used in relation to children who attend a program
offered by a head start agency, means a bus that is owned and operated by a
head start agency, is equipped with an automatically extended stop warning sign
of a type approved by the state Board of Education, is painted the color and
displays the markings described in Ohio R.C. 4511.77, and is equipped with
amber and red visual signals meeting the requirements of Ohio R.C. 4511.77,
irrespective of whether or not the bus has 15 or more children aboard at any
time. The term does not include a van owned and operated by a head start
agency, irrespective of its color, lights or markings.
(ORC 4511.75)
§ 432.31  USE OF EARPHONES WHILE DRIVING.
   (a)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle while wearing earphones over,
or earplugs in, both ears. As used in this section, "earphones" means any
headset, radio, tape player, or other similar device that provides the listener
with radio programs, music, or other recorded information through a device
attached to the head and that covers all or a portion of both ears. "Earphones"
does not include speakers or other listening devices that are built into
protective headgear.
   (b)   This section does not apply to:
      (1)   Any person wearing a hearing aid;
      (2)   Law enforcement personnel while on duty;
      (3)   Fire department personnel and emergency medical service personnel
while on duty;
      (4)   Any person operating equipment for use in the maintenance or repair
of any highway;
      (5)   Any person engaged in the operation of refuse collection equipment.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(ORC 4511.84)
§ 432.32  RESERVED.
Editor's note:
   Section
432.32 is reserved for future legislation.
§ 432.33  RESERVED.
Editor's note:
   Section
432.33 is reserved for future legislation.
§ 432.34  OBSTRUCTING INTERSECTIONS, CROSSWALKS OR GRADE CROSSINGS.
   (a)   No driver shall enter an intersection or marked crosswalk, or drive
onto any railroad grade crossing, unless there is sufficient space on the other
side of the intersection, crosswalk, or grade crossing to accommodate the
vehicle the driver is operating without obstructing the passage of other
vehicles, pedestrians, or railroad trains, notwithstanding any traffic-control
signal indication to proceed.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(ORC 4511.712)
§ 432.35  "PEELING"; CRACKING EXHAUST NOISES.
   No person shall operate any motor vehicle, except when necessary for safe
operation, or in compliance with law, in such a manner that the vehicle is so
rapidly accelerated or started from a stopped position, or in the shifting of
gears while in motion, that the exhaust system emits a loud, cracking or
chattering noise unusual to its normal operation, or that the rubber tires of
such vehicle squeal or leave tire marks on the roadway, commonly known as
"peeling".
§ 432.36  SHORTCUTTING ACROSS PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   No operator of a motor vehicle shall enter upon private property for the
sole purpose of driving across such property, between abutting streets or other
public ways thereof. The failure to stop on such property in connection with or
in furtherance of the enterprise or activities being conducted on the property
shall constitute prima facie evidence of the violation.
§ 432.37  ENTERING AND EXITING CONTROLLED-ACCESS HIGHWAY.
   No person shall drive a vehicle onto or from any controlled-access highway
except at such entrances and exits as are established by public authority.
§ 432.38  FAILURE TO CONTROL; WEAVING.
   (a)   Editor's note:
      Subsection (a) hereof was repealed by implication by the adoption of §
434.025.
   (b)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle or motorcycle upon any street
or highway in a weaving or zigzag course unless such irregular course is
necessary for safe operation or in compliance with law.
(Ord. 81-O-9, passed 1-5-1981)
§ 432.39  OPERATION ON PATHS SET ASIDE FOR BICYCLES.
   (a)   (1)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle, snowmobile, or all-
purpose vehicle upon any path set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles, when
an appropriate sign giving notice of such use is posted on the path.
      (2)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to affect any rule of
the Director of Natural Resources governing the operation of motor vehicles,
snowmobiles, all-purpose vehicles, and bicycles on lands under the Director's
jurisdiction.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(ORC 4511.713(A), (B))
§ 432.40  LITTERING FROM MOTOR VEHICLES.
   (a)   No operator or occupant of a motor vehicle shall, regardless of
intent, throw, drop, discard, or deposit litter from any motor vehicle in
operation upon any street, road, or highway, except into a litter receptacle in
a manner that prevents its being carried away or deposited by the elements.
   (b)   No operator of a motor vehicle in operation upon any street, road, or
highway shall allow litter to be thrown, dropped, discarded, or deposited from
the motor vehicle, except into a litter receptacle in a manner that prevents
its being carried away or deposited by the elements.
   (c)   As used in this section, "litter" means garbage, trash, waste,
rubbish, ashes, cans, bottles, wire, paper, cartons, boxes, automobile parts,
furniture, glass, or anything else of an unsightly or unsanitary nature.
   (d)   Whoever violates subsection (a) or (b) of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4511.82)
§ 432.41  DRIVING ACROSS GRADE CROSSINGS.
   (a)   (1)   Whenever any person driving a vehicle approaches a railroad
grade crossing, the person shall stop within 50 feet but not less than 15 feet
from the nearest rail of the railroad if any of the following circumstances
exist at the crossing:
         A.   A clearly visible electric or mechanical signal device gives
warning of the immediate approach of a train.
         B.   A crossing gate is lowered.
         C.   A flagperson gives or continues to give a signal of the approach
or passage of a train.
         D.   There is insufficient space on the other side of the railroad
grade crossing to accommodate the vehicle the person is operating without
obstructing the passage of other vehicles, pedestrians or railroad trains,
notwithstanding any traffic control signal indication to proceed.
         E.   An approaching train is emitting an audible signal or is plainly
visible, and is in hazardous proximity to the crossing.
         F.   There is insufficient undercarriage clearance to safely negotiate
the crossing.
      (2)   A person who is driving a vehicle and who approaches a railroad
grade crossing shall not proceed as long as any of the circumstances described
in subsections (a)(1)A. through (a)(1)F. of this section exist at the crossing.
   (b)   No person shall drive any vehicle through, around, or under any
crossing gate or barrier at a railroad crossing while the gate or barrier is
closed, or is being opened or closed unless the person is signaled by a law
enforcement officer or flagperson that it is permissible to do so.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.
(ORC 4511.62)
§ 432.42  TEXTING WHILE DRIVING PROHIBITED.
   (a)   No person shall drive a motor vehicle on any street, highway, or
property open to the public for vehicular traffic while using a handheld
electronic wireless communications device to write, send, or read a text-based
communication.
   (b)   Subsection (a) of this section does not apply to any of the following:
      (1)   A person using a handheld electronic wireless communications device
in that manner for emergency purposes, including an emergency contact with a
law enforcement agency, hospital or health care provider, fire department, or
other similar emergency agency or entity;
      (2)   A person driving a public safety vehicle who uses a handheld
electronic wireless communications device in that manner in the course of the
person's duties;
      (3)   A person using a handheld electronic wireless communications device
in that manner whose motor vehicle is in a stationary position and who is
outside a lane of travel;
      (4)   A person reading, selecting, or entering a name or telephone number
in a handheld electronic wireless communications device for the purpose of
making or receiving a telephone call;
      (5)   A person receiving wireless messages on a device regarding the
operation or navigation of a motor vehicle; safety-related information,
including emergency, traffic, or weather alerts; or data used primarily by the
motor vehicle;
      (6)   A person receiving wireless messages via radio waves;
      (7)   A person using a device for navigation purposes;
      (8)   A person conducting wireless interpersonal communication with a
device that does not require manually entering letters, numbers, or symbols or
reading text messages, except to activate, deactivate, or initiate the device
or a feature or function of the device;
      (9)   A person operating a commercial truck while using a mobile data
terminal that transmits and receives data;
      (10)   A person using a handheld electronic wireless communications
device in conjunction with a voice-operated or hands-free device feature or
function of the vehicle.
   (c)   Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, no law
enforcement officer shall cause an operator of an automobile being operated on
any street or highway to stop the automobile for the sole purpose of
determining whether a violation of subsection (a) of this section has been or
is being committed or for the sole purpose of issuing a ticket, citation, or
summons for a violation of that nature or causing the arrest of or commencing a
prosecution of a person for a violation of that nature, and no law enforcement
officer shall view the interior or visually inspect any automobile being
operated on any street or highway for the sole purpose of determining whether a
violation of that nature has been or is being committed.
   (d)   Whoever violates subsection (a) of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
   (e)   A prosecution for a violation of R.C. § 4511.204 does not preclude a
prosecution for a violation of a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance
based on the same conduct. However, if an offender is convicted of or pleads
guilty to a violation of R.C. § 4511.204 and is also convicted of or pleads
guilty to a violation of a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance based
on the same conduct, the two offenses are allied offenses of similar import
under R.C. § 2941.25.
   (f)   As used in this section:
      (1)   “Electronic wireless communications device.”  Includes any of the
following:
         A.   A wireless telephone;
         B.   A text-messaging device;
         C.   A personal digital assistant;
         D.   A computer, including a laptop computer and a computer tablet;
         E.   Any other substantially similar wireless device that is designed
or used to communicate text.
      (2)   “Voice-operated or hands-free device.”  A device that allows the
user to vocally compose or send, or to listen to a text-based communication
without the use of either hand except to activate or deactivate a feature or
function.
      (3)   “Write, send, or read a text-based communication.”  To manually
write or send, or read a text-based communication using an electronic wireless
communications device, including manually writing or sending, or reading
communications referred to as text messages, instant messages, or electronic
mail.
(ORC 4511.204)
Statutory reference:
   No preemption for local regulations imposing greater penalties, see Ohio
R.C. 4511.204(E)
§ 432.43  USE OF ELECTRONIC WIRELESS COMMUNICATION DEVICES BY MINORS OR
PROBATIONARY DRIVERS WHILE DRIVING PROHIBITED.
   (a)   No holder of a temporary instruction permit who has not attained the
age of 18 years and no holder of a probationary driver's license shall drive a
motor vehicle on any street, highway, or property used by the public for
purposes of vehicular traffic or parking while using in any manner an
electronic wireless communications device.
   (b)   Subsection (a) of this section does not apply to either of the
following:
      (1)   A person using an electronic wireless communications device for
emergency purposes, including an emergency contact with a law enforcement
agency, hospital or health care provider, fire department, or other similar
emergency agency or entity;
      (2)   A person using an electronic wireless communications device whose
motor vehicle is in a stationary position and the motor vehicle is outside a
lane of travel;
      (3)   A person using a navigation device in a voice-operated or hands-
free manner who does not manipulate the device while driving.
   (c)   (1)   Except as provided in subsection (c)(2) of this section, whoever
violates subsection (a) of this section shall be fined one hundred fifty
dollars ($150.00).  In addition, the court shall impose a class seven
suspension of the offender's driver's license or permit for a definite period
of 60 days.
      (2)   If the person previously has been adjudicated a delinquent child or
a juvenile traffic offender for a violation of this section, whoever violates
this section shall be fined $300. In addition, the court shall impose a class
seven suspension of the person’s driver’s license or permit for a definite
period of one year.
   (d)   The filing of a sworn complaint against a person for a violation of
R.C. § 4511.205 does not preclude the filing of a sworn complaint for a
violation of a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance for the same
conduct. However, if a person is adjudicated a delinquent child or a juvenile
traffic offender for a violation of R.C. § 4511.205 and is also adjudicated a
delinquent child or a juvenile traffic offender for a violation of a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance for the same conduct, the two
offenses are allied offenses of similar import under R.C. § 2941.25.
   (e)   As used in this section, “electronic wireless communications device”
includes any of the following:
      (1)   A wireless telephone;
      (2)   A personal digital assistant;
      (3)   A computer, including a laptop computer and a computer tablet;
      (4)   A text-messaging device;
      (5)   Any other substantially similar electronic wireless device that is
designed or used to communicate via voice, image, or written word.
(ORC 4511.205)
§ 432.99  PENALTY.
Editor's note:
   See §§
408.01 and
408.02 for general Traffic Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 434:  O.V.I.; RECKLESS OPERATION; SPEED
Section
434.01   Driving or physical control while under the influence.
434.011   Immobilizing or disabling device violation
434.02   Reckless operation on streets, public or private property.
434.025   Reasonable control.
434.03   Maximum speed limits; assured clear distance ahead.
434.035   Speed limits on private roads and driveways.
434.04   Slow speed; posted minimum speeds.
434.05   Speed limitations over bridges.
434.06   Speed exceptions for emergency or safety vehicles.
434.07   Street racing prohibited.
434.08   Vehicular homicide; vehicular manslaughter.
434.09   Operation restricted for mini-trucks and low-speed, under-speed, or
utility vehicles
434.99   Penalty.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Alcohol defined - see Ohio R.C. 4301.01
   Alteration of prima facie speed limits - see Ohio R.C. 4511.21, 4511.22,
4511.23
   Criminal offenses by drivers of commercial vehicles - see TRAF.
442.05,
442.08
   Driving upon sidewalks, tree lawns or curbs - see TRAF.
432.22
   Drug of abuse defined - see Ohio R.C. 3719.011
   Failure to control; weaving - see TRAF.
432.38
   Ignition interlock devices - see TRAF.
438.29
   Intoxicated pedestrians - see TRAF.
416.10
   Liquor consumption in motor vehicle - see GEN. OFF.
612.04
   "Peeling" - see TRAF.
432.35
   See section histories for similar state law
§ 434.01  DRIVING OR PHYSICAL CONTROL WHILE UNDER THE INFLUENCE.
   (a)   Driving under the influence.
      (1)   No person shall operate any vehicle within this municipality, if,
at the time of the operation, any of the following apply:
         A.   The person is under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or
a combination of them.
         B.   The person has a concentration of 0.08% or more but less than
0.17% by weight per unit volume of alcohol in the person’s whole blood.
         C.   The person has a concentration of 0.096% or more but less than
0.204% by weight per unit volume of alcohol in the person’s blood serum or
plasma.
         D.   The person has a concentration of 0.08 grams or more but less
than 0.17 grams by weight of alcohol per 210 liters of the person’s breath.
         E.   The person has a concentration of 0.11 grams or more but less
than 0.238 grams by weight of alcohol per 100 milliliters of the person’s
urine.
         F.   The person has a concentration of 0.17% or more by weight per
unit volume of alcohol in the person’s whole blood.
         G.   The person has a concentration of 0.204% or more by weight per
unit volume of alcohol in the person’s blood serum or plasma.
         H   The person has a concentration of 0.17 grams or more by weight of
alcohol per 210 liters of the person’s breath.
         I.   The person has a concentration of 0.238 grams or more by weight
of alcohol per 100 milliliters of the person’s urine.
         J.   Except as provided in division (k) of this section, the person
has a concentration of any of the following controlled substances or
metabolites of a controlled substance in the person’s whole blood, blood serum
or plasma, or urine that equals or exceeds any of the following:
            1.   The person has a concentration of amphetamine in the person’s
urine of at least 500 nanograms of amphetamine per milliliter of the person’s
urine or has a concentration of amphetamine in the person’s whole blood or
blood serum or plasma of at least 100 nanograms of amphetamine per milliliter
of the person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma.
            2.   The person has a concentration of cocaine in the person’s
urine of at least 150 nanograms of cocaine per milliliter of the person’s urine
or has a concentration of cocaine in the person’s whole blood or blood serum or
plasma of at least 50 nanograms of cocaine per milliliter of the person’s whole
blood or blood serum or plasma.
            3.   The person has a concentration of cocaine metabolite in the
person’s urine of at least 150 nanograms of cocaine metabolite per milliliter
of the person’s urine or has a concentration of cocaine metabolite in the
person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at least 50 nanograms of
cocaine metabolite per milliliter of the person’s whole blood or blood serum or
plasma.
            4.   The person has a concentration of heroin in the person’s urine
of at least 2,000 nanograms of heroin per milliliter of the person’s urine or
has a concentration of heroin in the person’s whole blood or blood serum or
plasma of at least 50 nanograms of heroin per milliliter of the person’s whole
blood or blood serum or plasma.
            5.   The person has a concentration of heroin metabolite (6-
monoacetyl morphine) in the person’s urine of at least ten nanograms of heroin
metabolite (6-monoacetyl morphine) per milliliter of the person’s urine or has
a concentration of heroin metabolite (6-monoacetyl morphine) in the person’s
whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at least ten nanograms of heroin
metabolite (6- monoacetyl morphine) per milliliter of the person’s whole blood
or blood serum or plasma.
            6.   The person has a concentration of L.S.D. in the person’s urine
of at least 25 nanograms of L.S.D. per milliliter of the person’s urine or a
concentration of L.S.D. in the person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma of
at least ten nanograms of L.S.D. per milliliter of the person’s whole blood or
blood serum or plasma.
            7.   The person has a concentration of marihuana in the person’s
urine of at least ten nanograms of marihuana per milliliter of the person’s
urine or has a concentration of marihuana in the person’s whole blood or blood
serum or plasma of at least two nanograms of marihuana per milliliter of the
person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma.
            8.   Either of the following applies:
               a.   The person is under the influence of alcohol, a drug of
abuse, or a combination of them, and the person has a concentration of
marihuana metabolite in the person’s urine of at least 15 nanograms of
marihuana metabolite per milliliter of the person’s urine or has a
concentration of marihuana metabolite in the person’s whole blood or blood
serum or plasma of at least five nanograms of marihuana metabolite per
milliliter of the person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma.
               b.   The person has a concentration of marihuana metabolite in
the person’s urine of at least 35 nanograms of marihuana metabolite per
milliliter of the person’s urine or has a concentration of marihuana metabolite
in the person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at least 50 nanograms
of marihuana metabolite per milliliter of the person’s whole blood or blood
serum or plasma.
            9.   The person has a concentration of methamphetamine in the
person’s urine of at least 500 nanograms of methamphetamine per milliliter of
the person’s urine or has a concentration of methamphetamine in the person’s
whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at least 100 nanograms of
methamphetamine per milliliter of the person’s whole blood or blood serum or
plasma.
            10.   The person has a concentration of phencyclidine in the
person’s urine of at least 25 nanograms of phencyclidine per milliliter of the
person’s urine or has a concentration of phencyclidine in the person’s whole
blood or blood serum or plasma of at least ten nanograms of phencyclidine per
milliliter of the person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma.
            11.   The State Board of Pharmacy has adopted a rule pursuant to
R.C. § 4729.041 that specifies the amount of salvia divinorum and the amount of
salvinorin A that constitute concentrations of salvia divinorum and salvinorin
A in a person’s urine, in a person’s whole blood, or in a person’s blood serum
or plasma at or above which the person is impaired for purposes of operating
any vehicle within this state, the rule is in effect, and the person has a
concentration of salvia divinorum or salvinorin A of at least that amount so
specified by rule in the person’s urine, in the person’s whole blood, or in the
person’s blood serum or plasma.
      (2)   No person who, within 20 years of the conduct described in division
(a)(2)A. of this section, previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to
a violation of this division or a substantially equivalent State law or
municipal ordinance, division (a)(1) or (b) of this section or a substantially
equivalent State law or municipal ordinance, or shall do both of the following:
         A.   Operate any vehicle within this municipality while under the
influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a combination of them;
         B.   Subsequent to being arrested for operating the vehicle as
described in division (a)(2)A. of this section, being asked by a law
enforcement officer to submit to a chemical test or tests under R.C. § 4511.191
or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, and being advised by the
officer in accordance with R.C. § 4511.192 or any substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance of the consequences of the person’s refusal or submission
to the test or tests, refuse to submit to the test or tests.
   (b)   Underage alcohol consumption. No person under 21 years of age shall
operate any vehicle within this municipality if, at the time of the operation,
any of the following apply:
      (1)   The person has a concentration of at least 0.02% but less than
0.08% by weight per unit volume of alcohol in the person’s whole blood;
      (2)   The person has a concentration of at least 0.03% but less than
0.096% by weight per unit volume of alcohol in the person’s blood serum or
plasma;
      (3)   The person has a concentration of at least 0.02 grams but less than
0.08 grams by weight of alcohol per 210 liters of the person’s breath;
      (4)   The person has a concentration of at least 0.028 grams but less
than 0.11 grams by weight of alcohol per 100 milliliters of the person’s urine.
   (c)   Prosecution; limitation on convictions. In any proceeding arising out
of one incident, a person may be charged with a violation of division (a)(1)A.
or (a)(2) and a violation of division (b)(1), (b)(2) or (b)(3) of this section,
but the person may not be convicted of more than one violation of these
divisions.
   (d)   Evidence; tests.
      (1)   A.   In any criminal prosecution or juvenile court proceeding for a
violation of division (a)(1)A. of this section or for an equivalent offense
that is vehicle-related, the result of any test of any blood or urine withdrawn
and analyzed at any health care provider, as defined in R.C. § 2317.02, may be
admitted with expert testimony to be considered with any other relevant and
competent evidence in determining the guilt or innocence of the defendant.
         B.   In any criminal prosecution for a violation of division (a) or
(b) of this section or for an equivalent offense that is vehicle-related, the
court may admit evidence on the concentration of alcohol, drugs of abuse,
controlled substances, metabolites of a controlled substance or a combination
of them in the defendant’s whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, urine or
other bodily substance at the time of the alleged violation as shown by
chemical analysis of the substance withdrawn within three hours of the time of
the alleged violation. The three-hour time limit specified in this division
regarding the admission of evidence does not extend or affect the two-hour time
limit specified in R.C. § 4511.192(A) as the maximum period of time during
which a person may consent to a chemical test or tests as described in that
section. The court may admit evidence on the concentration of alcohol, drugs of
abuse, or a combination of them as described in this division when a person
submits to a blood test at the request of a law enforcement officer under R.C.
§ 4511.191 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, or a blood or
urine sample is obtained pursuant to a search warrant. Only a physician, a
registered nurse, an emergency medical technician-intermediate, an emergency
medical technician-paramedic,  or a qualified technician, chemist or
phlebotomist shall withdraw a blood sample for the purpose of determining the
alcohol, drug, controlled substance, metabolite of a controlled substance, or
combination content of the whole blood, blood serum or blood plasma. This
limitation does not apply to the taking of breath or urine specimens. A person
authorized to withdraw blood under this division may refuse to withdraw blood
under this division, if in that person’s opinion, the physical welfare of the
person would be endangered by the withdrawing of blood. The bodily substance
withdrawn under this division (d)(1)B. shall be analyzed in accordance with
methods approved by the Director of Health by an individual possessing a valid
permit issued by the Director pursuant to R.C. § 3701.143.
         C.   As used in division (d)(1)B. of this section, “Emergency medical
technician- intermediate” and “Emergency medical technician-paramedic” have the
same meanings as in R.C. § 4765.01.
      (2)   In a criminal prosecution for a violation of division (a) of this
section or for an equivalent offense that is vehicle-related, if there was at
the time the bodily substance was withdrawn a concentration of less than the
applicable concentration of alcohol specified in divisions (a)(1)B., (a)(1)C.,
(a)(1)D. and (a)(1)E. of this section or less than the applicable concentration
of a listed controlled substance or a listed metabolite of a controlled
substance specified for a violation of division (a)(1)J. of this section, that
fact may be considered with other competent evidence in determining the guilt
or innocence of the defendant. This division does not limit or affect a
criminal prosecution for a violation of division (b) of this section.
      (3)   Upon the request of the person who was tested, the results of the
chemical test shall be made available to the person or the person’s attorney,
immediately upon the completion of the chemical test analysis. If the chemical
test was obtained pursuant to division (d)(1)B. of this section, the person
tested may have a physician, a registered nurse or a qualified technician,
chemist or phlebotomist of the person’s own choosing administer a chemical test
or tests, at the person’s expense, in addition to any administered at the
request of a law enforcement officer. If the person was under arrest as
described in R.C. § 4511.191(A)(5), the arresting officer shall advise the
person at the time of the arrest that the person may have an independent
chemical test taken at the person’s own expense. If the person was under arrest
other than described in R.C. § 4511.191(A)(5), the form to be read to the
person to be tested, as required under division (g) of this section, shall
state that the person may have an independent test performed at the person’s
expense. The failure or inability to obtain an additional chemical test by a
person shall not preclude the admission of evidence relating to the chemical
test or tests taken at the request of a law enforcement officer.
      (4)   A.   As used in division (d)(4)B. and (d)(4)C. of this section,
“National Highway Traffic Safety Administration” means the National Highway
Traffic Safety Administration established as an administration of the United
States Department of Transportation under 96 Stat. 2415 (1983), 49 U.S.C. 105.
         B.   In any criminal prosecution or juvenile court proceeding for a
violation of division (a) or (b) of this section, of a municipal ordinance
relating to operating a vehicle while under the influence of alcohol, a drug of
abuse, or alcohol and a drug of abuse, or of a municipal ordinance relating to
operating a vehicle with a prohibited concentration of alcohol, a controlled
substance, or a metabolite of a controlled substance in the whole blood, blood
serum or plasma, breath, or urine, if a law enforcement officer has
administered a field sobriety test to the operator of the vehicle involved in
the violation and if it is shown by clear and convincing evidence that the
officer administered the test in substantial compliance with the testing
standards for any reliable, credible and generally accepted field sobriety
tests that were in effect at the time the tests were administered, including
but not limited to any testing standards then in effect that were set by the
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, all of the following apply:
            1.   The officer may testify concerning the results of the field
sobriety test so administered.
            2.   The prosecution may introduce the results of the field
sobriety test so administered as evidence in any proceedings in the criminal
prosecution or juvenile court proceeding.
            3.   If testimony is presented or evidence is introduced under
division (d)(4)B.1. or (d)(4)B.2. of this section and if the testimony or
evidence is admissible under the Rules of Evidence, the court shall admit the
testimony or evidence and the trier of fact shall give it whatever weight the
trier of fact considers to be appropriate.
         C.   Division (d)(4)B. of this section does not limit or preclude a
court, in its determination of whether the arrest of a person was supported by
probable cause or its determination of any other matter in a criminal
prosecution or juvenile court proceeding of a type described in that division,
from considering evidence or testimony that is not otherwise disallowed by
division (d)(4)B. of this section.
   (e)   Laboratory report.
      (1)   Subject to division (e)(3) of this section, in any criminal
prosecution or juvenile court proceeding for a violation of division (a)(1)B.,
(a)(1)C., (a)(1)D., (a)(1)E., (a)(1)F., (a)(1)G., (a)(1)H., (a)(1)I. or (a)
(1)J. or (b)(1), (b)(2), (b)(3) or (b)(4) of this section or for an equivalent
offense that is substantially equivalent to any of those divisions, a
laboratory report from any laboratory personnel issued a permit by the
Department of Health authorizing an analysis as described in this division that
contains an analysis of the whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, urine
or other bodily substance tested and that contains all of the information
specified in this division shall be admitted as prima facie evidence of the
information and statements that the report contains. The laboratory report
shall contain all of the following:
         A.   The signature, under oath, of any person who performed the
analysis;
         B.   Any findings as to the identity and quantity of alcohol, a drug
of abuse, a controlled substance, a metabolite of a controlled substance, or a
combination of them that was found;
         C.   A copy of a notarized statement by the laboratory director or a
designee of the director that contains the name of each certified analyst or
test performer involved with the report, the analyst’s or test performer’s
employment relationship with the laboratory that issued the report, and a
notation that performing an analysis of the type involved is part of the
analyst’s or test performer’s regular duties;
         D.   An outline of the analyst’s or test performer’s education,
training and experience in performing the type of analysis involved and a
certification that the laboratory satisfies appropriate quality control
standards in general and, in this particular analysis, under rules of the
Department of Health.
      (2)   Notwithstanding any other provision of law regarding the admission
of evidence, a report of the type described in division (e)(1) of this section
is not admissible against the defendant to whom it pertains in any proceeding,
other than a preliminary hearing or a grand jury proceeding, unless the
prosecutor has served a copy of the report on the defendant’s attorney or, if
the defendant has no attorney, on the defendant.
      (3)   A report of the type described in division (e)(1) of this section
shall not be prima facie evidence of the contents, identity or amount of any
substance if, within seven days after the defendant to whom the report pertains
or the defendant’s attorney receives a copy of the report, the defendant or the
defendant’s attorney demands the testimony of the person who signed the report.
The judge in the case may extend the seven-day time limit in the interest of
justice.
   (f)   Limitation of liability.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, any physician,
registered nurse, emergency medical technician-intermediate, emergency medical
technician-paramedic,  or qualified technician, chemist or phlebotomist who
withdraws blood from a person pursuant to this section or R.C. § 4511.19,
4511.191 or 4511.192, and any hospital, first-aid station or clinic at which
blood is withdrawn from a person pursuant to this section or R.C. § 4511.19,
4511.191 or 4511.192, is immune from criminal liability and civil liability
based upon a claim of assault and battery or any other claim that is not a
claim of malpractice, for any act performed in withdrawing blood from the
person. The immunity provided in this division also extends to an emergency
medical service organization that employs an emergency medical technician-
intermediate or emergency medical technician-paramedic who withdraws blood
under this section. The immunity provided in this division is not available to
a person who withdraws blood if the person engages in willful or wanton
misconduct.
      (2)   As used in division (f)(1), “Emergency medical technician-
intermediate” and “Emergency medical technician-paramedic” have the same
meanings as in R.C. § 4765.01.
(R.C. § 4511.19(A) - (F))
   (g)   Implied consent.
      (1)   Definitions. For the purpose of this division (g), the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
         A.   “Alcohol monitoring device.” Any device that provides for
continuous alcohol monitoring, any ignition interlock device, any immobilizing
or disabling device other than an ignition interlock device that is constantly
available to monitor the concentration of alcohol in a person’s system, or any
other device that provides for the automatic testing and periodic reporting of
alcohol consumption by a person and that a court orders a person to use as a
sanction imposed as a result of the person’s conviction of or plea of guilty to
an offense.
         B.   “Community addiction services provider.”  Has the same meaning as
in R.C. § 5119.01.
         C.   “Physical control.” Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.194.
      (2)   Implied consent to chemical tests. Any person who operates a
vehicle upon a highway or any public or private property used by the public for
vehicular travel or parking within this municipality or who is in physical
control of a vehicle shall be deemed to have given consent to a chemical test
or tests of the person’s whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine
to determine the alcohol, drug of abuse, controlled substance, metabolite of a
controlled substance, or combination content of the person’s whole blood, blood
serum or plasma, breath, or urine if arrested for a violation of division (a),
(b) or (o) of this section, R.C. § 4511.19(A) or (B), 4511.194 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance or any other municipal O.V.I.
ordinance.
      (3)   Tests at request of law enforcement agent. The chemical test or
tests under division (g)(2) of this section shall be administered at the
request of a law enforcement officer having reasonable grounds to believe the
person was operating or in physical control of a vehicle in violation of a
division, section or ordinance identified in division (g)(2) of this section.
The law enforcement agency by which the officer is employed shall designate
which of the tests shall be administered.
      (4)   Effect of death or unconsciousness. Any person who is dead or
unconscious, or who otherwise is in a condition rendering the person incapable
of refusal, shall be deemed to have consented as provided in division (g)(2) of
this section and the test or tests may be administered, subject to R.C. §§
313.12 to 313.16.
      (5)   Chemical tests.
         A.   If a law enforcement officer arrests a person for a violation of
R.C. § 4511.19(A) or (B), 4511.194 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, or a municipal O.V.I. ordinance and if the person if convicted would
be required to be sentenced under R.C. § 4511.19(G)(1)(c), (G)(1)(d) or (G)(1)
(e), the law enforcement officer shall request the person to submit, and the
person shall submit, to a chemical test or tests of the person’s whole blood,
blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine for the purpose of determining the
alcohol, drug of abuse, controlled substance, metabolite of a controlled
substance, or combination content of the person’s whole blood, blood serum or
plasma, breath, or urine. A law enforcement officer who makes a request
pursuant to this division that a person submit to a chemical test or tests is
not required to advise the person of the consequences of submitting to, or
refusing to submit to, the test or tests and is not required to give the person
the form described in division (g)(7) of this section, but the officer shall
advise the person at the time of the arrest that if the person refuses to take
a chemical test the officer may employ whatever reasonable means are necessary
to ensure that the person submits to a chemical test of the person’s whole
blood or blood serum or plasma. The officer shall also advise the person at the
time of the arrest that the person may have an independent chemical test taken
at the person’s own expense. Divisions (g)(3) and (g)(4) of this section apply
to the administration of a chemical test or tests pursuant to this division.
         B.   If a person refuses to submit to a chemical test upon a request
made pursuant to division (g)(5)A. of this section, the law enforcement officer
who made the request may employ whatever reasonable means are necessary to
ensure that the person submits to a chemical test of the person’s whole blood
or blood serum or plasma. A law enforcement officer who acts pursuant to this
division to ensure that a person submits to a chemical test of the person’s
whole blood or blood serum or plasma is immune from criminal and civil
liability based upon a claim for assault and battery or any other claim for the
acts, unless the officer so acted with malicious purpose, in bad faith, or in a
wanton or reckless manner.
(R.C. § 4511.191(A))
      (6)   Advice required. Except as provided in division (g)(5) of this
section, the arresting law enforcement officer shall give advice in accordance
with this division to any person under arrest for a violation of division (a),
(b) or (o) of this section, R.C. § 4511.19(A) or (B), 4511.194 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, or any other municipal O.V.I.
ordinance. The officer shall give that advice in a written form that contains
the information described in division (g)(7) of this section and shall read the
advice to the person. The form shall contain a statement that the form was
shown to the person under arrest and read to the person by the arresting
officer. One or more persons shall witness the arresting officer’s reading of
the form, and the witnesses shall certify to this fact by signing the form. The
person must submit to the chemical test or tests, subsequent to the request of
the arresting officer, within two hours of the time of the alleged violation
and, if the person does not submit to the test or tests within that two- hour
time limit, the failure to submit automatically constitutes a refusal to submit
to the test or tests.
      (7)   Certification of arrest. Except as provided in division (g)(5) of
this section, if a person is under arrest as described in division (g)(6) of
this section, before the person may be requested to submit to a chemical test
or tests to determine the alcohol, drug of abuse, controlled substance,
metabolite of a controlled substance or combination content of the person’s
whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath or urine, the arresting officer
shall read the following form to the person:
            “You now are under arrest for (specifically state the offense under
state law or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance for which the
person was arrested – operating a vehicle under the influence of alcohol, a
drug, or a combination of them; operating a vehicle while under the influence
of a listed controlled substance or a listed metabolite of a controlled
substance; operating a vehicle after underage alcohol consumption; or having
physical control of a vehicle while under the influence).
            “If you refuse to take any chemical test required by law, your Ohio
driving privileges will be suspended immediately, and you will have to pay a
fee to have the privileges reinstated. If you have a prior conviction of
O.V.I., O.V.U.A.C., or operating a vehicle while under the influence of a
listed controlled substance or a listed metabolite of a controlled substance
under state or municipal law within the preceding 20 years, you are now under
arrest for state O.V.I., and, if you refuse to take a chemical test, you will
face increased penalties if you subsequently are convicted of the state O.V.I.
            (Read this part unless the person is under arrest for solely having
physical control of a vehicle while under the influence.) “If you take any
chemical test required by law and are found to be at or over the prohibited
amount of alcohol, a controlled substance, or a metabolite of a controlled
substance in your whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine as set
by law, your Ohio driving privileges will be suspended immediately, and you
will have to pay a fee to have the privileges reinstated.
            “If you take a chemical test, you may have an independent chemical
test taken at your own expense.”
      (8)   Actions required by arresting officer. If the arresting law
enforcement officer does not ask a person under arrest as described in division
(g)(5) of this section or division (g)(6) of this section to submit to a
chemical test or tests under R.C. § 4511.191 or this section, the arresting
officer shall seize the Ohio or out-of-state driver’s or commercial driver’s
license or permit of the person and immediately forward it to the court in
which the arrested person is to appear on the charge. If the arrested person is
not in possession of the person’s license or permit or it is not in the
person’s vehicle, the officer shall order the person to surrender it to the law
enforcement agency that employs the officer within 24 hours after the arrest,
and, upon the surrender, the agency immediately shall forward the license or
permit to the court in which the person is to appear on the charge. Upon
receipt of the license or permit, the court shall retain it pending the
arrested person’s initial appearance and any action taken under R.C. §
4511.196.
      (9)   Duties of officer.
         A.   If a law enforcement officer asks a person under arrest as
described in division (g)(5) of this section to submit to a chemical test or
tests under that division and the test results indicate a prohibited
concentration of alcohol, a controlled substance, or a metabolite of a
controlled substance in the person’s whole blood, blood serum or plasma,
breath, or urine at the time of the alleged offense, or if a law enforcement
officer asks a person under arrest as described in division (g)(6) of this
section to submit to a chemical test or tests under R.C. § 4511.191 or this
section, if the officer advises the person in accordance with this section of
the consequences of the person’s refusal or submission, and if either the
person refuses to submit to the test or tests or, unless the arrest was for a
violation of division (o) of this section, R.C. § 4511.194 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, the person submits to the test or tests and the
test results indicate a prohibited concentration of alcohol, a controlled
substance or a metabolite of a controlled substance in the person’s whole
blood, blood serum or plasma, breath or urine at the time of the alleged
offense, the arresting officer shall do all of the following:
            1.   On behalf of the Registrar of Motor Vehicles, notify the
person that, independent of any penalties or sanctions imposed upon the person,
the person’s Ohio driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit or
nonresident operating privilege is suspended immediately, that the suspension
will last at least until the person’s initial appearance on the charge, which
will be held within five days after the date of the person’s arrest or the
issuance of a citation to the person, and that the person may appeal the
suspension at the initial appearance or during the period of time ending 30
days after that initial appearance;
            2.   Seize the driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit of
the person and immediately forward it to the Registrar. If the arrested person
is not in possession of the person’s license or permit or it is not in the
person’s vehicle, the officer shall order the person to surrender it to the law
enforcement agency that employs the officer within 24 hours after the person is
given notice of the suspension, and, upon the surrender, the officer’s
employing agency immediately shall forward the license or permit to the
Registrar;
            3.   Verify the person’s current residence and, if it differs from
that on the person’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit, notify
the Registrar of the change;
            4.   Send to the Registrar, within 48 hours after the arrest of the
person, a sworn report that includes all of the following statements:
               a.   That the officer had reasonable grounds to believe that, at
the time of the arrest, the arrested person was operating a vehicle in
violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A) or (B) or a municipal O.V.I. ordinance or for
being in physical control of a stationary vehicle in violation of R.C. §
4511.194 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance;
               b.   That the person was arrested and charged with a violation
of R.C. § 4511.19(A) or (B), 4511.194 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, or a municipal O.V.I. ordinance;
               c.   Unless division (g)(9)A.4.e. of this section applies, that
the officer asked the person to take the designated chemical test or tests,
advised the person in accordance with this section of the consequences of
submitting to, or refusing to take, the test or tests, and gave the person the
form described in division (g)(7) of this section;
               d.   Unless division (g)(9)A.4.e. of this section applies, that
either the person refused to submit to the chemical test or tests or, unless
the arrest was for a violation of R.C. § 4511.194 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, the person submitted to the chemical test or tests and the
test results indicate a prohibited concentration of alcohol, a controlled
substance, or a metabolite of a controlled substance in the person’s whole
blood, blood serum or plasma, breath or urine at the time of the alleged
offense;
               e.   If the person was under arrest as described in division (g)
(5) of this section and the chemical test or tests were performed in accordance
with that division, that the person was under arrest as described in that
division, that the chemical test or tests were performed in accordance with
that division, and that test results indicated a prohibited concentration of
alcohol, a controlled substance, or a metabolite of a controlled substance in
the person’s whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine at the time
of the alleged offense.
         B.   Division (g)(9)A. of this section does not apply to a person who
is arrested for a violation of division (o) of this section, R.C. § 4511.194 or
a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, or any other substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, who is asked by a law enforcement officer to
submit to a chemical test or tests under this section, and who submits to the
test or tests, regardless of the amount of alcohol, a controlled substance, or
a metabolite of a controlled substance that the test results indicate is
present in the person’s whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath or urine.
      (10)   Sworn report of arresting officer.
         A.   The arresting officer shall give the officer’s sworn report that
is completed under this section to the arrested person at the time of the
arrest, or the Registrar of Motor Vehicles shall send the report to the person
by regular first-class mail as soon as possible after receipt of the report,
but not later than 14 days after receipt of it. An arresting officer may give
an unsworn report to the arrested person at the time of the arrest, provided
the report is complete when given to the arrested person and subsequently is
sworn to by the arresting officer. As soon as possible, but not later than 48
hours after the arrest of the person, the arresting officer shall send a copy
of the sworn report to the court in which the arrested person is to appear on
the charge for which the person was arrested.
         B.   The sworn report of an arresting officer completed under this
section is prima facie proof of the information and statements that it
contains. It shall be admitted and considered as prima facie proof of the
information and statements that it contains in any appeal under R.C. § 4511.197
relative to any suspension of a person’s driver’s or commercial driver’s
license or permit or nonresident operating privilege that results from the
arrest covered by the report.
(R.C. § 4511.192)
      (11)   Suspension effective immediately. A suspension of a person’s
driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit or nonresident operating
privilege under this section for the time described in R.C. § 4511.191(B) or
(C) is effective immediately from the time at which the arresting officer
serves the notice of suspension upon the arrested person. Any subsequent
finding that the person is not guilty of the charge that resulted in the
person’s being requested to take the chemical test or tests under division (g)
(1) through (g)(5) of this section does not affect the suspension.
      (12)   Initial appearance. If a person arrested for operating a vehicle
in violation of division (a) or (b) of this section, R.C. § 4511.19(A) or (B),
or any other municipal O.V.I. ordinance, or for being in physical control of a
vehicle in violation of division (o) of this section or R.C. § 4511.194 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, regardless of whether the
person’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit or nonresident
operating privilege is or is not suspended under R.C. § 4511.191(B) or (C) or
R.C. Chapter 4510, the person’s initial appearance on the charge resulting from
the arrest shall be held within five days of the person’s arrest or the
issuance of the citation to him or her, subject to any continuance granted by
the court pursuant to R.C. § 4511.197 regarding the issues specified in that
section.
(R.C. § 4511.191(D))
   (h)   Penalty for driving under the influence.
      (1)   Whoever violates any provisions of divisions (a)(1)A. through (a)
(1)I. or (a)(2) of this section is guilty of operating a vehicle under the
influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a combination of them. Whoever
violates division (a)(1)J. of this section is guilty of operating a vehicle
while under the influence of a listed controlled substance or a listed
metabolite of a controlled substance. The court shall sentence the offender for
either offense under R.C. Chapter 2929, except as otherwise authorized or
required by divisions (h)(1)A. through (h)(1)E. of this section:
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in division (h)(1)B., (h)(1)C., (h)
(1)D. or (h)(1)E. of this section, the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the first degree and the court shall sentence the offender to all of the
penalties and sanctions provided in R.C. § 4511.19(G)(1)(a)(i) to (G)(1)(a)
(iv).
         B.   Except as otherwise provided in division (h)(1)E. of this
section, an offender who, within ten years of the offense previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to one violation of division (a) or (b) of this
section, or one other equivalent offense is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
first degree. The court shall sentence the offender to all of the penalties and
sanctions provided in R.C. § 4511.19(G)(1)(b)(i) to (G)(1)(b)(v).
         C.   Except as otherwise provided in division (h)(1)E. of this
section, an offender who, within ten years of the offense, previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to two violations of division (a) or (b) of this
section or other equivalent offenses is guilty of a misdemeanor. The court
shall sentence the offender to all of the penalties and sanctions provided in
R.C. § 4511.19(G)(1)(c)(i) to (G)(1)(c)(vi).
         D.   Except as otherwise provided in division (h)(1)E. of this
section, an offender who, within ten years of the offense, previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to three or more violations of division (a) or
(b) of this section or other equivalent offenses or an offender who, within 20
years of the offense, previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to
five or more violations of that nature is guilty of a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.
         E.   An offender who previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A) that was a felony, regardless of
when the violation and the conviction or guilty plea occurred, is guilty of a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   An offender who is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of
division (a) of this section and who subsequently seeks reinstatement of the
driver’s or occupational driver’s license or permit or nonresident operating
privilege suspended under this section or R.C. § 4511.19 as a result of the
conviction or guilty plea shall pay a reinstatement fee as provided in R.C. §
4511.191(F)(2).
      (3)   A.   If an offender is sentenced to a jail term under R.C. §
4511.19(G)(1)(b)(i) or (G)(1)(b)(ii) or (G)(1)(c)(i) or (G)(1)(c)(ii) and if,
within 60 days of sentencing of the offender, the court issues a written
finding on the record that, due to the unavailability of space at the jail
where the offender is required to serve the term, the offender will not be able
to begin serving that term within the 60-day period following the date of
sentencing, the court may impose an alternative sentence as specified in R.C. §
4511.19(G)(3) that includes a term of house arrest with electronic monitoring,
with continuous alcohol monitoring, or with both electronic monitoring and
continuous alcohol monitoring.
         B.   As an alternative to the mandatory jail terms as required by R.C.
§ 4511.19(G)(1), the court may sentence the offender as provided in R.C. §
4511.19(G)(3).
      (4)   If an offender’s driver’s or occupational driver’s license or
permit or nonresident operating privilege is suspended under division (h) of
this section or R.C. § 4511.19(G) and if R.C. § 4510.13 permits the court to
grant limited driving privileges, the court may grant the limited driving
privileges in accordance with that section. If division (A)(7) of that section
requires the court impose as a condition of the privileges that the offender
must display on the vehicle that is driven subject to the privileges restricted
license plates that are issuedunder R.C. § 4503.231, except as provided in
division (B) of that section, the court shall impose that condition as one of
the conditions of the limited driving privileges granted to the offender,
except as provided in R.C. § 4503.231(B).
      (5)   Fines imposed under this section for a violation of division (a) of
this section shall be distributed as provided in R.C. § 4511.19(G)(5).
      (6)   If title to a motor vehicle that is subject to an order of criminal
forfeiture under division (h)(1)C., (h)(1)D. or (h)(1)E. of this section is
assigned or transferred and R.C. § 4503.234(B)(2) or (B)(3) applies, in
addition to or independent of any other penalty established by law, the court
may fine the offender the value of the vehicle as determined by publications of
the National Automobile Dealers Association. The proceeds of any fine so
imposed shall be distributed in accordance with division (C)(2) of that
section.
      (7)   In all cases in which an offender is sentenced under division (h)
of this section, the offender shall provide the court with proof of financial
responsibility as defined in R.C. § 4509.01. If the offender fails to provide
that proof of financial responsibility, the court, in addition to any other
penalties provided by law, may order restitution pursuant to § 698.02(f) or
R.C. § 2929.18 or 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding $5,000 for any economic
loss arising from an accident or collision that was the direct and proximate
result of the offender’s operation of the vehicle before, during, or after
committing the offense for which the offender is sentenced under division (h)
of this section.
      (8)   A court may order an offender to reimburse a law enforcement agency
for any costs incurred by the agency with respect to a chemical test or tests
administered to the offender if all of the following apply:
         A.   The offender is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of
division (a) of this section.
         B.   The test or tests were of the offender’s whole blood, blood serum
or plasma, or urine.
         C.   The test or tests indicated that the offender had a prohibited
concentration of a controlled substance or a metabolite of a controlled
substance in the offender’s whole blood, blood serum or plasma, or urine at the
time of the offense.
      (9)   As used in division (h) of this section, “electronic monitoring”
has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2929.01.
   (i)   Penalty for operating a vehicle after underage alcohol consumption.
Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of operating a motor
vehicle after underage alcohol consumption and shall be punished as follows:
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (i)(2) of this section,
the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. In addition to
any other sanction imposed for the offense, the court shall impose a class six
suspension of the offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s license,
temporary instruction permit, probationary license or nonresident operating
privilege from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(6). The court may grant
unlimited driving privileges with an ignition interlock device relative to the
suspension and may reduce the period of suspension as authorized under R.C. §
4510.022. If the court grants unlimited driving privileges under R.C. §
4510.022, the court shall suspend any jail term imposed under division (i)(1)
of this section as required under that section.
      (2)   If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one or more violations of division (a)
or (b) of this section or other equivalent offense or offenses, the offender is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. In addition to any other sanction
imposed for the offense, the court shall impose a class four suspension of the
offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction
permit, probationary license or nonresident operating privilege from the range
specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(4).  The court may grant limited driving
privileges relative to the suspension under R.C. §§ 4510.021 and 4510.13.
      (3)   If the offender also is convicted of or also pleads guilty to a
specification of the type described in R.C. § 2941.1414 and if the court
imposes a jail term for the violation of division (b) of this section, the
court shall impose upon the offender an additional definite jail term pursuant
to R.C. § 2929.24(E).
      (4)   The offender shall provide the court with proof of financial
responsibility as defined in R.C. § 4509.01. If the offender fails to provide
that proof of financial responsibility, then, in addition to any other
penalties provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to§ 698.02
(f) or R.C. § 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding $5,000 for any economic loss
arising from an accident or collision that was the direct and proximate result
of the offender’s operation of the vehicle before, during, or after committing
the violation of division (b) of this section.
   (j)   Treatment programs.
      (1)   No court shall sentence an offender to an alcohol treatment program
under this section unless the treatment program complies with the minimum
standards for alcohol treatment programs adopted under R.C. Chapter 5119 by the
Director of Mental Health and Addiction Services.
      (2)   An offender who stays in a drivers’ intervention program or in an
alcohol treatment program under an order issued under this section shall pay
the cost of the stay in the program. However, if the court determines that an
offender who stays in an alcohol treatment program under an order issued under
this section is unable to pay the cost of the stay in the program, the court
may order that the cost be paid from the court’s Indigent Drivers’ Alcohol
Treatment Fund.
   (k)   Appeal; effect on suspension. If a person whose driver’s or commercial
driver’s license or permit or nonresident operating privilege is suspended
under this section or R.C. § 4511.19 files an appeal regarding any aspect of
the person’s trial or sentence, the appeal itself does not stay the operation
of the suspension.
   (l)   Exception; direction of health professional. Division (a)(1)J. of this
section does not apply to a person who operates a vehicle while the person has
a concentration of a listed controlled substance or a listed metabolite of a
controlled substance in the person’s whole blood, blood serum or plasma, or
urine that equals or exceeds the amount specified in that division, if both of
the following apply:
      (1)   The person obtained the controlled substance pursuant to a
prescription issued by a licensed health professional authorized to prescribe
drugs.
      (2)   The person injected, ingested or inhaled the controlled substance
in accordance with the health professional’s directions.
   (m)   Applicability to R.C. § 2923.16(D). The prohibited concentrations of a
controlled substance or a metabolite of a controlled substance listed in
division (a)(1)J. of this section also apply in a prosecution of a violation of
R.C. § 2923.16(D) in the same manner as if the offender is being prosecuted for
a prohibited concentration of alcohol.
   (n)   Applicability of terms. All terms defined in R.C. § 4510.01 apply to
this section. If the meaning of a term defined in R.C. § 4510.01 conflicts with
the meaning of the same term as defined in R.C. § 4501.01 or 4511.01, the term
as defined in R.C. § 4510.01 applies to this section.
(R.C. § 4511.19(G) - (M))
   (o)   Physical control of vehicle while under the influence.
      (1)   Definition. As used in this division (o), “physical control” means
being in the driver’s position of the front seat of a vehicle and having
possession of the vehicle’s ignition key or other ignition device.
      (2)   Generally. No person shall be in physical control of a vehicle if,
at the time of the physical control, any of the following apply:
         A.   The person is under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or
a combination of them.
         B.   The person’s whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath or urine
contains at least the concentration of alcohol specified in divisions (a)(1)B.,
(a)(1)C., (a)(1)D. or (a)(1)E. of this section.
         C.   Except as provided in division (o)(5) of this section, the person
has a concentration of a listed controlled substance or a listed metabolite of
a controlled substance in the person’s whole blood, blood serum or plasma, or
urine that equals or exceeds the concentration specified in division (a)(1)J.
of this section.
      (3)   Field sobriety test.
         A.   In any criminal prosecution or juvenile court proceeding for a
violation of this section, if a law enforcement officer has administered a
field sobriety test to the person in physical control of the vehicle involved
in the violation and if it is shown by clear and convincing evidence that the
officer administered the test in substantial compliance with the testing
standards for any reliable, credible and generally acceptable field sobriety
tests that were in effect at the time the tests were administered, including
but not limited to any testing standards then in effect that were set by the
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, all of the following apply:
            1.   The officer may testify concerning the results of the field
sobriety test so administered.
            2.   The prosecution may introduce the results of the field
sobriety test so administered as evidence in any proceedings in the criminal
prosecution or juvenile court proceeding.
            3.   If testimony is presented or evidence is introduced under
division (o)(3)A.1. or (o)(3)A.2. of this section and if the testimony or
evidence is admissible under the Rules of Evidence, the court shall admit the
testimony or evidence, and the trier of fact shall give it whatever weight the
trier of fact considers to be appropriate.
         B.   Division (o)(3)A. of this section does not limit or preclude a
court, in its determination of whether the arrest of a person was supported by
probable cause or its determination of any other matter in a criminal
prosecution or juvenile court proceeding of a type described in that division,
from considering evidence or testimony that is not otherwise disallowed by
division (o)(3)A. of this section.
      (4)   Penalty. Whoever violates this division (o) is guilty of having
physical control of a vehicle while under the influence, a misdemeanor of the
first degree. In addition to other sanctions imposed, the court may impose on
the offender a class seven suspension of the offender’s driver’s license,
commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license
or nonresident operating privilege from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02
(A)(7).
      (5)   Exception. Division (o)(2)C. of this section does not apply to a
person who is in physical control of a vehicle while the person has a
concentration of a listed controlled substance or a listed metabolite of a
controlled substance in the person’s whole blood, blood serum or plasma, or
urine that equals or exceeds the amount specified in division (a)(1)J. of this
section if both of the following apply:
         A.   The person obtained the controlled substance pursuant to a
prescription issued by a licensed health professional authorized to prescribe
drugs.
         B.   The person injected, ingested or inhaled the controlled substance
in accordance with the health professional’s directions.
(R.C. § 4511.194)
   (p)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      (1)   “Community residential sanction,” “continuous alcohol monitoring,”
“jail,” “mandatory prison term,” “mandatory term of local incarceration,”
“prison term” and “sanction.” Have the same meanings as in R.C. § 2929.01.
      (2)   “Drug of abuse.” Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4506.01.
      (3)   “Equivalent offense.” Any of the following:
         A.   A violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A) or (B);
         B.   A violation of a municipal O.V.I. ordinance;
         C.   A violation of R.C. § 2903.04 in a case in which the offender was
subject to the sanctions described in division (D) of that section;
         D.   A violation of R.C. § 2903.06(A)(1) or 2903.08 or a municipal
ordinance that is substantially equivalent to either of those divisions;
         E.   A violation of R.C. § 2903.06(A)(2), (A)(3) or (A)(4), 2903.08(A)
(2), or former R.C. § 2903.07, or a municipal ordinance that is substantially
equivalent to any of those divisions or that former section, in a case in which
a judge or jury as the trier of fact found that the offender was under the
influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a combination of them;
         F.   A violation of R.C. § 1547.11(A) or (B);
         G.   A violation of a municipal ordinance prohibiting a person from
operating or being in physical control of any vessel underway or from
manipulating any water skis, aquaplane or similar device on the waters of this
state while under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a combination
of them or prohibiting a person from operating or being in physical control of
any vessel underway or from manipulating any water skis, aquaplane or similar
device on the waters of this state with a prohibited concentration of alcohol,
a controlled substance, or a metabolite of a controlled substance in the whole
blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine;
         H.   A violation of an existing or former municipal ordinance, law of
another state, or law of the United States that is substantially equivalent to
R.C. § 4511.19(A) or (B) or 1547.11(A) or (B);
         I.   A violation of a former law of this state that was substantially
equivalent to R.C. § 4511.19(A) or (B) or 1547.11(A) or (B).
      (4)   “Equivalent offense that is vehicle-related.” An equivalent offense
that is any of the following:
         A.   A violation described in division A., B., C., D. or E. of the
definition for “equivalent offense” provided in this division (p);
         B.   A violation of an existing or former municipal ordinance, law of
another state, or law of the United States that is substantially equivalent to
R.C. § 4511.19(A) or (B);
         C.   A violation of a former law of this state that was substantially
equivalent to R.C. § 4511.19(A) or (B).
      (5)   “Mandatory jail term.” The mandatory term in jail of three, six,
ten, 20, 30 or 60 days that must be imposed under R.C. § 4511.19(G)(1)(a), (G)
(1)(b), or (G)(1)(c) upon an offender convicted of a violation of division (A)
of that section and in relation to which all of the following apply:
         A.   Except as specifically authorized under R.C. § 4511.19, the term
must be served in a jail.
         B.   Except as specifically authorized under R.C. § 4511.19, the term
cannot be suspended, reduced or otherwise modified pursuant to R.C. §§ 2929.21
through 2929.28 or any other provision of the Ohio Revised Code.
      (6)   “Municipal O.V.I. ordinance” and “municipal O.V.I. offense.” Any
municipal ordinance prohibiting a person from operating a vehicle while under
the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a combination of them or
prohibiting a person from operating a vehicle with a prohibited concentration
of alcohol, a controlled substance, or a metabolite of a controlled substance
in the whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath or urine.
(R.C. § 4511.181)
Statutory reference:
   Disposition of fines, immobilization of vehicle and  impoundment of license
plates, criminal forfeiture for municipal ordinance conviction, see Ohio R.C.
4511.193
   Effect of refusal to submit to test, seizure of license, suspension periods,
appeal procedures, occupational driving privileges, and indigent drivers
alcohol treatment funds, see Ohio R.C. 4511.191(C) - (N)
   Judicial pretrial suspension, initial appearance, see Ohio R.C. 4511.196
   Mayor's Court to suspend or revoke driver's license, see Ohio R.C. 1905.201
   Seizure of vehicles upon arrest, see Ohio R.C. 4511.195
   Trial judge to suspend driver's license, see Ohio R.C. 4510.05
§ 434.011  IMMOBILIZING OR DISABLING DEVICE VIOLATION.
   (a)   (1)   No offender who has been granted limited or unlimited driving
privileges, during any period that the offender is required to operate only a
motor vehicle equipped with an immobilizing or disabling device, shall request
or permit any other person to breathe into the device if it is an ignition
interlock device or another type of device that monitors the concentration of
alcohol in a person’s breath or to otherwise start the motor vehicle equipped
with the device, for the purpose of providing the offender with an operable
motor vehicle.
      (2)   No person shall breathe into an immobilizing or disabling device
that is an ignition interlock device or another type of device that monitors
the concentration of alcohol in a person’s breath or otherwise start a motor
vehicle equipped with an immobilizing or disabling device, for the purpose of
providing an operable motor vehicle to another person who has been granted
limited or unlimited driving privileges under the condition that the person
operate only a motor vehicle equipped with an immobilizing or disabling device.
      (3)   No unauthorized person shall tamper with or circumvent the
operation of an immobilizing or disabling device.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of an immobilizing or
disabling device violation, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(ORC 4510.44)
§ 434.02  RECKLESS OPERATION ON STREETS, PUBLIC OR PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   (a)   No person shall operate a vehicle on any street or highway in willful
or wanton disregard of the safety of persons or property.
   (b)   (1)   No person shall operate a vehicle on any public or private
property other than streets or highways in willful or wanton disregard of the
safety of persons or property.
      (2)   Division (b)(1) of this section does not apply to the competitive
operation of vehicles on public or private property when the owner of such
property knowingly permits such operation thereon.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates any
provision of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty
to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates any
provision of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If,
within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of
two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates any
provision of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(ORC 4511.20, 4511.201)
§ 434.025  REASONABLE CONTROL.
   (a)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle, agricultural tractor, or
agricultural tractor that is towing, pulling, or otherwise drawing a unit of
farm machinery on any street, highway, or property open to the public for
vehicular traffic without being in reasonable control of the vehicle,
agricultural tractor, or unit of farm machinery.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of operating a motor vehicle
or agricultural tractor without being in control of it, a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4511.202)
§ 434.03  MAXIMUM SPEED LIMITS; ASSURED CLEAR DISTANCE AHEAD.
   (a)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle at a speed greater or less
than is reasonable or proper, having due regard for the traffic, surface, and
width of the street or highway and any other conditions, and no person shall
drive any motor vehicle in and upon any street or highway at a greater speed
than will permit him or her to bring it to a stop within the assured clear
distance ahead.
   (b)   It is prima facie lawful, in the absence of a lower limit declared or
established pursuant to this section by the Director of Transportation or local
authorities, for the operator of a motor vehicle to operate the same at a speed
not exceeding the following:
      (1)   A.   Twenty miles per hour in school zones during school recess and
while children are going to or leaving school during the opening or closing
hours, and when 20 miles per hour school speed limit signs are erected, except
that on controlled-access highways and expressways, if the right-of-way line
fence has been erected without pedestrian opening, the speed shall be governed
by subsection (b)(4) of this section, and on freeways, if the right-of-way line
fence has been erected without pedestrian opening, the speed shall be governed
by subsections (b)(10) and (b)(11) of this section. The end of every school
zone may be marked by a sign indicating the end of the zone. Nothing in this
section or in the Manual and Specifications for a Uniform System of Traffic-
Control Devices shall be construed to require school zones to be indicated by
signs equipped with flashing or other lights, or giving other special notice of
the hours in which the school zone speed limit is in effect.
         B.   As used in this section, "school" means any school chartered
under Ohio R.C. 3301.16 and any nonchartered school that during the preceding
year filed with the Department of Education in compliance with O.A.C. 3301-35-
08, a copy of the school's report for the parents of the school's pupils
certifying that the school meets state minimum standards for nonchartered,
nontax-supported schools and presents evidence of this filing to the
jurisdiction from which it is requesting the establishment of a school zone.
"School" also includes a special elementary school that in writing requests the
County Engineer to create a school zone at the location of the school. Upon
receipt of such written request, the County Engineer shall create a school zone
at that location by erecting appropriate signs.
         C.   As used in this section, "school zone" means that portion of a
street or highway passing a school fronting upon the street or highway that is
encompassed by projecting the school property lines to the fronting street or
highway, and also includes that portion of a state highway. Upon request from
local authorities for streets and highways under their jurisdiction and that
portion of a state highway under the jurisdiction of the Director of
Transportation or a request from a County Engineer in the case of a school zone
for a special elementary school, the Director may extend the traditional school
zone boundaries. The distances in subsections (b)(1)C.1. through 3. below shall
not exceed 300 feet per approach per direction, and are bounded by whichever of
the following distances or combination thereof the Director approves as most
appropriate:
            1.   The distance encompassed by projecting the school building
lines normal to the fronting highway and extending a distance of 300 feet on
each approach direction;
            2.   The distance encompassed by projecting the school property
lines intersecting the fronting highway and extending a distance of 300 feet on
each approach direction;
            3.   The distance encompassed by the special marking of the
pavement for a principal school pupil crosswalk plus a distance of 300 feet on
each approach direction of the highway.
         D.   Nothing in this section shall be construed to invalidate the
Director's initial action on August 9, 1976, establishing all school zones at
the traditional school zone boundaries defined by projecting school property
lines, except when those boundaries are extended as provided in subsections (b)
(1)A. and (b)(1)C. of this section.
         E.   As used in this subsection, "crosswalk" has the meaning given
that term in Ohio R.C. 4511.01(LL)(2).
         F.   The Director may, upon request by resolution of the Legislative
Authority and upon submission by the Municipality of such engineering, traffic,
and other information as the Director considers necessary, designate a school
zone on any portion of a state route lying within the Municipality that
includes a crosswalk customarily used by children going to or leaving a school
during recess and opening and closing hours, whenever the distance, as measured
in a straight line, from the school property line nearest the crosswalk to the
nearest point of a crosswalk is no more than 1,320 feet. Such a school zone
shall include the distance encompassed by the crosswalk and extending 300 feet
in each appropriate direction of the state route.
         G.   As used in this section, "special elementary school" means a
school that meets all of the following:
            1.   It is not chartered and does not receive tax revenue from any
source.
            2.   It does not educate children beyond the eighth grade.
            3.   It is located outside the limits of a municipal corporation.
            4.   A majority of the total number of students enrolled at the
school are not related by blood.
            5.   The principal or other person in charge of the special
elementary school annually sends a report to the superintendent of the school
district in which the special elementary school is located indicating the total
number of students enrolled at the school, but otherwise the principal or other
person in charge does not report any other information or data to the
superintendent.
      (2)   Twenty-five miles per hour in all other portions of the
municipality, except on state routes outside business districts, through
highways outside business districts, and alleys;
      (3)   Thirty-five miles per hour on all state routes or through highways
within the municipality outside business districts, except as provided in
subsections (b)(4) and (b)(6) of this section;
      (4)   Fifty miles per hour on controlled-access highways and expressways
within the municipality;
      (5)   Fifty-five miles per hour on highways outside the municipality,
other than highways within island jurisdictions as provided in division (b)(8)
of this section, highways as provided in divisions (b)(9) and (b)(10) of this
section, and highways, expressways and freeways as provided in division (b)
(13), (b)(14), (b)(15) and (b)(17) of this section;
      (6)   Fifty miles per hour on state routes within the municipality
outside urban districts unless a lower prima facie speed is established as
further provided in this section;
      (7)   Fifteen miles per hour on all alleys within the municipality;
      (8)   Thirty-five miles per hour on highways outside the municipality
that are within an island jurisdiction;
      (9)   Thirty-five miles per hour on through highways, except state
routes, that are outside municipal corporations and that are within a national
park with boundaries extending through two or more counties;
      (10)   Sixty miles per hour on two-lane state routes outside municipal
corporations as established by the Director under R.C. § 4511.21(H)(2);
      (11)   Fifty-five miles per hour at all times on freeways with paved
shoulders inside the municipality, other than freeways as provided in divisions
(b)(15) and (b)(17) of this section;
      (12)   Fifty-five miles per hour at all times on freeways outside the
municipality, other than freeways as provided in divisions (b)(15) and (b)(17)
of this section;
      (13)   Sixty miles per hour for operators of any motor vehicle at all
times on all portions of rural divided highways;
      (14)   Sixty-five miles per hour for operators of any motor vehicle at
all times on all rural expressways without traffic control signals;
      (15)   Seventy miles per hour for operators of any motor vehicle at all
times on all rural freeways;
      (16)   Fifty-five miles per hour for operators of any motor vehicle at
all times on all portions of freeways in congested areas as determined by the
Director and that are part of the interstate system and are located within a
municipal corporation or within an interstate freeway outerbelt;
      (17)   Sixty-five miles per hour for operators of any motor vehicle at
all times on all portions of freeways in urban areas as determined by the
Director and that are part of the interstate system and are part of an
interstate freeway outerbelt.
   (c)   It is prima facie unlawful for any person to exceed any of the speed
limitations in subsections (b)(1)A., (b)(2), (b)(3), (b)(4), (b)(6), (b)(7),
(b)(8) and (b)(9) of this section or any declared pursuant to this section by
the Director or local authorities and it is unlawful for any person to exceed
any of the speed limitations in subsection (d) of this section. No person shall
be convicted of more than one violation of this section for the same conduct,
although violations of more than one provision of this section may be charged
in the alternative in a single affidavit.
   (d)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle upon a street or highway as
follows:
      (1)   At a speed exceeding 55 miles per hour, except upon a two-lane
state route as provided in division (b)(10) of this section and upon a highway,
expressway or freeway as provided in divisions (b)(13), (b)(14), (b)(15) and
(b)(17) of this section;
      (2)   At a speed exceeding 60 miles per hour upon a two-lane state route
as provided in division (b)(10) of this section and upon a highway as provided
in division (b)(13) of this section;
      (3)   At a speed exceeding 65 miles per hour upon an expressway as
provided in division (b)(14) of this section or upon a freeway as provided in
division (b)(17) of this section, except upon a freeway as provided in division
(b)(15) of this section;
      (4)   At a speed exceeding 70 miles per hour upon a freeway as provided
in division (b)(15) of this section;
      (5)   At a speed exceeding the posted speed limit upon a highway,
expressway or freeway for which the Director has determined and declared a
speed limit pursuant to R.C. § 4511.21(I)(2) or (L)(2).
   (e)   Pursuant to Ohio R.C. 4511.21(E), in every charge of violating this
section, the affidavit and warrant shall specify the time, place and speed at
which the defendant is alleged to have driven, and in charges made in reliance
upon subsection (c) of this section also the speed which subsection (b)(1)A.,
(b)(2), (b)(3), (b)(4), (b)(6), (b)(7), (b)(8) or (b)(9) of, or a limit
declared or established pursuant to, this section or Ohio R.C. 4511.21 declares
is prima facie lawful  at the time and place of such alleged violation, except
that in affidavits where a person is alleged to have driven at a greater speed
than will permit the person to bring the vehicle to stop within the assured
clear distance ahead, the affidavit and warrant need not specify the speed at
which the defendant is alleged to have driven.
   (f)   Pursuant to Ohio R.C. 4511.21(F), when a speed in excess of both a
prima facie limitation and a limitation in subsection (d) of this section is
alleged, the defendant shall be charged in a single affidavit, alleging a
single act, with a violation indicated of both subsection (b)(1)A., (b)(2), (b)
(3), (b)(4), (b)(6), (b)(7), (b)(8) or (b)(9) of this section, or of a limit
declared or established pursuant to this section or Ohio R.C. 4511.21 by the
Director or local authorities, and of the limitation in subsection (d) of this
section. If the court finds a violation of subsection (b)(1)A., (b)(2), (b)(3),
(b)(4), (b)(6), (b)(7), (b)(8) or (b)(9) of, or a limit declared or established
pursuant to, this section or Ohio R.C. 4511.21 has occurred, it shall enter a
judgment of conviction under such subsection and dismiss the charge under
subsection (d) of this section. If it finds no violation of subsection (b)
(1)A., (b)(2), (b)(3), (b)(4), (b)(6), (b)(7), (b)(8) or (b)(9) of, or a limit
declared or established pursuant to, this section or Ohio R.C. 4511.21, it
shall then consider whether the evidence supports a conviction under subsection
(d) of this section.
   (g)   Pursuant to Ohio R.C. 4511.21(G), points shall be assessed for a
violation of a limitation under subsection (d) of this section in accordance
with Ohio R.C. 4510.036.
(ORC 4511.21(A) - (G))
   (h)   Whenever, in accordance with Ohio R.C. 4511.21(H) through (N), the
maximum prima facie speed limitations as established herein have been altered,
either higher or lower, and the appropriate signs giving notice have been
erected as required, operators of motor vehicles shall be governed by the speed
limitations set forth on such signs. It is prima facie unlawful for any person
to exceed the speed limits posted upon such signs.
   (i)   As used in this section:
      (1)   "Commercial bus" means a motor vehicle designed for carrying more
than nine passengers and used for the transportation of persons for
compensation.
      (2)   "Interstate system" has the same meaning as in 23 U.S.C. § 101.
      (3)   "Noncommercial bus" includes but is not limited to a school bus, or
a motor vehicle operated solely for the transportation of persons associated
with a charitable or nonprofit organization.
      (4)   “Outerbelt.” A portion of a freeway that is part of the interstate
system and is located in the outer vicinity of a major municipal corporation or
group of municipal corporations, as designated by the Director.
      (5)   “Rural.”  Outside urbanized areas, as designated in accordance with
23 U.S.C. § 101, and outside of a business or urban district.
(ORC 4511.21(O))
   (j)   Penalty.
      (1)   A violation of any provision of this section is one of the
following:
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in subsections (j)(1)B., (j)(1) C.,
and (j)(2) and (j)(3) of this section, a minor misdemeanor;
         B.   If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two violations of any provision of this
section, Ohio R.C.  4511.21, or any provision of any other municipal ordinance
that is substantially equivalent to any provision of that section, a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree;
         C.   If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to three or more violations of any
provision of this section, Ohio R.C. 4511.21, or any provision of any other
municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to any provision of that
section, a misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (2)   If the offender has not previously been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of any provision of this section, Ohio R.C.  4511.21, or
any other municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to any provision
of that section, and operated a motor vehicle faster than 35 miles an hour in a
business district of the municipality, faster than 50 miles an hour in other
portions of the municipality, or faster than 35 miles an hour in a school zone
during recess or while children are going to or leaving school during the
school's opening or closing hours, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
      (3)   Notwithstanding subsection (j)(1) of this section, if the offender
operated a motor vehicle in a construction zone where a sign was then posted in
accordance with Ohio R.C. 4511.98, the court, in addition to all other
penalties provided by law, shall impose upon the offender a fine of two times
the usual amount imposed for the violation. No court shall impose a fine of two
times the usual amount imposed for the violation upon an offender if the
offender alleges, in an affidavit filed with the court prior to the offender's
sentencing, that the offender is indigent and is unable to pay the fine imposed
pursuant to this subsection and if the court determines that the offender is an
indigent person and unable to pay the fine.
(ORC 4511.21(P))
§ 434.035  SPEED LIMITS ON PRIVATE ROADS AND DRIVEWAYS.
   (a)   The owner of a private road or driveway located in a private
residential area containing 20 or more dwelling units may establish a speed
limit on the road or driveway by complying with all of the following
requirements:
      (1)   The speed limit is not less than 25 miles per hour and is indicated
by a sign that is in a proper position, is sufficiently legible to be seen by
an ordinarily observant person, and meets the specifications for the basic
speed limit sign included in the manual adopted by the Department of
Transportation pursuant to Ohio R.C. 4511.09;
      (2)   The owner has posted a sign at the entrance of the private road or
driveway that is in plain view and clearly informs persons entering the road or
driveway that they are entering private property, a speed limit has been
established for the road or driveway, and the speed limit is enforceable by law
enforcement officers under state law.
   (b)   No person shall operate a vehicle upon a private road or driveway as
provided in subsection (a) of this section at a speed exceeding any speed limit
established and posted pursuant to subsection (a).
   (c)   When a speed limit is established and posted in accordance with
subsection (a) of this section, a law enforcement officer may apprehend a
person violating the speed limit of the residential area by utilizing any of
the means described in Ohio R.C. 4511.091 or by any other accepted method of
determining the speed of a motor vehicle and may stop and charge the person
with exceeding the speed limit.
   (d)   Pursuant to Ohio R.C. 4511.211(D), points shall be assessed for
violation of a speed limit established and posted in accordance with subsection
(a) of this section in accordance with Ohio R.C. 4510.036.
   (e)   As used in this section:
      (1)   "Owner" includes but is not limited to a person who holds title to
the real property in fee simple, a condominium owners' association, a property
owners' association, a board of directors or trustees of a private community,
and a nonprofit corporation governing a private community.
      (2)   "Private residential area containing 20 or more dwelling units"
does not include a Chautauqua assembly as defined in Ohio R.C. 4511.90.
   (f)   Penalty. A violation of subsection (b) of this section is one of the
following:
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in subsections (f)(2) and (f)(3) of
this section, a minor misdemeanor;
      (2)   If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two violations of this section, Ohio
R.C. 4511.211(B), or any other municipal ordinance that is substantially
equivalent to that subsection, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree;
      (3)   If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to three or more violations of this
section, Ohio R.C. 4511.211(B), or any other municipal ordinance that is
substantially equivalent to that subsection, a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(ORC 4511.211)
§ 434.04  SLOW SPEED; POSTED MINIMUM SPEEDS.
   (a)   No person shall stop or operate a vehicle at such an unreasonably slow
speed as to impede or block the normal and reasonable movement of traffic,
except when stopping or reduced speed is necessary for safe operation or to
comply with law.
   (b)   Whenever the Director of Transportation or local authorities determine
on the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation that slow speeds on
any part of a controlled-access highway, expressway, or freeway consistently
impede the normal and reasonable movement of traffic, the Director or such
local authority may declare a minimum speed limit below which no person shall
operate a motor vehicle, except when necessary for safe operation or in
compliance with the law. No minimum speed limit established hereunder shall be
less than 30 miles per hour, greater than 50 miles per hour, nor effective
until the provisions of Ohio R.C. 4511.21 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, relating to appropriate signs, have been fulfilled and
local authorities have obtained the approval of the Director.
   (c)   In a case involving a violation of this section, the trier of fact, in
determining whether the vehicle was being operated at an unreasonably slow
speed, shall consider the capabilities of the vehicle and its operator.
   (d)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(ORC 4511.22)
§ 434.05  SPEED LIMITATIONS OVER BRIDGES.
   (a)   (1)   No person shall operate a vehicle over any bridge or other
elevated structure constituting a part of a highway at a speed which is greater
than the maximum speed that can be maintained with safety to such bridge or
structure, when such structure is posted with signs as provided in this
section.
      (2)   The Department of Transportation upon request from any local
authority shall, or upon its own initiative may, conduct an investigation of
any bridge or other elevated structure constituting a part of a highway, and if
it finds that such structure cannot with safety withstand traffic traveling at
the speed otherwise permissible under this Traffic Code, the Department shall
determine and declare the maximum speed of traffic which such structure can
withstand, and shall cause or permit suitable signs stating such maximum speed
to be erected and maintained at a distance of a least 100 feet before each end
of the structure.
      (3)   Upon the trial of any person charged with a violation of this
section, proof of such determination of the maximum speed by the Department and
the existence of such signs shall constitute prima facie evidence of the
maximum speed which can be maintained with safety to such bridge or structure.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(ORC 4511.23)
§ 434.06  SPEED EXCEPTIONS FOR EMERGENCY OR SAFETY VEHICLES.
   The prima facie speed limitations set forth in Ohio R.C. 4511.21 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance do not apply to emergency vehicles
or public safety vehicles when they are responding to emergency calls and are
equipped with and displaying at least one flashing, rotating, or oscillating
light visible under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of 500 feet
to the front of the vehicle, and when the drivers thereof sound audible signals
by bell, siren, or exhaust whistle. This section does not relieve the driver of
an emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle from the duty to drive with due
regard for the safety of all persons using the street or highway.
(ORC 4511.24)
§ 434.07  STREET RACING PROHIBITED.
   (a)   As used in this section, "street racing" means the operation of two or
more vehicles from a point side by side at accelerating speeds in a competitive
attempt to outdistance each other, or the operation of one or more vehicles
over a common selected course, from the same point to the same point, wherein
timing is made of the participating vehicles involving competitive
accelerations or speeds. Persons rendering assistance in any manner to such
competitive use of vehicles shall be equally charged as the participants. The
operation of two or more vehicles side by side either at speeds in excess of
prima facie lawful speeds established by Ohio R.C. 4511.21(B)(1)(a) through (B)
(9) or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, or rapidly accelerating
from a common starting point to a speed in excess of such prima facie lawful
speeds shall be prima facie evidence of street racing.
   (b)   No person shall participate in street racing upon any public road,
street, or highway in this municipality.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of street racing, a
misdemeanor of the first degree. In addition to any other sanctions, the court
shall suspend the offender's driver's license, commercial driver's license,
temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating
privileges for not less than 30 days or more than three years. No judge shall
suspend the first 30 days of any suspension of an offender's license, permit,
or privilege imposed under this subsection.
(ORC 4511.251)
§ 434.08  VEHICULAR HOMICIDE; VEHICULAR MANSLAUGHTER.
   (a)   No person, while operating or participating in the operation of a
motor vehicle, motorcycle, snowmobile, locomotive, watercraft, or aircraft,
shall cause the death of another or the unlawful termination of another's
pregnancy in any of the following ways:
      (1)   A.   As the proximate result of committing a violation of Ohio R.C.
4511.19(A) or of a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance;
         B.   As the proximate result of committing a violation of Ohio R.C.
1547.11(A) or of a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance;
         C.   As the proximate result of committing a violation of Ohio R.C.
4561.15(A)(3) or of a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
      (2)   In one of the following ways:
         A.   Recklessly;
         B.   As the proximate result of committing, while operating or
participating in the operation of a motor vehicle or motorcycle in a
construction zone, a reckless operation offense, provided that this subsection
applies only if the person whose death is caused or whose pregnancy is
unlawfully terminated is in the construction zone at the time of the offender's
commission of the reckless operation offense in the construction zone and does
not apply as described in subsection (d) of this section.
      (3)   In one of the following ways:
         A.   Negligently;
         B.   As the proximate result of committing, while operating or
participating in the operation of a motor vehicle or motorcycle in a
construction zone, a speeding offense, provided that this subsection applies
only if the person whose death is caused or whose pregnancy is unlawfully
terminated is in the construction zone at the time of the offender's commission
of the speeding offense in the construction zone and does not apply as
described in subsection (d) of this section.
      (4)   As the proximate result of committing a violation of any provision
of any section contained in Ohio R.C. Title 45 that is a minor misdemeanor or
of a municipal ordinance that, regardless of the penalty set by ordinance for
the violation, is substantially equivalent to any provision of any section
contained in Ohio R.C. Title 45 that is a minor misdemeanor.
   (b)   (1)   Whoever violates subsection (a)(1) or (2) of this section is
guilty of aggravated vehicular homicide, a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
      (2)   A.   Whoever violates subsection (a)(3) of this section is guilty
of vehicular homicide. Except as otherwise provided in this subsection,
vehicular homicide is a misdemeanor of the first degree. Vehicular homicide
committed in violation of subsection (a)(3) of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law if, at the time of the offense, the
offender was driving under a suspension or cancellation imposed under Ohio R.C.
Chapter 4510 or any other provision of the Ohio Revised Code or was operating a
motor vehicle or motorcycle, did not have a valid driver’s license, commercial
driver’s license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license or
nonresident operating privilege, and was not eligible for renewal of the
offender’s driver’s license or commercial driver’s license without examination
under Ohio R.C. 4507.10 or if the offender previously has been convicted of or
pleaded guilty to a violation of this section or any traffic-related homicide,
manslaughter, or assault offense. The court shall impose a mandatory jail term
on the offender when required by subsection (c) of this section.
         B.   In addition to any other sanctions imposed pursuant to this
subsection, the court shall impose upon the offender a class four suspension of
the offender's driver's license, commercial driver's license, temporary
instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege
from the range specified in Ohio R.C. 4510.02(A)(4) or, if the offender
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of this
section or any traffic-related homicide, manslaughter, or assault offense, a
class three suspension of the offender's driver's license, commercial driver's
license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident
operating privilege from the range specified in Ohio R.C. 4510.02(A)(3), or, if
the offender previously had been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a traffic-
related murder, felonious assault, or attempted murder offense, a class two
suspension of the offender's driver's license, commercial driver's license,
temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating
privilege as specified in Ohio R.C. 4510.02(A)(2).
      (3)   A.   Whoever violates subsection (a)(4) of this section is guilty
of vehicular manslaughter. Except as otherwise provided in this subsection,
vehicular manslaughter is a misdemeanor of the second degree. Vehicular
manslaughter is a misdemeanor of the first degree if, at the time of the
offense, the offender was driving under a suspension or cancellation imposed
under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4510 or any other provision of the Revised Code or was
operating a motor vehicle or motorcycle, did not have a valid driver’s license,
commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license
or nonresident operating privilege, and was not eligible for renewal of the
offender’s driver’s license or commercial driver’s license without examination
under Ohio R.C. 4507.10 or if the offender previously has been convicted of or
pleaded guilty to a violation of this section or any traffic-related homicide,
manslaughter, or assault offense.
         B.   In addition to any other sanctions imposed pursuant to this
subsection, the court shall impose upon the offender a class six suspension of
the offender's driver's license, commercial driver's license, temporary
instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege
from the range specified in Ohio R.C. 4510.02(A)(6) or, if the offender
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of this
section, any traffic-related homicide, manslaughter, or assault offense, or a
traffic-related murder, felonious assault, or attempted murder offense, a class
four suspension of the offender's driver's license, commercial driver's
license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident
operating privilege from the range specified in Ohio R.C. 4510.02(A)(4).
   (c)   The court shall impose a mandatory prison term on an offender who is
convicted of or pleads guilty to a felony violation of this section, as
provided in Ohio R.C. 2903.06(E). The court shall impose a mandatory jail term
of at least 15 days on an offender who is convicted of or pleads guilty to a
misdemeanor violation of subsection (a)(3)B. of this section and may impose
upon the offender a longer jail term as authorized pursuant to Ohio R.C.
2929.24.
   (d)   Divisions (a)(2)B. and (a)(3)B. of this section do not apply in a
particular construction zone unless signs of the type described in Ohio R.C.
2903.081 are erected in that construction zone in accordance with the
guidelines and design specifications established by the Director of
Transportation under Ohio R.C. 5501.27. The failure to erect signs of the type
described in Ohio R.C. 2903.081 in a particular construction zone in accordance
with those guidelines and design specifications does not limit or affect the
application of subsection (a)(1), (a)(2)A., (a)(3)A., or (a)(4) of this section
in that construction zone or the prosecution of any person who violates any of
those subsections in that construction zone.
   (e)   (1)   As used in this section:
         A.   "Construction zone" has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 5501.27.
         B.   "Mandatory prison term" and "mandatory jail term" have the same
meanings as in Ohio R.C. 2929.01.
         C.   "Motor vehicle" has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 4501.01.
         D.   "Reckless operation offense" means a violation of Ohio R.C.
4511.20 or a municipal ordinance substantially equivalent to Ohio R.C. 4511.20.
         E.   "Speeding offense" means a violation of Ohio R.C. 4511.21 or a
municipal ordinance pertaining to speed.
         F.   "Traffic-related homicide, manslaughter, or assault offense"
means a violation of Ohio R.C. 2903.04 in circumstances in which subsection (D)
of that section applies, a violation of Ohio R.C. 2903.06 or 2903.08, or a
violation of Ohio R.C. 2903.06, or 2903.08 as they existed prior to March 23,
2000.
         G.   "Traffic-related murder, felonious assault, or attempted murder
offense" means a violation of Ohio R.C. 2903.01 or Ohio R.C. 2903.02 in
circumstances in which the offender used a motor vehicle as the means to commit
the violation, a violation of Ohio R.C. 2903.11(A)(2) in circumstances in which
the deadly weapon used in the commission of the violation is a motor vehicle,
or an attempt to commit aggravated murder or murder in violation of Ohio R.C.
2923.02 in circumstances in which the offender used a motor vehicle as the
means to attempt to commit the aggravated murder or murder.
      (2)   For the purposes of this section, when a penalty or suspension is
enhanced because of a prior or current violation of a specified law or a prior
or current specified offense, the reference to the violation of the specified
law or the specified offense includes any violation of any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, former law of this State, or current or former
law of this or another state or the United States.
(ORC 2903.06)
Statutory reference:
   Aggravated vehicular assault, felony, see Ohio R.C. 2903.08
   Trial court to suspend driver's license, see Ohio R.C. 4510.05, 4510.10
§ 434.09  OPERATION RESTRICTED FOR MINI-TRUCKS AND LOW-SPEED, UNDER- SPEED, OR
UTILITY VEHICLES.
   (a)   (1)   No person shall operate a low-speed vehicle upon any street or
highway having an established speed limit greater than 35 miles per hour.
      (2)   No person shall operate an under-speed or utility vehicle or a
mini-truck upon any street or highway except as follows:
         A.   Upon a street or highway having an established speed limit not
greater than 35 miles per hour and only upon such streets or highways where the
municipality has granted permission for such operation in accordance with
division (e) of this section;
         B.   A state park or political subdivision employee or volunteer
operating a utility vehicle exclusively within the boundaries of state parks or
political subdivision parks for the operation or maintenance of state or
political subdivision park facilities.
      (3)   No person shall operate a motor-driven cycle or motor scooter upon
any street or highway having an established speed limit greater than 45 miles
per hour.
   (b)   This section does not prohibit either of the following:
      (1)   A person operating a low-speed, under-speed, or utility vehicle or
a mini-truck from proceeding across an intersection of a street or highway
having a speed limit greater than 35 miles per hour;
      (2)   A person operating a motor-driven cycle or motor scooter from
proceeding across an intersection of a street or highway having a speed limit
greater than 45 miles per hour.
   (c)   Nothing in this section shall prevent the municipality from adopting
more stringent local ordinances, resolutions, or regulations governing the
operation of a low-speed vehicle or a mini-truck, or a motor-driven cycle or
motor scooter.
   (d)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (a) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If within one year of
the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.214)
   (e)   By ordinance or resolution, the municipality may authorize the
operation of under-speed or utility vehicles or mini-trucks on a public street
or highway under its jurisdiction. The municipality shall do all of the
following:
      (1)   Limit the operation of those vehicles to streets and highways
having an established speed limit not greater than 35 miles per hour;
      (2)   Require the vehicle owner who wishes to operate an under-speed or
utility vehicle or a mini-truck on the public streets or highways to submit the
vehicle to an inspection conducted by a local law enforcement agency that
complies with inspection requirements established by the Department of Public
Safety under Ohio R.C. § 4513.02;
      (3)   Permit the operation on public streets or highways of only those
vehicles that successfully pass the required vehicle inspection, are registered
in accordance with R.C. Chapter 4503, and are titled in accordance with Ohio
R.C. Chapter 4505;
      (4)   Notify the Director of Public Safety, in a manner the Director
determines, of the authorization for the operation of under-speed or utility
vehicles or mini-trucks.
   (f)   The municipality may establish additional requirements for the
operation of under-speed or utility vehicles or mini-trucks on its streets and
highways.
(R.C. § 4511.215)
   (g)   Notwithstanding divisions (a) through (f) of this section, a person
may operate a utility vehicle on any public roads or right-of-way, other than a
freeway, when traveling from one farm field to another for agricultural
purposes if the vehicle is displaying a triangular slow-moving vehicle emblem
as described in R.C. § 4513.11.
(R.C. § 4511.216)
   (h)   (1)   Except as provided in this division (h) and divisions (e) and
(f) of this section, no person shall operate a mini-truck within this
municipality.
      (2)   A person may operate a mini-truck on a farm for agricultural
purposes only when the owner of the farm qualifies for the current agricultural
use valuation tax credit. A mini-truck may be operated by or on behalf of such
a farm owner on public roads and rights-of-way only when traveling from one
farm field to another.
      (3)   A person may operate a mini-truck on property owned or leased by a
dealer who sells mini-trucks at retail.
      (4)   Whoever violates this division (h) shall be penalized as provided
in division (d) of this section.
(R.C. § 4519.401)
§ 434.99  PENALTY.
Editor's note:
   See §§
408.01 and
408.02 for general Traffic Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 436:  LICENSING; ACCIDENTS
Section
436.01   Driver's or commercial driver's license required.
436.02   Possession of more than one license prohibited.
436.03   Driving with temporary instruction permit.
436.035   Driving with probationary license.
436.04   Certain acts prohibited.
436.05   Owner or operator allowing another to drive.
436.06   Display of license.
436.07   Driving under suspension or revocation or without proof of financial
responsibility or in violation of license restrictions. (Repealed)
436.071   Driving under suspension or in violation of license restriction.
436.072   Operating motor vehicle without valid license.
436.073   Driving under O.V.I. suspension.
436.074   Driving under financial responsibility law suspension or
cancellation; driving under a nonpayment of judgment suspension.
436.075   Failure to reinstate license.
436.08   Operation or sale without certificate of title.
436.09   Display of license plates; registration; obstructions.
436.10   Use of illegal license plates.
436.11   Failure to stop after accident.
436.12   Stopping after accident on other than public roads or highways.
436.13   Vehicle accident resulting in damage to realty.
436.14   Removal of vehicles after accidents.
436.99   Penalty.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Accidents in the Holden Arboretum - see TRAF.
448.02(f)
   Driver's license law - see Ohio R.C. Ch. 4507
   Employment of a minor to operate a taxicab prohibited - see Ohio R.C.
4507.321
   Glass removal from street after accident - see TRAF.
412.01
   Licensing requirements of snowmobile, off-highway and all-purpose vehicle
operator - see TRAF.
476.05
   Motor vehicle licensing law - see Ohio R.C. Ch. 4503
   Power of trial court of record to suspend license for certain violations -
see Ohio R.C. 4510.05, 4510.15
   See section histories for similar state law
   Snowmobile, off-highway  and all-purpose vehicle accident reports - see
TRAF.
476.06
   State accident reports - see Ohio R.C. 4509.01, 4509.06, 4509.74, 5502.11
   State point system suspension - see Ohio R.C. 4510.037
   Suspension of driver's license - see TRAF.
408.03; GEN. OFF.
698.07
§ 436.01  DRIVER'S OR COMMERCIAL DRIVER'S LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (a)   (1)   No person, except those expressly exempted under Ohio R.C. §§
4507.03, 4507.04, and 4507.05, shall operate any motor vehicle upon a public
road or highway or any public or private property used by the public for
purposes of vehicular travel or parking in this state unless the person has a
valid driver's license issued under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4507 or a commercial
driver's license issued under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4506.
      (2)   No person, except a person expressly exempted under Ohio R.C. §§
4507.03, 4507.04, and 4507.05, shall operate any motorcycle upon a public road
or highway or any public or private property used by the public for purposes of
vehicular travel or parking in this state unless the person has a valid license
as a motorcycle operator that was issued upon application by the register of
motor vehicles under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4507. The license shall be in the form
of an endorsement, as determined by the registrar, upon a driver's or
commercial driver's license, if the person has a valid license to operate a
motor vehicle or commercial motor vehicle, or in the form of a restricted
license as provided in Ohio R.C. § 4507.14, if the person does not have a valid
license to operate a motor vehicle or commercial motor vehicle.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of operating a motor vehicle
without a valid license and shall be punished as follows:
      (1)   If the trier of fact finds that the offender never has held a valid
driver's or commercial driver's license issued by this state or any other
jurisdiction, the offense is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (2)   A.   Subject to subsection (B)(2)(b) of this section, if the
offender's driver's or commercial driver's license or permit was expired at the
time of the offense for no more than six months, the offense is a minor
misdemeanor and if the offender's driver's or commercial driver's license or
permit was expired at the time of the offense for more than six months, the
offense is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
         B.   1.   If the offender previously was convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one violation of this section or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance within the past three years, the offense is a misdemeanor of the
third degree.
            2.   If the offender previously was convicted of or pleaded guilty
to two violations of this section or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance within the past three years, the offense is a misdemeanor of the
second degree.
            3.   If the offender previously was convicted of or pleaded guilty
to three or more violations of this section or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance within the past three years, the offense is a misdemeanor
of the first degree.
   (c)   The court shall not impose a license suspension for a first violation
of this section or if more than three years have passed since the offender's
last violation of this section or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance.
   (d)   If the offender was convicted of or pleaded guilty to one or more
violations of this section or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance
within the last three years, and if the offender's license was expired for more
than six months at the time of the offense, the court shall impose a class
seven suspension of the offender's driver license, commercial driver's license,
temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or non resident operating
privilege from the range specified in subsection (A)(7) of Ohio R.C. § 4510.02.
(O.R.C. 4510.12)
(Am. Ord. 04-O-51, passed 10-4-2004)
§ 436.02  POSSESSION OF MORE THAN ONE LICENSE PROHIBITED.
   (a)   No person shall receive a driver's license, or a motorcycle operator's
endorsement of a driver's or commercial driver's license, unless and until the
person surrenders to the Registrar all valid licenses issued to the person by
another jurisdiction recognized by this State. The Registrar shall report the
surrender of a license to the issuing authority, together with information that
a license is now issued in this State. The Registrar shall destroy any such
license that is not returned to the issuing authority. No person shall be
permitted to have more than one valid license at any time.
(ORC 4507.02(A)(2))
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(ORC 4507.99)
§ 436.03  DRIVING WITH TEMPORARY INSTRUCTION PERMIT.
   (a)   No holder of a temporary instruction permit issued under Ohio R.C.
4507.05(A) shall operate a motor vehicle upon a highway or any public or
private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking
in violation of the conditions established under Ohio R.C. 4507.05(A).
   (b)   Except as provided in subsection (c) of this section, no holder of a
temporary instruction permit that is issued under Ohio R.C. 4507.05(A) and that
is issued on or after July 1, 1998, and who has not attained the age of 18
years, shall operate a motor vehicle upon a highway or any public or private
property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking between
the hours of midnight and 6:00 a.m.
   (c)   The holder of a temporary instruction permit issued under Ohio R.C.
4507.05(A) on or after July 1, 1998, who has not attained the age of 18 years,
may operate a motor vehicle upon a highway or any public or private property
used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking between the
hours of midnight and 6:00 a.m. if, at the time of such operation, the holder
is accompanied by the holder's parent, guardian, or custodian, and the parent,
guardian, or custodian holds a current valid driver's or commercial driver's
license issued by this State, is actually occupying a seat beside the permit
holder, and does not have a prohibited concentration of alcohol in the whole
blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine as provided in Ohio R.C. 4511.19
(A).
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4507.05(F), (I))
§ 436.035  DRIVING WITH PROBATIONARY LICENSE.
   (a)   (1)   A.   No holder of a probationary driver’s license who has held
the license for less than 12 months shall operate a motor vehicle upon a
highway or any public or private property used by the public for purposes of
vehicular travel or parking between the hours of midnight and 6:00 a.m. unless
the holder is accompanied by the holder’s parent or guardian.
         B.   No holder of a probationary driver’s license who has held the
license for 12 months or longer shall operate a motor vehicle upon a highway or
any public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular
travel or parking between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. unless the
holder is accompanied by the holder’s parent or guardian.
      (2)   A.   Subject to subsection (c)(1) of this section, subsection (a)
(1)A. of this section does not apply to the holder of a probationary driver’s
license who is doing either of the following:
            1.   Traveling to or from work between the hours of midnight and 6:
00 a.m., provided that the holder has in the holder’s immediate possession
written documentation from the holder’s employer.
            2.   Traveling to or from an official function sponsored by the
school the holder attends between the hours of midnight and 6:00 a.m., provided
that the holder has in the holder’s immediate possession written documentation
from an appropriate official of the school;
            3.   Traveling to or from an official religious event between the
hours of midnight and 6:00 a.m., provided that the holder has in the holder’s
immediate possession written documentation from an appropriate official
affiliated with the event.
         B.   Subsection (a)(1)B. of this section does not apply to the holder
of a probationary driver’s license who is doing either of the following:
            1.   Traveling to or from work between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and
5:00 a.m., provided that the holder has in the holder’s immediate possession
written documentation from the holder’s employer.
            2.   Traveling to or from an official function sponsored by the
school the holder attends between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m.,
provided that the holder has in the holder’s immediate possession written
documentation from an appropriate official of the school;
            3.   Traveling to or from an official religious event between the
hours of 1:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m., provided that the holder has in the holder’s
immediate possession written documentation from an appropriate official
affiliated with the event.
      (3)   An employer, school official, or official affiliated with a
religious event is not liable in damages in a civil action for any injury,
death, or loss to person or property that allegedly arises from, or is related
to, the fact that the employer, school official, or official affiliated with a
religious event provided the holder of a probationary driver’s license with the
written documentation described in subsection (a)(2) of this section. The
Registrar of Motor Vehicles shall make available at no cost a form to serve as
the written documentation described in subsection (a)(2) of this section, and
employers, school officials, officials affiliated with religious events, and
holders of probationary driver’s licenses may utilize that form or may choose
to utilize any other written documentation to meet the requirements of that
division.
      (4)   No holder of a probationary driver’s license who has held the
license for less than 12 months shall operate a motor vehicle upon a highway or
any public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular
travel or parking with more than one person who is not a family member
occupying the vehicle unless the probationary license holder is accompanied by
the probationary license holder’s parent, guardian, or custodian.
   (b)   It is an affirmative defense to a violation of subsection (a)(1)A. or
(a)(1)B. of this section if, at the time of the violation, an emergency existed
that required the holder of the probationary driver’s license to operate a
motor vehicle in violation of subsection (a)(1)A. or (a)(1)B. of this section
or the holder was an emancipated minor.
   (c)   (1)   If a person is issued a probationary driver’s license prior to
attaining the age of 17 years and the person pleads guilty to, is convicted of,
or is adjudicated in juvenile court of having committed a moving violation
during the six-month period commencing on the date on which the person is
issued the probationary driver’s license, the court with jurisdiction over the
violation may order that the holder must be accompanied by the holder’s parent
or guardian whenever the holder is operating a motor vehicle upon a highway or
any public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular
travel or parking for a period not to exceed six months or the date the holder
attains the age of 17 years, whichever occurs first.
      (2)   Any person who is subject to the operating restrictions established
under subsection (c)(1) of this section as a result of a first moving violation
may petition the court for driving privileges without being accompanied by the
holder’s parent or guardian during the period of time determined by the court
under that division. In granting the driving privileges, the court shall
specify the purposes of the privileges and shall issue the person appropriate
forms setting forth the privileges granted. If a person is convicted of, pleads
guilty to, or is adjudicated in juvenile court of having committed a second or
subsequent moving violation, the court with jurisdiction over the violation may
terminate any driving privileges previously granted under this division.
      (3)   No person shall violate any operating restriction imposed under
subsection (c)(1) or (c)(2) of this section.
   (d)   No holder of a probationary license shall operate a motor vehicle upon
a highway or any public or private property used by the public for purposes of
vehicular travel or parking unless the total number of occupants of the vehicle
does not exceed the total number of occupant restraining devices originally
installed in the motor vehicle by its manufacturer, and each occupant of the
vehicle is wearing all of the available elements of a properly adjusted
occupant restraining device.
   (e)   A restricted license may be issued to a person who is 14 or 15 years
of age under proof of hardship satisfactory to the Registrar of Motor Vehicles.
   (f)   Notwithstanding any other provisions of law to the contrary, no law
enforcement officer shall cause the operator of a motor vehicle being operated
on any street or highway to stop the motor vehicle for the sole purpose of
determining whether each occupant of the motor vehicle is wearing all of the
available elements of a properly adjusted occupant restraining device as
required by subsection (d) of this section, or for the sole purpose of issuing
a ticket, citation or summons if that requirement has been or is being
violated, or for causing the arrest of or commencing a prosecution of a person
for a violation of that requirement.
   (g)   Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, no law
enforcement officer shall cause the operator of a motor vehicle being operated
on any street or highway to stop the motor vehicle for the sole purpose of
determining whether a violation of subsection (a)(1)A. or (a)(1)B. of this
section has been or is being committed or for the sole purpose of issuing a
ticket, citation or summons for such a violation or for causing the arrest or
commencing a prosecution of a person for such a violation.
   (h)   As used in this section:
      (1)   "Family member" of a probationary license holder includes any of
the following:
         A.   A spouse;
         B.   A child or stepchild;
         C.   A parent, stepparent, grandparent, or parent-in-law;
         D.   An aunt or uncle;
         E.   A sibling, whether of the whole or half blood or by adoption, a
brother-in-law, or a sister-in-law;
         F.   A son or daughter of the probationary license holder's stepparent
if the stepparent has not adopted the probationary license holder;
         G.   An eligible adult, as defined in Ohio R.C. 4507.05.
      (2)   "Moving violation" means any violation of any statute or ordinance
that regulates the operation of vehicles on the highways or streets. "Moving
violation" does not include a violation of Ohio R.C. 4513.263 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, or a violation of any statute or
ordinance regulating pedestrians or the parking of vehicles, vehicle size or
load limitations, vehicle fitness requirements, or vehicle registration.
      (3)   "Occupant restraining device" has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C.
4513.263.
   (i)   Whoever violates subsections (a)(1), (a)(4), (c)(3), or (d) of this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4507.071(B) - (J))
§ 436.04  CERTAIN ACTS PROHIBITED.
   (a)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Display or cause or permit to be displayed, or possess any
identification card, driver's or commercial driver's license, temporary
instruction permit, or commercial driver's license temporary instruction permit
knowing the same to be fictitious, or to have been canceled, suspended, or
altered;
      (2)   Lend to a person not entitled thereto, or knowingly permit a person
not entitled thereto to use any identification card, driver's or commercial
driver's license, temporary instruction permit or commercial driver's license
temporary instruction permit issued to the person so lending or permitting the
use thereof;
      (3)   Display, or represent as one's own, any identification card,
driver's or commercial driver's license, temporary instruction permit, or
commercial driver's license temporary instruction permit not issued to the
person so displaying the same;
      (4)   Fail to surrender to the Registrar of Motor Vehicles, upon the
Registrar's demand, any identification card, driver's or commercial driver's
license, temporary instruction permit, or commercial driver's license temporary
instruction permit that has been suspended or canceled;
      (5)   In any application for an identification card, driver's or
commercial driver's license, temporary instruction permit, or commercial
driver's license temporary instruction permit or any renewal or duplicate
thereof, knowingly conceal a material fact or present any physician's statement
required under Ohio R.C. 4507.08 or 4507.081 when knowing the same to be false
or fictitious.
   (b)   Whoever violates any subsection of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(ORC 4507.30)
§ 436.05  OWNER OR OPERATOR ALLOWING ANOTHER TO DRIVE.
   (a)   No person shall permit a motor vehicle owned by the person or under
the person's control to be driven by another if any of the following apply:
      (1)   The offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe that the
other person does not have a valid driver's or commercial driver's license or
permit or valid nonresident driving privileges.
      (2)   The offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe that the
other person's driver's or commercial driver's license or permit or nonresident
operating privileges have been suspended or canceled under Ohio R.C. Chapter
4510 or any other provision of the Revised Code.
      (3)   The offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe that the
other person's act of driving the motor vehicle would violate any prohibition
contained in Ohio R.C. Chapter 4509.
      (4)   The offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe that the
other person's act of driving would violate Ohio R.C. 4511.19 or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
      (5)   The offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe that the
vehicle is the subject of an immobilization waiver order issued under R.C.
4503.235 and the other person is prohibited from operating the vehicle under
that order.
   (b)   Without limiting or precluding the consideration of any other evidence
in determining whether a violation of subsection (a)(1), (a)(2), (a)(3), (a)(4)
or (a)(5) of this section has occurred, it shall be prima facie evidence that
the offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe that the operator of the
motor vehicle owned by the offender or under the offender's control is in a
category described in subsection (a)(1), (a)(2), (a)(3), (a)(4) or (a)(5) of
this section if any of the following applies:
      (1)   Regarding an operator allegedly in the category described in
subsection (a)(1),(a)(3), or (a)(5) of this section, the offender and the
operator of the motor vehicle reside in the same household and are related by
consanguinity or affinity.
      (2)   Regarding an operator allegedly in the category described in
subsection (a)(2) of this section, the offender and the operator of the motor
vehicle reside in the same household, and the offender knows or has reasonable
cause to believe that the operator has been charged with or convicted of any
violation of law or ordinance, or has committed any other act or omission, that
would or could result in the suspension or cancellation of the operator's
license, permit, or privilege.
      (3)   Regarding an operator allegedly in the category described in
subsection (a)(4) of this section, the offender and the operator of the motor
vehicle occupied the motor vehicle together at the time of the offense.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of wrongful entrustment of a
motor vehicle, and shall be punished as provided in subsections (c) to (h) of
this section.
      (1)   Except as provided in subsection (c)(2) of this section, whoever
violates subsection (a)(1), (a)(2), or (a)(3) of this section is guilty of an
unclassified misdemeanor. When the offense is an unclassified misdemeanor, the
offender shall be sentenced pursuant to §
698.02, §
698.03 or Ohio R.C.  2929.21 to 2929.28, except that the offender shall not be
sentenced to a jail term; the offender shall not be sentenced to a community
residential sanction pursuant to §
698.02(d) or Ohio R.C. 2929.26; notwithstanding §
698.02(f)(1)B.1. and Ohio R.C. 2929.28(A)(2)(a), the offender may be fined up
to $1,000; and, notwithstanding §
698.02(e)(1)C. and R.C. § 2929.27(A)(3), the offender may be ordered pursuant
to §
698.02(e)(3) or Ohio R.C. 2929.27(C) to serve a term of community service of up
to 500 hours. The failure of an offender to complete a term of community
service imposed by the court may be punished as indirect criminal contempt
under Ohio R.C. 2705.02(A) that may be filed in the underlying case.
      (2)   A.   If, within three years of a violation of division (a)(1), (a)
(2), or (a)(3) of this section, the offender previously has pleaded guilty to
or been convicted of two or more violations of division (a)(1), (a)(2), or (a)
(3) of this section, Ohio R.C. 4511.203(A)(1), (a)(2), or (a)(3), or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the offender is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
         B.   Whoever violates subsection (a)(4) or (a)(5) of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (3)   For any violation of this section, in addition to the penalties
imposed under this Code or Ohio R.C. Chapter 2929, the court may impose a class
seven suspension of the offender's driver's license, commercial driver's
license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident
operating privilege from the range specified in Ohio R.C. 4510.02(A)(7), and,
if the vehicle involved in the offense is registered in the name of the
offender, the court may order one of the following:
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in subsection (c)(3)B. or (c)(3)C.
of this section, the court may order, for 30 days, the immobilization of the
vehicle involved in the offense and the impoundment of that vehicle's license
plates. If issued, the order shall be issued and enforced under Ohio R.C.
4503.233.
         B.   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one violation of this section, Ohio R.C. 4511.203, or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, the court may order, for 60 days, the
immobilization of the vehicle involved in the offense and the impoundment of
that vehicle's license plates. If issued, the order shall be issued and
enforced under Ohio R.C. 4503.233.
         C.   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to two or more violations of this section, Ohio R.C. 4511.203, or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the court may order the criminal
forfeiture to the state of the vehicle involved in the offense. If issued, the
order shall be issued and enforced under Ohio R.C. 4503.234.
      (4)   If title to a motor vehicle that is subject to an order for
criminal forfeiture under subsection (c)(3)C. of this section is assigned or
transferred and Ohio R.C. 4503.234(B)(2) or (B)(3) applies, in addition to or
independent of any other penalty established by law, the court may fine the
offender the value of the vehicle as determined by publications of the National
Automobile Dealers Association. The proceeds from any fine imposed under this
subsection shall be distributed in accordance with Ohio R.C. 4503.234(C)(2).
   (d)   If a court orders the criminal forfeiture of a vehicle under
subsection (c)(3)A. or (c)(3)B. of this section, the court shall not release
the vehicle from the immobilization before the termination of the period of
immobilization ordered unless the court is presented with current proof of
financial responsibility with respect to that vehicle.
   (e)   If a court orders the criminal forfeiture of a vehicle under
subsection (c)(3)C. of this section, upon receipt of the order from the court,
neither the Registrar of Motor Vehicles nor any deputy registrar shall accept
any application for the registration or transfer of registration of any motor
vehicle owned or leased by the person named in the order. The period of denial
shall be five years after the date the order is issued, unless, during that
five-year period, the court with jurisdiction of the offense that resulted in
the order terminates the forfeiture and notifies the Registrar of the
termination. If the court terminates the forfeiture and notifies the Registrar,
the Registrar shall take all necessary measures to permit the person to
register a vehicle owned or leased by the person or to transfer the
registration of the vehicle.
   (f)   This section does not apply to motor vehicle rental dealers or motor
vehicle leasing dealers, as defined in Ohio R.C. 4549.65.
   (g)   Evidence of a conviction of, plea of guilty to, or adjudication as a
delinquent child for a violation of this section shall not be admissible as
evidence in any civil action that involves the offender or delinquent child who
is the subject of the conviction, plea, or adjudication and that arises from
the wrongful entrustment of a motor vehicle.
   (h)   For purposes of this section, a vehicle is owned by a person if, at
the time of a violation of this section, the vehicle is registered in the
person’s name.
(ORC 4511.203)
§ 436.06  DISPLAY OF LICENSE.
   (a)   The operator of a motor vehicle shall display the operator's driver's
license, or furnish satisfactory proof that the operator has a driver's
license, upon demand of any peace officer or of any person damaged or injured
in any collision in which the licensee may be involved. When a demand is
properly made, and the operator has the operator's driver's license on or about
the operator's person, the operator shall not refuse to display the license. A
person's failure to furnish satisfactory evidence that the person is licensed
under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4507 when the person does not have the person's license
on or about the person's person shall be prima facie evidence of the person's
not having obtained a driver's license.
   (b)   (1)   Except as provided in subsection (b)(2) of this section, whoever
violates this section is guilty of an unclassified misdemeanor. When the
offense is an unclassified misdemeanor, the offender shall be sentenced
pursuant to § 698.02, § 698.03 or Ohio R.C. 2929.21 to 2929.28, except that the
offender shall not be sentenced to a jail term; the offender shall not be
sentenced to a community residential sanction pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2929.26;
notwithstanding Ohio R.C. 2929.28(A)(2)(a), the offender may be fined up to one
thousand dollars ($1,000); and notwithstanding Ohio R.C. 2929.27(A)(3), the
offender may be ordered pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2929.27(C) to serve a term of
community service of up to 500 hours. The failure of an offender to complete a
term of community service imposed by the court may be punished as indirect
criminal contempt under Ohio R.C. 2705.02(A) that may be filed in the
underlying case.
      (2)   If, within three years of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations of this section,
Ohio R.C. 4507.35, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the
offense is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(ORC 4507.35)
§ 436.07  DRIVING UNDER SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OR WITHOUT PROOF OF FINANCIAL
RESPONSIBILITY OR IN VIOLATION OF LICENSE RESTRICTIONS. (Repealed)
Editor's note:
   Section
436.07 was repealed as part of the 2004 updating and revision of this Model
Ohio Municipal Code because substantially equivalent state law (Ohio R.C.
4507.02(B) - (H)) was repealed by the Ohio General Assembly. See §§
436.071 through
436.075 for current provisions.)
§ 436.071  DRIVING UNDER SUSPENSION OR IN VIOLATION OF LICENSE RESTRICTION.
   (a)   Driving under suspension or in violation of license restriction.
      (1)   Except as provided in subsection (a)(2) of this section, subsection
(b) of this section, § 436.11 and in Ohio R.C.§ 4510.111 and 4510.16, no person
whose driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit or nonresident
operating privilege has been suspended under any provision of the Revised Code,
other than Ohio R.C. Chapter 4509, or under any applicable law in any other
jurisdiction in which the person’s license or permit was issued shall operate
any motor vehicle upon the public roads and highways or upon any public or
private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking
within this Municipality during the period of suspension unless the person is
granted limited driving privileges and is operating the vehicle in accordance
with the terms of the limited driving privileges.
      (2)   No person shall operate any motor vehicle upon a highway or any
public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel
or parking in this Municipality in violation of any restriction of the person’s
driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit imposed under Ohio R.C.
4506.10(D) or 4507.14.
      (3)   Upon the request or motion of the prosecuting authority, a
noncertified copy of the law enforcement automated data system report or a
noncertified copy of a record of the Registrar of Motor Vehicles that shows the
name, date of birth, and social security number of a person charged with a
violation of subsection (a)(1) or (a)(2) of this section may be admitted into
evidence as prima facie evidence that the license of the person was under
suspension at the time of the alleged violation of subsection (a)(1) of this
section or the person operated a motor vehicle in violation of a restriction at
the time of the alleged violation of subsection (a)(2) of this section. The
person charged with a violation of subsection (a)(1) or (a)(2) of this section
may offer evidence to rebut this prima facie evidence.
      (4)   A.   Whoever violates subsection (a)(1) or (a)(2) of this section
is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. The court may impose upon the
offender a class seven suspension of the offender’s driver’s license,
commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction permit, probationary
license, or nonresident operating privilege from the range specified in Ohio
R.C. 4510.02(A)(7).
         B.   1.   Except as provided in subsection (a)(4)B.2. or (a)(4)B.3. of
this section, the court, in addition to any other penalty that it imposes on
the offender and if the vehicle is registered in the offender’s name and if,
within three years of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted
of or pleaded guilty to one violation of this section, Ohio R.C. 4510.11,
4510.111 or 4510.16, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the
court, in addition to or independent of any other sentence that it imposes upon
the offender, may order the immobilization of the vehicle involved in the
offense for 30 days and the impoundment of that vehicle’s license plates for 30
days in accordance with Ohio R.C. 4503.233.
            2.   If the vehicle is registered in the offender’s name and if,
within three years of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted
of or pleaded guilty to two violations of this section, or any combination of
two violations of this section, Ohio R.C. 4510.11, 4510.111 or 4510.16, or of a
substantially similar municipal ordinance, the court, in addition to any other
sentence that it imposes on the offender, may order the immobilization of the
vehicle involved in the offense for 60 days and the impoundment of that
vehicle’s license plates for 60 days in accordance with Ohio R.C. 4503.233.
            3.   If the vehicle is registered in the offender’s name and if,
within three years of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted
of or pleaded guilty to three or more violations of this section, or any
combination of three or more violations of this section or Ohio R.C. 4510.11,
4510.111 or 4510.16, or of a substantially similar municipal ordinance, the
court, in addition to any other sentence that it imposes on the offender, may
order the criminal forfeiture of the vehicle involved in the offense to the
state.
      (5)   Any order for immobilization and impoundment under this section
shall be issued and enforced under Ohio R.C. 4503.233 and 4507.02, as
applicable. The court shall not release a vehicle from immobilization ordered
under this section unless the court is presented with current proof of
financial responsibility with respect to that vehicle.
      (6)   Any order of criminal forfeiture under this section shall be issued
and enforced under Ohio R.C. 4503.234. Upon receipt of the copy of the order
from the court, neither the Registrar of Motor Vehicles nor a deputy registrar
shall accept any application for the registration or transfer of registration
of any motor vehicle owned or leased by the person named in the declaration of
forfeiture. The period of registration denial shall be five years after the
date of the order, unless, during that period, the court having jurisdiction of
the offense that led to the order terminates the forfeiture and notifies the
registrar of the termination. The registrar then shall take necessary measures
to permit the person to register a vehicle owned or leased by the person or to
transfer registration of the vehicle.
      (7)   The offender shall provide the court with proof of financial
responsibility as defined in Ohio R.C. 4509.01. If the offender fails to
provide that proof of financial responsibility, then, in addition to any other
penalties provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to Ohio
R.C. 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding five thousand dollars ($5,000) for any
economic loss arising from an accident or collision that was the direct and
proximate result of the offender’s operation of the vehicle before, during, or
after committing the offense for which the offender is sentenced under this
section.
(ORC 4510.11)
   (b)   Driving under suspension in violation of other provisions.
      (1)   No person shall operate any motor vehicle upon a highway or any
public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel
or parking in this municipality whose driver’s or commercial driver’s license
has been suspended pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2151.354, 2151.87, 2935.27, 3123.58,
4301.99, 4510.032, 4510.22, or 4510.33, or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance.
      (2)   Upon the request or motion of the prosecuting authority, a
noncertified copy of the law enforcement automated data system report or a
noncertified copy of a record of the Registrar of Motor Vehicles that shows the
name, date of birth, and social security number of a person charged with a
violation of subsection (b)(1) of this section may be admitted into evidence as
prima facie evidence that the license of the person was under suspension at the
time of the alleged violation of subsection (b)(1) of this section. The person
charged with a violation of subsection (b)(1) of this section may offer
evidence to rebut this prima facie evidence.
      (3)   Whoever violates division (b)(1) of this section is guilty of
driving under suspension and shall be punished as provided in division (b)(3)A.
or division (b)(3)B. of this section.
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in subsection (b)(3)B. of this
section, the offense is an unclassified misdemeanor. The offender shall be
sentenced pursuant to §
698.02, §
698.03 or Ohio R.C. 2929.21 to 2929.28, except that the offender shall not be
sentenced to a jail term; the offender shall not be sentenced to a community
residential sanction pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2929.26; notwithstanding Ohio R.C.
2929.28(A)(2)(a), the offender may be fined up to one thousand dollars
($1,000); and, notwithstanding Ohio R.C. 2929.27(A)(3), the offender may be
ordered pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2929.27(C) to serve a term of community service
of up to 500 hours. The failure of an offender to complete a term of community
service imposed by the court may be punished as indirect criminal contempt
under Ohio R.C. 2705.02(A) that may be filed in the underlying case.
         B.   If, within three years of the offense, the offender previously
was convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations of subsection (b)
(1) of this section, or any combination
of two or more violations of subsection (b)(1) of this section, R.C. §§
4510.11, 4510.111 or 4510.16, or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, the offense is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree, and the offender
shall provide the court with proof of financial responsibility as defined in
R.C. § 4509.01. If the offender fails to provide that proof of financial
responsibility, then in addition to any other penalties provided by law, the
court may order restitution pursuant to R.C. § 2929.28 in an amount not
exceeding $5,000 for any economic loss arising from an accident or collision
that was the direct and proximate result of the offender’s operation of the
vehicle before, during, or after committing the offense for which the offender
is sentenced under this section.
(ORC 4510.111)
   (c)   Repeat traffic offender; point system suspension. Any person whose
driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit or nonresident operating
privileges are suspended as a repeat traffic offender under Ohio R.C. 4510.037
and who, during the suspension, operates any motor vehicle upon any public
roads and highways is guilty of driving under a twelve-point suspension, a
misdemeanor of the first degree. The court shall sentence the offender to a
minimum term of three days in jail. No court shall suspend the first three days
of jail time imposed pursuant to this division.
(ORC 4510.037(J))
   (d)   It is an affirmative defense to any prosecution brought under division
(a) of this section that the alleged offender drove under suspension, without a
valid permit or driver’s or commercial driver’s license, or in violation of a
restriction because of a substantial emergency, and because no other person was
reasonably available to drive in response to the emergency.
(ORC 4510.04)
§ 436.072  OPERATING MOTOR VEHICLE WITHOUT VALID LICENSE.
   (a)   (1)   No person, except those expressly exempted under Ohio R.C.
4507.03, 4507.04, and 4507.05, shall operate any motor vehicle upon a public
road or highway or any public or private property used by the public for
purposes of vehicular travel or parking in this Municipality unless the person
has a valid driver's license issued under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4507 or a
commercial driver's license issued under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4506.
      (2)   No person, except a person expressly exempted under Ohio R.C.
4507.03, 4507.04, and 4507.05, shall operate any motorcycle upon a public road
or highway or any public or private property used by the public for purposes of
vehicular travel or parking in this Municipality unless the person has a valid
license as a motorcycle operator that was issued upon application by the
Registrar of Motor Vehicles under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4507. The license shall be
in the form of an endorsement, as determined by the Registrar, upon a driver's
or commercial driver's license, if the person has a valid license to operate a
motor vehicle or commercial motor vehicle, or in the form of a restricted
license as provided in Ohio R.C. 4507.14, if the person does not have a valid
license to operate a motor vehicle or commercial motor vehicle.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of operating a motor vehicle
without a valid license and shall be punished as follows:
      (1)   If the trier of fact finds that the offender never has held a valid
driver’s or commercial driver’s license issued by this state or any other
jurisdiction, or, in a case involving the operation of a motorcycle by the
offender, if the offender has never held a valid license as a motorcycle
operator, either in the form of an endorsement upon a driver’s or commercial
driver’s license or in the form of a restricted license, except as otherwise
provided in this subsection, the offense is an unclassified misdemeanor. When
the offense is an unclassified misdemeanor, the offender shall be sentenced
pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2929.21 to 2929.28, except that the offender shall not be
sentenced to a jail term; the offender shall not be sentenced to a community
residential sanction pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2929.26; notwithstanding Ohio R.C.
2929.28(A)(2)(a), the offender may be fined up to one thousand dollars
($1,000); and, notwithstanding Ohio R.C. 2929.27(A)(3), the offender may be
ordered pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2929.27(B) to serve a term of community service
of up to 500 hours. If the offender previously was convicted of or pleaded
guilty to any violation of this section or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, the offense is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (2)   If the offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit
or, in a case involving the operation of a motorcycle by the offender, the
offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license bearing the motorcycle
endorsement or the offender’s restricted license was expired at the time of the
offense, except as otherwise provided in this division, the offense is a minor
misdemeanor. If within three years of the offense, the offender previously was
convicted of or pleaded guilty to three or more violations of this section or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the offense is a misdemeanor of
the first degree.
   (c)   The court shall not impose a license suspension for a first violation
of this section or if more than three years have passed since the offender's
last violation of Ohio R.C. 4510.12, this section, or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (d)   If the offender is sentenced under subsection (b)(2) of this section,
if within three years of the offense the offender previously was convicted of
or pleaded guilty to one or more violations of Ohio R.C. 4510.12, this section,
or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance within the past three years,
and if the offender’s license was expired for more than six months at the time
of the offense, the court shall impose a class seven suspension of the
offender’s driver license, commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction
permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege from the range
specified in Ohio R.C. 4510.02(A)(7).
(ORC 4510.12)
§ 436.073  DRIVING UNDER O.V.I. SUSPENSION.
   (a)   No person whose driver's or commercial driver's license or permit or
nonresident operating privilege has been suspended under Ohio R.C. 4511.19,
4511.191, or 4511.196 or under Ohio R.C. 4510.07 for a conviction of a
violation of a municipal O.V.I. ordinance shall operate any motor vehicle upon
the public roads or highways within this Municipality during the period of the
suspension.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of driving under O.V.I.
suspension. The court shall sentence the offender under Ohio R.C. Chapter 2929,
subject to the differences authorized or required by this section.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in subsection (b)(2) or (3) of this
section, driving under O.V.I. suspension is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
The court shall sentence the offender to all of the following:
         A.   A mandatory jail term of three consecutive days. The three-day
term shall be imposed, unless, subject to subsection (c) of this section, the
court instead imposes a sentence of not less than 30 consecutive days of house
arrest with electronic monitoring. A period of house arrest with electronic
monitoring imposed under this subsection shall not exceed six months. If the
court imposes a mandatory three-day jail term under this subsection, the court
may impose a jail term in addition to that term, provided that in no case shall
the cumulative jail term imposed for the offense exceed six months;
         B.   A fine of not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) and
not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00);
         C.   A license suspension under subsection (e) of this section;
         D.   If the vehicle the offender was operating at the time of the
offense is registered in the offender’s name, immobilization for 30 days of the
offender’s vehicle and impoundment for 30 days of the identification license
plates of that vehicle. The order for immobilization and impoundment shall be
issued and enforced in accordance with Ohio R.C. 4503.233.
      (2)   If, within six years of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one violation of this section or one
equivalent offense, driving under O.V.I. suspension is a misdemeanor of the
first degree. The court shall sentence the offender to all of the following:
         A.   A mandatory jail term of ten consecutive days. Notwithstanding
the jail terms provided in Ohio R.C. 2929.21 to 2929.28, the court may sentence
the offender to a longer jail term of not more than one year. The 10-day
mandatory jail term shall be imposed unless, subject to subsection (c) of this
section, the court instead imposes a sentence of not less than 90 consecutive
days of house arrest with electronic monitoring. The period of house arrest
with electronic monitoring shall not exceed one year;
         B.   Notwithstanding the fines provided for in Ohio R.C. Chapter 2929,
a fine of not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) and not more than two
thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00);
         C.   A license suspension under subsection (e) of this section;
         D.   If the vehicle the offender was operating at the time of the
offense is registered in the offender's name, immobilization of the offender's
vehicle for 60 days and the impoundment for 60 days of the identification
license plates of that vehicle. The order for immobilization and impoundment
shall be issued and enforced in accordance with Ohio R.C. 4503.233.
      (3)   If, within six years of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations of this section
or two or more equivalent offenses, driving under O.V.I. suspension is a
misdemeanor. The court shall sentence the offender to all of the following:
         A.   A mandatory jail term of 30 consecutive days. Notwithstanding the
jail terms provided in Ohio R.C. 2929.21 to 2929.28, the court may sentence the
offender to a longer jail term of not more than one year. The court shall not
sentence the offender to a term of house arrest with electronic monitoring in
lieu of the mandatory portion of the jail term;
         B.   Notwithstanding the fines set forth in Ohio R.C. Chapter 2929, a
fine of not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) and not more than two
thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00);
         C.   A license suspension under subsection (e) of this section;
         D.   If the vehicle the offender was operating at the time of the
offense is registered in the offender's name, criminal forfeiture to the state
of the offender's vehicle. The order of criminal forfeiture shall be issued and
enforced in accordance with Ohio R.C. 4503.234. If title to a motor vehicle
that is subject to an order for criminal forfeiture under this subsection is
assigned or transferred and Ohio R.C. 4503.234(B)(2) or (3) applies, the court
may fine the offender the value of the vehicle as determined by publications of
the National Auto Dealers' Association. The proceeds from any fine so imposed
shall be distributed in accordance with Ohio R.C. 4503.234(C)(2).
   (c)   (1)   No court shall impose an alternative sentence of house arrest
with electronic monitoring under subsection (b)(1) or (2) of this section
unless, within 60 days of the date of sentencing, the court issues a written
finding on the record that, due to the unavailability of space at the jail
where the offender is required to serve the jail term imposed, the offender
will not be able to begin serving that term within the 60-day period following
the date of sentencing.
      (2)   An offender sentenced under this section to a period of house
arrest with electronic monitoring shall be permitted work release during that
period.
   (d)   Fifty percent of any fine imposed by a court under subsection (b)(1),
(2), or (3) of this section shall be deposited into the Municipal Indigent
Drivers' Alcohol Treatment Fund under the control of that court, as created by
the municipality pursuant to Ohio R.C. 4511.191(H).
   (e)   In addition to or independent of all other penalties provided by law
or ordinance, the trial judge of any court of record or the mayor of a mayor's
court shall impose on an offender who is convicted of or pleads guilty to a
violation of this section a class seven suspension of the offender's driver's
or commercial driver's license or permit or nonresident operating privilege
from the range specified in Ohio R.C. 4510.02 (A)(7).
      (1)   When permitted as specified in Ohio R.C. 4510.021, if the court
grants limited driving privileges during a suspension imposed under this
section, the privileges shall be granted on the additional condition that the
offender must display restricted license plates, issued under Ohio R.C.
4503.231, on the vehicle driven subject to the privileges, except as provided
in Ohio R.C. 4503.231(B).
      (2)   A suspension of a commercial driver's license under this section
shall be concurrent with any period of suspension or disqualification under
Ohio R.C. 3123.58 or 4506.16. No person who is disqualified for life from
holding a commercial driver's license under Ohio R.C. 4506.16 shall be issued a
driver's license under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4507 during the period for which the
commercial driver's license was suspended under this section, and no person
whose commercial driver's license is suspended under this section shall be
issued a driver's license under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4507 during the period of the
suspension.
   (f)   The offender shall provide the court with proof of financial
responsibility as defined in Ohio R.C. 4509.01. If the offender fails to
provide that proof of financial responsibility, then, in addition to any other
penalties provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to Ohio
R.C. 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding five thousand dollars ($5,000) for any
economic loss arising from an accident or collision that was the direct and
proximate result of the offender’s operation of the vehicle before, during, or
after committing the offense that is a misdemeanor of the first degree under
this section for which the offender is sentenced.
 
   (g)   As used in this section:
      (1)   "Electronic monitoring" has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C.
2929.01.
      (2)   "Equivalent offense" means any of the following:
         A.   A violation of a municipal ordinance, law of another state, or
law of the United States that is substantially equivalent to subsection (a) of
this section;
         B.   A violation of a former law of this state that was substantially
equivalent to subsection (a) of this section.
      (3)   "Jail" has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2929.01.
      (4)   "Mandatory jail term" means the mandatory term in jail of 3, 10, or
30 consecutive days that must be imposed under subsection (b)(1), (2), or (3)
of this section upon an offender convicted of a violation of subsection (a) of
this section and in relation to which all of the following apply:
         A.   Except as specifically authorized under this section, the term
must be served in a jail.
         B.   Except as specifically authorized under this section, the term
cannot be suspended, reduced, or otherwise modified pursuant to any provision
of the Ohio Revised Code.
(ORC 4510.14)
   (h)   It is an affirmative defense to any prosecution brought under this
section that the alleged offender drove under suspension, without a valid
permit or driver’s or commercial driver’s license, or in violation of a
restriction because of a substantial emergency, and because no other person was
reasonably available to drive in response to the emergency.
(ORC 4510.04)
Statutory reference:
   Immobilization of vehicle; impoundment of license plates; criminal
forfeiture of vehicle, see Ohio R.C. 4510.161
§ 436.074  DRIVING UNDER FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY LAW SUSPENSION OR
CANCELLATION; DRIVING UNDER A NONPAYMENT OF JUDGMENT SUSPENSION.
   (a)   No person, whose driver's or commercial driver's license or temporary
instruction permit or nonresident's operating privilege has been suspended or
canceled pursuant to Ohio R.C. Chapter 4509, shall operate any motor vehicle
within this municipality, or knowingly permit any motor vehicle owned by the
person to be operated by another person in the municipality, during the period
of the suspension or cancellation, except as specifically authorized by Ohio
R.C. Chapter 4509. No person shall operate a motor vehicle within this
municipality, or knowingly permit any motor vehicle owned by the person to be
operated by another person in the municipality, during the period in which the
person is required by Ohio R.C. 4509.45 to file and maintain proof of financial
responsibility for a violation of Ohio R.C. 4509.101, unless proof of financial
responsibility is maintained with respect to that vehicle.
   (b)   No person shall operate any motor vehicle upon a highway or any public
or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel or
parking in this municipality if the person’s driver’s or commercial driver’s
license or temporary instruction permit or nonresident operating privilege has
been suspended pursuant to Ohio R.C. 4509.37 or 4509.40 for nonpayment of a
judgment.
   (c)   Upon the request or motion of the prosecuting authority, a
noncertified copy of the law enforcement automated data system report or a
noncertified copy of a record of the registrar of motor vehicles that shows the
name, date of birth, and social security number of a person charged with a
violation of subsection (a) or (b) of this section may be admitted into
evidence as prima facie evidence that the license of the person was under
either a financial responsibility law suspension at the time of the alleged
violation of subsection (a) of this section or a nonpayment of judgment
suspension at the time of the alleged violation of subsection (b) of this
section. The person charged with a violation of subsection (a) or (b) of this
section may offer evidence to rebut this prima facie evidence.
   (d)   Whoever violates subsection (a) of this section is guilty of driving
under financial responsibility law suspension or cancellation and shall be
punished as provided in this subsection. Whoever violates subsection (b) of
this section is guilty of driving under a nonpayment of judgment suspension and
shall be punished as provided in this subsection (d).
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in subsection (d)(2) of this section,
the offense is an unclassified misdemeanor. When the offense is an unclassified
misdemeanor, the offender shall be sentenced pursuant to §
698.02, §
698.03 or Ohio R.C. 2929.21 to 2929.28, except that the offender shall not be
sentenced to a jail term; the offender shall not be sentenced to a community
residential sanction pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2929.26; notwithstanding Ohio R.C.
2929.28(A)(2)(a), the offender may be fined up to one thousand dollars
($1,000); and, notwithstanding Ohio R.C. 2929.27(A)(3), the offender may be
ordered pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2929.27(C) to serve a term of community service
of up to 500 hours. The failure of an offender to complete a term of community
service imposed by the court may be punished as indirect criminal contempt
under Ohio R.C. 2705.02(A) that may be filed in the underlying case.
      (2)   If, within three years of the offense, the offender previously was
convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations of this section, or
any combination of two violations of this section, Ohio R.C. 4510.11, 4510.111
or 4510.16, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the offense is a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (3)   The offender shall provide the court with proof of financial
responsibility as defined in R.C. § 4509.01. If the offender fails to provide
that proof of financial responsibility, then in addition to any other penalties
provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to R.C. § 2929.28 in
an amount not exceeding $5,000 for any economic loss arising from an accident
or collision that was the direct and proximate result of the offender’s
operation of the vehicle before, during, or after committing the offense for
which the offender is sentenced under this section.
(ORC 4510.16)
   (e)   (1)   It is an affirmative defense to any prosecution brought under
this section that the alleged offender drove under suspension, without a valid
permit or driver’s or commercial driver’s license, or in violation of a
restriction because of a substantial emergency, and because no other person was
reasonably available to drive in response to the emergency.
      (2)   It is an affirmative defense to any prosecution brought under this
section that the order of suspension resulted from the failure of the alleged
offender to respond to a financial responsibility random verification request
under Ohio R.C. 4509.101(A)(3)(c) and that, at the time of the initial
financial responsibility random verification request, the alleged offender was
in compliance with Ohio R.C. 4509.101(A)(1) as shown by proof of financial
responsibility that was in effect at the time of that request.
(ORC 4510.04)
Statutory reference:
   Immobilization of vehicle; impoundment of license plates; criminal
forfeiture of vehicle, see Ohio R.C. 4510.161
§ 436.075  FAILURE TO REINSTATE LICENSE.
   (a)   No person whose driver's license, commercial driver's license,
temporary instruction permit, or nonresident's operating privilege has been
suspended shall operate any motor vehicle upon a public road or highway or any
public or private property after the suspension has expired unless the person
has complied with all license reinstatement requirements imposed by the court,
the Bureau of Motor Vehicles, or another provision of the Ohio Revised Code.
   (b)   Upon the request or motion of the prosecuting authority, a
noncertified copy of the law enforcement automated data system report or a
noncertified copy of a record of the registrar of motor vehicles that shows the
name, date of birth, and social security number of a person charged with a
violation of subsection (a) of this section may be admitted into evidence as
prima facie evidence that the license of the person had not been reinstated by
the person at the time of the alleged violation of subsection (a) of this
section. The person charged with a violation of subsection (a) of this section
may offer evidence to rebut this prima facie evidence.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of failure to reinstate a
license, and shall be punished as follows:
      (1)   Except as provided in subsection (c)(2) of this section, whoever
violates this section is guilty of an unclassified misdemeanor. When the
offense is an unclassified misdemeanor, the offender shall be sentenced
pursuant to §
698.02, §
698.03 or Ohio R.C. 2929.21 to 2929.28, except that the offender shall not be
sentenced to a jail term; the offender shall not be sentenced to a community
residential sanction pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2929.26; notwithstanding Ohio R.C.
2929.28(A)(2)(a), the offender may be fined up to one thousand dollars
($1,000); and, notwithstanding Ohio R.C. 2929.27(A)(3), the offender may be
ordered pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2929.27(C) to serve a term of community service
of up to 500 hours. The failure of an offender to complete a term of community
service imposed by the court may be punished as indirect criminal contempt
under Ohio R.C. 2705.02(A) that may be filed in the underlying case.
      (2)   If, within three years of a violation of subsection (a) of this
section, the offender previously has pleaded guilty to or been convicted of two
or more violations of this section, Ohio R.C. 4510.21 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
first degree.
      (3)   In all cases, the court may impose upon the offender a class seven
suspension of the offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s license,
temporary instruction permit, probationary driver's license, or nonresident
operating privilege from the range specified in Ohio R.C. 4510.02(A)(7).
(ORC 4510.21)
   (d)   It is an affirmative defense to any prosecution brought under this
section that the alleged offender drove under suspension, without a valid
permit or driver’s or commercial driver’s license, or in violation of a
restriction because of a substantial emergency, and because no other person was
reasonably available to drive in response to the emergency.
(ORC 4510.04)
§ 436.08  OPERATION OR SALE WITHOUT CERTIFICATE OF TITLE.
   (a)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Operate in this municipality a motor vehicle for which a
certificate of title is required without having that certificate in accordance
with Ohio R.C. Chapter 4505 or, if a physical certificate of title has not been
issued for a motor vehicle, operate the motor vehicle in this state knowing
that the ownership information relating to the vehicle has not been entered
into the automated title processing system by a Clerk of a Court of Common
Pleas;
      (2)   Display or display for sale or sell as a dealer or acting on behalf
of a dealer, a motor vehicle without having obtained a manufacturer's or
importer's certificate, a certificate of title, or an assignment of a
certificate of title for it as provided in Ohio R.C. Chapter 4505;
      (3)   Fail to surrender any certificate of title or any certificate of
registration or license plates upon cancellation of the same by the Registrar
of Motor Vehicles and notice of the cancellation as prescribed in Ohio R.C.
Chapter 4505;
      (4)   Fail to surrender the certificate of title to a Clerk of a Court of
Common Pleas as provided in Ohio R.C. Chapter 4505 in case of the destruction
or dismantling or change of a motor vehicle in such respect that it is not the
motor vehicle described in the certificate of title;
      (5)   Violate any rules adopted pursuant to Ohio R.C. Chapter 4505;
      (6)   Except as otherwise provided in Ohio R.C. Chapters 4505 and 4517,
sell at wholesale a motor vehicle ownership of which is not evidenced by an
Ohio certificate of title, or the current certificate of title issued for the
motor vehicle, or the manufacturer's certificate of origin, and all title
assignments that evidence the seller's ownership of the motor vehicle, and an
odometer disclosure statement that complies with Ohio R.C. 4505.06 and
subchapter IV of the "Motor Vehicle Information and Cost Savings Act", 86 Stat.
961 (1972), 15 U.S.C. 1981;
      (7)   Operate in this state a motor vehicle knowing that the certificate
of title to the vehicle or ownership of the vehicle as otherwise reflected in
the automated title processing system has been canceled.
   (b)   This section does not apply to persons engaged in the business of
warehousing or transporting motor vehicles for the purpose of salvage
disposition.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not more than two hundred
dollars ($200.00), imprisoned not more than 90 days, or both.
(ORC 4505.18)
§ 436.09  DISPLAY OF LICENSE PLATES; REGISTRATION; OBSTRUCTIONS.
   (a)   (1)   No person who is the owner or operator of a motor vehicle shall
fail to display in plain view on the front and rear of the motor vehicle a
license plate that bears the distinctive number and registration mark assigned
to the motor vehicle by the Ohio Director of Public Safety, including any
county identification sticker and any validation sticker issued under R.C. §§
4503.19 and 4503.191, except as follows:
         A.   A manufacturer of motor vehicles or dealer therein, the holder of
an in transit permit, and the owner or operator of a motorcycle, motorized
bicycle or moped, motor-driven cycle or motor scooter, autocycle, cab-enclosed
motorcycle, manufactured home, mobile home, trailer, or semitrailer shall
display a license plate on the rear only.
         B.   A motor vehicle that is issued two license plates shall display
the validation sticker only on the rear license plate, except that a commercial
tractor that does not receive an apportioned license plate under the
international registration plan shall display the validation sticker on the
front of the commercial tractor.
         C.   An apportioned vehicle receiving an apportioned license plate
under the international registration plan shall display the license plate only
on the front of a commercial tractor and on the rear of all other vehicles.
      (2)   All license plates shall be securely fastened so as not to swing,
and shall not be covered by any material that obstructs their visibility.
      (3)   No person to whom a temporary license placard or windshield sticker
has been issued for the use of a motor vehicle under R.C. § 4503.182, and no
operator of that motor vehicle, shall fail to display the temporary license
placard in plain view from the rear of the vehicle either in the rear window or
on an external rear surface of the motor vehicle, or fail to display the
windshield sticker in plain view on the rear window of the motor vehicle. No
temporary license placard or windshield sticker shall be covered by any
material that obstructs its visibility.
      (4)   A law enforcement officer shall only issue a ticket, citation, or
summons, or cause the arrest or commence a prosecution, for the failure to
display a license plate in plain view on the front of a parked motor vehicle if
the officer first determines that another offense has occurred and either
places the operator or vehicle owner under arrest or issues a ticket, citation,
or summons to the operator or vehicle owner for the other offense.
(R.C. § 4503.21(A), (B))
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided by Ohio R.C. 4503.103, 4503.173, 4503.41,
4503.43, and 4503.46, no person who is the owner or chauffeur of a motor
vehicle operated or driven upon the public roads or highways shall fail to file
annually the application for registration or to pay the tax therefor.
(ORC 4503.11(A))
   (c)   (1)   Within 30 days of becoming a resident of this state, any person
who owns a motor vehicle operated or driven upon the public roads or highways
shall register the vehicle in this state. If such a person fails to register a
vehicle owned by the person, the person shall not operate any motor vehicle in
this state under a license issued by another state.
      (2)   For purposes of subsection (c)(1) of this section, “resident” means
any person to whom any of the following applies:
         A.   The person maintains their principal residence in this state and
does not reside in this state as a result of the person’s active service in the
United States armed forces.
         B.   The person is determined by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles to be
a resident in accordance with standards adopted by the Registrar under Ohio
R.C. 4507.01.
(ORC 4503.111(A), (C))
   (d)   No person shall operate or drive upon the highways of this
Municipality a motor vehicle acquired from a former owner who has registered
the motor vehicle, while the motor vehicle displays the distinctive number or
identification mark assigned to it upon its original registration.
(ORC 4549.11(A))
   (e)   No person who is the owner of a motor vehicle and a resident of this
state shall operate or drive the motor vehicle upon the highways of this
Municipality while it displays a distinctive number or identification mark
issued by or under the authority of another state, without complying with the
laws of this state relating to the registration and identification of motor
vehicles.
(ORC 4549.12(A))
   (f)   No person shall park or operate any vehicle upon any public street or
highway upon which are displayed any license plates for any period of time
which has expired, or any license plates issued in another state for which the
period of reciprocal agreement with the state of issue has expired.
   (g)   No person shall park or operate any vehicle upon any public street or
highway upon which are displayed any license plates not legally registered and
issued for such vehicle, or upon which are displayed any license plates that
were issued on an application for registration that contains any false
statement by the applicant.
   (h)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle, upon which license plates are
required by law to be displayed, unless the license plates legally registered
and issued for such vehicle are fastened in such a manner, and not covered,
obscured or concealed by any part or accessory of such vehicle, to be readable
in their entirety from left to right.
   (i)   (1)   A.   Except as otherwise provided in division (i)(1)B., whoever
violates subsection (a) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
         B.   Whoever violates division (a) of this section by failing to
display a license plate in plain view on the front of a motor vehicle as
required under division (a) of this section while the motor vehicle is
otherwise legally parked is guilty of a minor misdemeanor and may be fined not
more than one hundred dollars ($100.00). A person who is subject to the penalty
prescribed in this division (i)(1)B. is not subject to the charging of points
under R.C. § 4510.036.
         C.   The offense established under division (a) of this section is a
strict liability offense and R.C. § 2901.20 does not apply. The designation of
this offense as a strict liability offense shall not be construed to imply that
any other offense, for which there is no specified degree of culpability, is
not a strict liability offense.
(R.C. § 4503.21(C))
      (2)   Whoever violates subsection (b) of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4503.11(C))
      (3)   A.   Whoever violates subsection (c) of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.
         B.   The offense established under subsection (i)(3)A. of this section
is a strict liability offense and strict liability is a culpable mental state
for purposes of Ohio R.C. 2901.20. The designation of this offense as a strict
liability offense shall not be construed to imply that any other offense, for
which there is no specified degree of culpability, is not a strict liability
offense.
(ORC 4503.111(B))
      (4)   Whoever violates subsection (d) of this section is guilty of
operation of a motor vehicle bearing license plates or an identification mark
issued to another, a minor misdemeanor on a first offense and a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree on each subsequent offense.
(ORC 4549.11(B))
      (5)   Whoever violates subsection (e) of this section is guilty of
illegal operation by a resident of this state of a motor vehicle bearing the
distinctive number or identification mark issued by a foreign jurisdiction, a
minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4549.12(B))
§ 436.10  USE OF ILLEGAL LICENSE PLATES.
   (a)   No person shall operate or drive a motor vehicle upon the public roads
and highways in this municipality if it displays a license plate or a
distinctive number or identification mark that meets any of the following
criteria:
      (1)   It is fictitious;
      (2)   It is a counterfeit or an unlawfully made copy of any distinctive
number or identification mark;
      (3)   It belongs to another motor vehicle, provided that this section
does not apply to a motor vehicle that is operated on the public roads and
highways in this municipality when the motor vehicle displays license plates
that originally were issued for a motor vehicle that previously was owned by
the same person who owns the motor vehicle that is operated on the public roads
and highways in this municipality during the 30-day period described in Ohio
R.C. 4503.12(A)(4).
   (b)   A person who fails to comply with the transfer of registration
provisions of Ohio R.C. 4503.12 and is charged with a violation of that section
shall not be charged with a violation of this section.
   (c)   Whoever violates subsection (a)(1), (2), or (3) of this section is
guilty of operating a motor vehicle bearing an invalid license plate or
identification mark, this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree on a first offense and a misdemeanor of the third degree on each
subsequent offense.
(ORC 4549.08)
§ 436.11  FAILURE TO STOP AFTER ACCIDENT.
   (a)   (1)   In the case of a motor vehicle accident or collision with
persons or property on a public road or highway, the operator of the motor
vehicle, having knowledge of the accident or collision, immediately shall stop
the operator’s motor vehicle at the scene of the accident or collision. The
operator shall remain at the scene of the accident or collision until the
operator has given the operator’s name and address and, if the operator is not
the owner, the name and address of the owner of that motor vehicle, together
with the registered number of that motor vehicle, to all of the following:
         A.   Any person injured in the accident or collision;
         B.   The operator, occupant, owner, or attendant of any motor vehicle
damaged in the accident or collision;
         C.   The police officer at the scene of the accident or collision.
      (2)   In the event an injured person is unable to comprehend and record
the information required to be given under division (a)(1) of this section, the
other operator involved in the accident or collision shall notify the nearest
police authority concerning the location of the accident or collision, and the
operator’s name, address, and the registered number of the motor vehicle the
operator was operating. The operator shall remain at the scene of the accident
or collision until a police officer arrives, unless removed from the scene by
an emergency vehicle operated by a political subdivision or an ambulance.
      (3)   If the accident or collision is with an unoccupied or unattended
motor vehicle, the operator who collides with the motor vehicle shall securely
attach the information required to be given in this section, in writing, to a
conspicuous place in or on the unoccupied or unattended motor vehicle.
   (b)   (1)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of
failure to stop after an accident. Except as otherwise provided in division (b)
(2) or (b)(3) of this section, failure to stop after an accident is a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (2)   If the accident or collision results in serious physical harm to a
person, failure to stop after an accident is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
      (3)   If the accident or collision results in the death of a person,
failure to stop after an accident is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
      (4)   In all cases, the court, in addition to any other penalties
provided by law, shall impose upon the offender a class five suspension of the
offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction
permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege from the range
specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(5). No judge shall suspend the first six months
of suspension of an offender’s license, permit, or privilege required by this
division.
      (5)   The offender shall provide the court with proof of financial
responsibility as defined in R.C. § 4509.01. If the offender fails to provide
that proof of financial responsibility, then, in addition to any other
penalties provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to R.C. §
2929.18 or 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding five thousand dollars ($5,000)
for any economic loss arising from an accident or collision that was the direct
and proximate result of the offender’s operation of the motor vehicle before,
during, or after committing the offense charged under this section.
(R.C. § 4549.02)
§ 436.12  STOPPING AFTER ACCIDENT ON OTHER THAN PUBLIC ROADS OR HIGHWAYS.
   (a)   (1)   In the case of a motor vehicle accident or collision resulting
in injury or damage to persons or property on any public or private property
other than a public road or highway, the operator of the motor vehicle, having
knowledge of the accident or collision, shall stop at the scene of the accident
or collision. Upon request of any person who is injured or damaged, or any
other person, the operator shall give that person the operator’s name and
address, and, if the operator is not the owner, the name and address of the
owner of that motor vehicle, together with the registered number of that motor
vehicle, and, if available, exhibit the operator’s driver’s or commercial
driver’s license.
      (2)   If the operator of the motor vehicle involved in the accident or
collision does not provide the information specified in division (a)(1) of this
section, the operator shall give that information, within 24 hours after the
accident or collision, to the police department of the city or village in which
the accident or collision occurred, or if it occurred outside the corporate
limits of a city or village, to the sheriff of the county in which the accident
or collision occurred.
      (3)   If the accident or collision is with an unoccupied or unattended
motor vehicle, the operator who collides with the motor vehicle shall securely
attach the information required under division (a)(1) of this section, in
writing, to a conspicuous place in or on the unoccupied or unattended motor
vehicle.
   (b)   (1)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of
failure to stop after a nonpublic road accident. Except as otherwise provided
in division (b)(2) or (b)(3) of this section, failure to stop after a nonpublic
road accident is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (2)   If the accident or collision results in serious physical harm to a
person, failure to stop after a nonpublic road accident is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (3)   If the accident or collision results in the death of a person,
failure to stop after a nonpublic road accident is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.
      (4)   In all cases, the court, in addition to any other penalties
provided by law, shall impose upon the offender a class five suspension of the
offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction
permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege from the range
specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(5). No judge shall suspend the first six months
of suspension of an offender’s license, permit, or privilege required by this
division.
      (5)   The offender shall provide the court with proof of financial
responsibility as defined in R.C. § 4509.01. If the offender fails to provide
that proof of financial responsibility, then, in addition to any other
penalties provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to R.C. §
2929.18 or 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding five thousand dollars ($5,000)
for any economic loss arising from an accident or collision that was the direct
and proximate result of the offender’s operation of the motor vehicle before,
during, or after committing the offense charged under this section.
(R.C. § 4549.021)
§ 436.13  VEHICLE ACCIDENT RESULTING IN DAMAGE TO REALTY.
   (a)   (1)   The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting in
damage to real property, or personal property attached to real property,
legally upon or adjacent to a public road or highway immediately shall stop and
take reasonable steps to locate and notify the owner or person in charge of the
property of that fact, of the driver's name and address, and of the
registration number of vehicle the driver is driving and, upon request and if
available, shall exhibit the driver's driver's or commercial driver's license.
      (2)   If the owner or person in charge of the property cannot be located
after reasonable search, the driver of the vehicle involved in the accident
resulting in damage to the property within 24 hours after the accident, shall
forward to the police department of the municipality the same information
required to be given to the owner or person in control of the property and give
the location of the accident and a description of the damage insofar as it is
known.
   (b)   (1)   Whoever violates subsection (a) of this section is guilty of
failure to stop after an accident involving the property of others, a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (2)   The offender shall provide the court with proof of financial
responsibility as defined in Ohio R.C. 4509.01. If the offender fails to
provide that proof of financial responsibility, then, in addition to any other
penalties provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to Ohio
R.C. 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding five thousand dollars ($5,000) for any
economic loss arising from an accident or collision that was the direct and
proximate result of the offender’s operation of the motor vehicle before,
during, or after committing the offense charged under this section.
(ORC 4549.03)
§ 436.14  REMOVAL OF VEHICLES AFTER ACCIDENTS.
   (a)   If a motor vehicle accident occurs on any highway, public street, or
other property open to the public for purposes of vehicular travel and if any
motor vehicle, cargo, or personal property that has been damaged or spilled as
a result of the motor vehicle accident is blocking the highway, street, or
other property or is otherwise endangering public safety, a public safety
official may do either of the following without the consent of the owner but
with the approval of the law enforcement agency conducting any investigation of
the accident:
      (1)   Remove, or order the removal of, the motor vehicle if the motor
vehicle is unoccupied, cargo, or personal property from the portion of the
highway, public street, or property ordinarily used for vehicular travel on the
highway, public street, or other property open to the public for purposes of
vehicular travel.
      (2)   If the motor vehicle is a commercial motor vehicle, allow the owner
or operator of the vehicle the opportunity to arrange for the removal of the
motor vehicle within a period of time specified by the public safety official.
If the public safety official determines that the motor vehicle cannot be
removed within the specified period of time, the public safety official shall
remove or order the removal of the motor vehicle.
   (b)   (1)   Except as provided in division (b)(2) of this section, the
Department of Transportation, any employee of the Department of Transportation,
or a public safety official who authorizes or participates in the removal of
any unoccupied motor vehicle, cargo, or personal property as authorized by
division (a) of this section, regardless of whether the removal is executed by
a private towing service, is not liable for civil damages for any injury,
death, or loss to person or property that results from the removal of that
unoccupied motor vehicle, cargo, or personal property. Further, except as
provided in division (b)(2) of this section, if a public safety official
authorizes, employs, or arranges to have a private towing service remove any
unoccupied motor vehicle, cargo, or personal property as authorized by division
(a) of this section, that private towing service is not liable for civil
damages for any injury, death, or loss to person or property that results from
the removal of that unoccupied motor vehicle, cargo, or personal property.
      (2)   Division (b)(1) of this section does not apply to any of the
following:
         A.   Any person or entity involved in the removal of an unoccupied
motor vehicle, cargo, or personal property pursuant to division (a) of this
section if that removal causes or contributes to the release of a hazardous
material or to structural damage to the roadway;
         B.   A private towing service that was not authorized, employed, or
arranged by a public safety official to remove an unoccupied motor vehicle,
cargo, or personal property under this section;
         C.   Except as provided in division (b)(2)D. of this section, a
private towing service that was authorized, employed, or arranged by a public
safety official to perform the removal of the unoccupied motor vehicle, cargo,
or personal property but the private towing service performed the removal in a
negligent manner;
         D.   A private towing service that was authorized, employed, or
arranged by a public safety official to perform the removal of the unoccupied
motor vehicle, cargo, or personal property that was endangering public safety
but the private towing service performed the removal in a reckless manner.
   (c)   As used in divisions (a) and (b) of this section:
      (1)   “Hazardous material.” Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2305.232.
      (2)   “Public safety official.” Means any of the following:
         A.   The sheriff of the county, or the chief of police in the
municipal corporation, township, or township or joint police district, in which
the accident occurred;
         B.   A state highway patrol trooper;
         C.   The chief of the fire department having jurisdiction where the
accident occurred;
         D.   A duly authorized subordinate acting on behalf of an official
specified in divisions A. to C. of this definition.
(R.C. § 4513.66)
   (d)   If a towing service is removing a motor vehicle, and the removal was
not authorized under R.C. § 4513.60, 4513.601, 4513.61, or 4513.66, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, prior to removing the motor
vehicle, the towing service shall provide a written estimate of the price for
the removal to the operator of the motor vehicle, if requested.
   (e)   The towing service shall ensure that any estimate provided under
subsection (d) of this section includes the fees, services to be rendered, and
destination of the vehicle.
   (f)   If a towing service fails to provide a written estimate as required by
this section, the towing service shall not charge fees for the towing and
storage of the motor vehicle that exceed 25 percent of any applicable fees
established by the public utilities commission in rules adopted under R.C. §
4921.25(B)(4) or, if the vehicle was towed within a municipal corporation that
has established vehicle removal and storage fees, 25 percent of the fees
established by the municipal corporation.
   (g)   Any storage facility that accepts towed vehicles shall conspicuously
post a notice at the entrance to the storage facility that states the
limitation on fees established under subsection (f) of this section.
(R.C. § 4513.68)
§ 436.99  PENALTY.
Editor's note:
   See §§
408.01 and
408.02 for general Traffic Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 438:  SAFETY AND EQUIPMENT
Section
438.01   Driving unsafe vehicles; application.
438.02   Lighted lights; measurement of distances and heights.
438.03   Headlights on motor vehicles and motorcycles.
438.04   Tail light; illumination of rear license plate.
438.05   Rear red reflectors.
438.06   Safety lighting on commercial vehicles.
438.07   Obscured lights on vehicles in combination.
438.08   Red light or red flag on extended loads.
438.09   Lights on parked or stopped vehicles.
438.10   Lights on slow-moving vehicles; emblem required; lights and reflectors
on multi-wheel agricultural tractors or farm machinery.
438.11   Spotlight and auxiliary lights.
438.12   Cowl, fender and back-up lights.
438.13   Two lights displayed.
438.14   Use of headlight beams.
438.15   Lights of less intensity on slow-moving vehicles.
438.16   Number of lights permitted; red and flashing lights.
438.165   Lights and sound-producing devices on coroners' vehicles.
438.17   Vehicles transporting preschool children.
438.18   Focus and aim of headlights.
438.19   Motor vehicle and motorcycle brakes.
438.20   Horn, siren and theft alarm signal.
438.21   Muffler; muffler cutout; excessive smoke, gas or noise.
438.22   Rear-view mirror; clear view to front, both sides and rear.
438.23   Windshield required; sign or poster upon windshield; windshield wiper.
438.235   Tinted glass; materials on glass.
438.24   Limited load extension on left side of passenger vehicle.
438.25   Motor vehicle stop lights.
438.26   Bumpers.
438.27   Air cleaner required.
438.28   Use of child restraints.
438.285   Use of occupant restraining devices.
438.29   Ignition interlock devices. (Repealed)
438.30   Air bags.
438.99   Penalty.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Bicycle equipment - see TRAF.
474.05
   Collector's vehicles - see Ohio R.C. 4513.38, 4513.41
   Improperly handling firearms in a motor vehicle - see GEN. OFF.
672.04
   Occupying travel trailers while in motion - see TRAF.
440.08
   See section histories for similar state law
   Snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle and all-purpose vehicle equipment - see
TRAF.
446.02
   Towing requirements - see TRAF.
440.05
   Use of stop and turn signals - see TRAF.
432.13
   Vehicles transporting explosives - see TRAF.
440.04
   Warning devices for commercial vehicles disabled upon freeways - see Ohio
R.C. 4513.28
   Wheel protectors for commercial vehicles - see TRAF.
440.03
§ 438.01  DRIVING UNSAFE VEHICLES; APPLICATION.
   (a)   No person shall drive or move, or cause or knowingly permit to be
driven or moved, on any highway any vehicle or combination of vehicles which is
in such unsafe condition as to endanger any person.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4513.02(A), (H))
§ 438.02  LIGHTED LIGHTS; MEASUREMENT OF DISTANCES AND HEIGHTS.
   (a)   Every vehicle, other than a motorized bicycle, operated upon a street
or highway within this state shall display lighted lights and illuminating
devices as required by Ohio R.C. 4513.04 through 4513.37 during all of the
following times:
      (1)   The time from sunset to sunrise;
      (2)   At any other time when, due to insufficient natural light or
unfavorable atmospheric conditions, persons, vehicles and substantial objects
on the highway are not discernible at a distance of 1,000 feet ahead;
      (3)   At any time when the windshield wipers of the vehicle are in use
because of precipitation on the windshield.
   (b)   Every motorized bicycle shall display at such times lighted lights
meeting the rules adopted by the Ohio Director of Public Safety under Ohio R.C.
4511.521. No motor vehicle, during any time specified in this section, shall be
operated upon a street or highway within this state using only parking lights
as illumination.
   (c)   Whenever in such sections a requirement is declared as to the distance
from which certain lamps and devices shall render objects visible, or within
which such lamps or devices shall be visible, such distance shall be measured
upon a straight level unlighted highway under normal atmospheric conditions
unless a different condition is expressly stated.
   (d)   Whenever in such sections a requirement is declared as to the mounted
height of lights or devices, it shall mean from the center of such light or
device to the level ground upon which the vehicle stands.
   (e)   Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, no law
enforcement officer shall cause the operator of a vehicle being operated upon a
street or highway within this state to stop the vehicle solely because the
officer observes that a violation of subsection (a)(3) of this section has been
or is being committed or for the sole purpose of issuing a ticket, citation, or
summons for a violation of that subsection, or causing the arrest of or
commencing a prosecution of a person for a violation of that subsection.
   (f)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4513.03)
§ 438.03  HEADLIGHTS ON MOTOR VEHICLES AND MOTORCYCLES.
   (a)   (1)   Every motor vehicle, other than a motorcycle, shall be equipped
with at least two headlights with at least one near each side of the front of
the motor vehicle.
      (2)   Every motorcycle shall be equipped with at least one and not more
than two headlights.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4513.04)
§ 438.04  TAIL LIGHT; ILLUMINATION OF REAR LICENSE PLATE.
   (a)   (1)   Every motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer, pole trailer or
vehicle which is being drawn at the end of a train of vehicles shall be
equipped with at least one tail light mounted on the rear which, when lighted,
shall emit a red light visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear,
provided that in the case of a train of vehicles only the tail light on the
rearmost vehicle need be visible from the distance specified.
      (2)   Either a tail light or a separate light shall be so constructed and
placed as to illuminate with a white light the rear registration plate, when
such registration plate is required, and render it legible from a distance of
50 feet to the rear. Any tail light, together with any separate light for
illuminating the rear registration plate, shall be so wired as to be lighted
whenever the headlights or auxiliary driving lights are lighted, except where
separate lighting systems are provided for trailers for the purpose of
illuminating such registration plate.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4513.05)
§ 438.05  REAR RED REFLECTORS.
   (a)   (1)   Every new motor vehicle sold after September 6, 1941, and
operated on a highway, other than a commercial tractor to which a trailer or
semitrailer is attached, shall carry at the rear, either as a part of the tail
lamps or separately, two red reflectors meeting the requirements of this
section, except that vehicles of the type mentioned in Ohio R.C. 4513.07 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance shall be equipped with reflectors
as required by the regulations provided for in that section.
      (2)   Every such reflector shall be of such size and characteristics and
so maintained as to be visible at night from all distances within 300 feet to
50 feet from such vehicle.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4513.06)
§ 438.06  SAFETY LIGHTING ON COMMERCIAL VEHICLES.
   (a)   (1)   When the Director of Public Safety prescribes and promulgates
regulations relating to clearance lights, marker lights, reflectors and stop
lights on buses, trucks, commercial tractors, trailers, semitrailers and pole
trailers, when operated upon any highway, these vehicles shall be equipped as
required by such regulations, and such equipment shall be lighted at all times
mentioned in Ohio R.C. 4513.03 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, except that clearance lights and side marker lights need not be
lighted on any such vehicle when it is operated within the Municipality where
there is sufficient light to reveal any person or substantial object on the
highway at a distance of 500 feet.
      (2)   Such equipment shall be in addition to all other lights
specifically required by Ohio R.C. 4513.03 through 4513.16, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinances.
      (3)   Vehicles operated under the jurisdiction of the Public Utilities
Commission are not subject to this section.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4513.07)
§ 438.07  OBSCURED LIGHTS ON VEHICLES IN COMBINATION.
   Whenever motor and other vehicles are operated in combination during the
time that lights are required, any light, except tail lights, which by reason
of its location on a vehicle of the combination would be obscured by another
vehicle of the combination, need not be lighted, but this section does not
affect the requirement that lighted clearance lights be displayed on the front
of the foremost vehicle required to have clearance lights or that all lights
required on the rear of the rearmost vehicle of any combination shall be
lighted.
(ORC 4513.08)
§ 438.08  RED LIGHT OR RED FLAG ON EXTENDED LOADS.
   (a)   Whenever the load upon any vehicle extends to the rear four feet or
more beyond the bed or body of this vehicle, there shall be displayed at the
extreme rear end of the load, at the times specified in Ohio R.C. 4513.03 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, a red light or lantern plainly
visible from a distance of at least 500 feet to the sides and rear. The red
light or lantern required by this section is in addition to the red rear light
required upon every vehicle. At any other time there shall be displayed at the
extreme rear end of such load a red flag or cloth not less than 16 inches
square.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4513.09)
§ 438.09  LIGHTS ON PARKED OR STOPPED VEHICLES.
   (a)   Except in case of an emergency, whenever a vehicle is parked or
stopped upon a roadway open to traffic or a shoulder adjacent thereto, whether
attended or unattended, during the times mentioned in Ohio R.C. 4513.03 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, such vehicle shall be equipped
with one or more lights which shall exhibit a white or amber light on the
roadway side visible from a distance of 500 feet to the front of such vehicle,
and a red light visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear. No lights need
be displayed upon any such vehicle when it is stopped or parked within the
municipality where there is sufficient light to reveal any person or
substantial object within a distance of 500 feet upon such highway. Any lighted
headlights upon a parked vehicle shall be depressed or dimmed.
(ORC 4513.10)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4513.99)
§ 438.10  LIGHTS ON SLOW-MOVING VEHICLES; EMBLEM REQUIRED; LIGHTS AND
REFLECTORS ON MULTI-WHEEL AGRICULTURAL TRACTORS OR FARM MACHINERY.
   (a)   All vehicles other than bicycles, including animal-drawn vehicles and
vehicles referred to in Ohio R.C. 4513.02(G), not specifically required to be
equipped with lamps or other lighting devices by Ohio R.C. 4513.03 through
4513.10, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinances, shall, at the
times specified in Ohio R.C. 4513.03 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, be equipped with at least one lamp displaying a white light visible
from a distance of not less than 1,000 feet to the front of the vehicle and
also shall be equipped with two lamps displaying red light visible from a
distance of not less than 1,000 feet to the rear of the vehicle, or as an
alternative, one lamp displaying a red light visible from a distance of not
less than 1,000 feet to the rear and two red reflectors visible from all
distances of 600 feet to 100 feet to the rear when illuminated by the lawful
lower beams of headlamps. Lamps and reflectors required by this section shall
meet standards adopted by the Director of Public Safety.
   (b)   All boat trailers, farm machinery and other machinery, including all
road construction machinery, upon a street or highway, except when being used
in actual construction and maintenance work in an area guarded by a flagperson,
or where flares are used, or when operating or traveling within the limits of a
construction area designated by the Director of Transportation, a city or
village engineer, or the county engineer of the several counties, when such
construction area is marked in accordance with requirements of the Director and
the Manual and Specifications for a Uniform System of Traffic-Control Devices,
as set forth in Ohio R.C. 4511.09, which is designed for operation at a speed
of 25 miles per hour or less, shall be operated at a speed not exceeding 25
miles per hour, and shall display a triangular slow-moving vehicle emblem
(SMV). The emblem shall be mounted so as to be visible from a distance of not
less than 500 feet to the rear. The Director of Public Safety shall adopt
standards and specifications for the design and position of mounting the SMV
emblem. The standards and specifications for SMV emblems referred to in this
section shall correlate with and, so far as possible, conform with those
approved by the American Society of Agricultural Engineers. A unit of farm
machinery that is designed by its manufacturer to operate at a speed greater
than 25 miles per hour may be operated on a street or highway at a speed
greater than 25 miles per hour provided it is operated in accordance with this
section. As used in this subsection, "machinery" does not include any vehicle
designed to be drawn by an animal.
   (c)   The use of the SMV emblem shall be restricted to animal-drawn vehicles
and to the slow-moving vehicles specified in subsection (b) of this section
operating or traveling within the limits of the highway. Its use on slow-moving
vehicles being transported upon other types of vehicles or on any other type of
vehicle or stationary object on the highway is prohibited.
   (d)   (1)   No person shall sell, lease, rent or operate any boat trailer,
farm machinery or other machinery defined as a slow-moving vehicle in
subsection (b) of this section, except those units designed to be completely
mounted on a primary power unit, which is manufactured or assembled on or after
April 1, 1966, unless the vehicle is equipped with a slow-moving vehicle emblem
mounting device as specified in subsection (b) of this section.
      (2)   No person shall sell, lease, rent, or operate on a street or
highway any unit of farm machinery that is designed by its manufacturer to
operate at a speed greater than 25 miles per hour unless the unit displays a
slow-moving vehicle emblem as specified in subsection (b) of this section and a
speed identification symbol that meets the specifications contained in the
American Society of Agricultural Engineers Standard ANSI/ASAE S584 JAN2005,
Agricultural Equipment: Speed Identification Symbol (SIS).
   (e)   Any boat trailer, farm machinery or other machinery defined as a slow-
moving vehicle in subsection (b) of this section, in addition to the use of the
slow-moving vehicle emblem, and any unit of farm machinery that is designed by
its manufacturer to operate at a speed greater than 25 miles per hour, in
addition to the display of a speed identification symbol, may be equipped with
a red flashing light that shall be visible from a distance of not less than
1,000 feet to the rear at all times specified in Ohio R.C. 4513.03 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance. When a double-faced light is
used, it shall display amber light to the front and red light to the rear. In
addition to the lights described in this subsection, farm machinery and motor
vehicles escorting farm machinery may display a flashing, oscillating or
rotating amber light, as permitted by Ohio R.C. 4513.17 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, and also may display simultaneously flashing
turn signals or warning lights, as permitted by that section.
   (f)   (1)   Every animal-drawn vehicle upon a street or highway shall at all
times be equipped in one of the following ways:
         A.   With a slow-moving vehicle emblem complying with subsection (b)
of this section;
         B.   With alternate reflective material complying with rules adopted
under subsection (f)(2) below;
         C.   With both a slow-moving vehicle emblem and alternate reflective
material as specified in subsection (f)(2) below.
      (2)   Rules adopted by the Director of Public Safety, subject to Ohio
R.C. Chapter 119, establishing standards and specifications for the position of
mounting of the alternate reflective material authorized by this subsection,
permit, as a minimum, the alternate reflective material to be black, gray, or
silver in color. The alternate reflective material shall be mounted on the
animal-drawn vehicle so as to be visible, at all times specified in Ohio R.C.
4513.03 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, from a distance of
not less than 500 feet to the rear when illuminated by the lawful lower beams
of headlamps.
   (g)   (1)   Every unit of farm machinery that is designed by its
manufacturer to operate at a speed greater than 25 miles per hour shall display
a slow-moving vehicle emblem and a speed identification symbol that meets the
specifications contained in the American Society of Agricultural Engineers
Standard ANSI/ASAE S584 JAN2005, Agricultural Equipment: Speed Identification
Symbol (SIS) when the unit is operated upon a street or highway, irrespective
of the speed at which the unit is operated on the street or highway. The speed
identification symbol shall indicate the maximum speed in miles per hour at
which the unit of farm machinery is designed by its manufacturer to operate.
The display of the speed identification symbol shall be in accordance with the
standard prescribed in this subsection.
      (2)   If an agricultural tractor that is designed by its manufacturer to
operate at a speed greater than 25 miles per hour is being operated on a street
or highway at a speed greater than 25 miles per hour and is towing, pulling, or
otherwise drawing a unit of farm machinery, the unit of farm machinery shall
display a slow-moving vehicle emblem and a speed identification symbol that is
the same as the speed identification symbol that is displayed on the
agricultural tractor.
   (h)   When an agricultural tractor that is designed by its manufacturer to
operate at a speed greater than 25 miles per hour is being operated on a street
or highway at a speed greater than 25 miles per hour, the operator shall
possess some documentation published or provided by the manufacturer indicating
the maximum speed in miles per hour at which the manufacturer designed the
agricultural tractor to operate.
   (i)   As used in this section, "boat trailer" means any vehicle designed and
used exclusively to transport a boat between a place of storage and a marina,
or in and around a marina, when drawn or towed on a street or highway for a
distance of no more than ten miles and at a speed of 25 miles per hour or less.
(ORC 4513.11)
   (j)   Lights and reflector requirements for multi-wheel agricultural
tractors or farm machinery.
      (1)   A.   Every multi-wheel agricultural tractor whose model year was
2001 or earlier, when being operated or traveling on a street or highway at the
times specified in Ohio R.C. 4513.03, or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, at a minimum shall be equipped with and display reflectors and
illuminated amber lamps so that the extreme left and right projections of the
tractor are indicated by flashing lamps displaying amber light, visible to the
front and the rear; by amber reflectors, all visible to the front; and by red
reflectors, all visible to the rear.
         B.   The lamps displaying amber light need not flash simultaneously
and need not flash in conjunction with any directional signals of the tractor.
         C.   The lamps and reflectors required by subsection (j)(1)A. of this
section and their placement shall meet standards and specifications contained
in rules adopted by the Director of Public Safety in accordance with Ohio R.C.
Chapter 119. The rules governing the amber lamps, amber reflectors, and red
reflectors and their placement shall correlate with and, as far as possible,
conform with paragraphs 4.1.4.1, 4.1.7.1, and 4.1.7.2, respectively, of the
American Society of Agricultural Engineers Standard ANSI/ASAE S279.10 OCT98,
Lighting and Marking of Agricultural Equipment on Highways.
      (2)   Every unit of farm machinery whose model year was 2002 or later,
when being operated or traveling on a street or highway at the times specified
in Ohio R.C. 4513.03, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, shall
be equipped with and display markings and illuminated lamps that meet or exceed
the lighting, illumination, and marking standards and specifications that are
applicable to that type of farm machinery for the unit's model year specified
in the American Society of Agricultural Engineers Standard ANSI/ASAE S279.11
APR01, Lighting and Marking of Agricultural Equipment on Highways, or any
subsequent revisions of that standard.
      (3)   The lights and reflectors required by subsection (j)(1) of this
section are in addition to the slow-moving vehicle emblem and lights required
or permitted by Ohio R.C. 4513.11 or 4513.17, or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, to be displayed on farm machinery being operated or
traveling on a street or highway.
      (4)   No person shall operate any unit of farm machinery on a street or
highway or cause any unit of farm machinery to travel on a street or highway in
violation of subsections (j)(1) or (j)(2) of this section.
(ORC 4513.111)
   (k)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4513.11(I), 4513.111(E))
§ 438.11  SPOTLIGHT AND AUXILIARY LIGHTS.
   (a)   (1)   Any motor vehicle may be equipped with not more than one
spotlight and every lighted spotlight shall be so aimed and used upon
approaching another vehicle that no part of the high-intensity portion of the
beam will be directed to the left of the prolongation of the extreme left side
of the vehicle, nor more than 100 feet ahead of the vehicle.
      (2)   Any motor vehicle may be equipped with not more than three
auxiliary driving lights mounted on the front of the vehicle. Any such lights
which do not conform to the specifications for auxiliary driving lights and the
regulations for their use prescribed by the Director of Public Safety shall not
be used.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4513.12)
§ 438.12  COWL, FENDER AND BACK-UP LIGHTS.
   (a)   (1)   Any motor vehicle may be equipped with side cowl or fender
lights which shall emit a white or amber light without glare.
      (2)   Any motor vehicle may be equipped with lights on each side thereof
which shall emit a white or amber light without glare.
      (3)   Any motor vehicle may be equipped with back-up lights, either
separately or in combination with another light. No back-up lights shall be
continuously lighted when the motor vehicle is in forward motion.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4513.13)
§ 438.13  TWO LIGHTS DISPLAYED.
   (a)   At all times mentioned in Ohio R.C. 4513.03 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, at least two lighted lights shall be displayed,
one near each side of the front of every motor vehicle, except when such
vehicle is parked subject to the regulations governing lights on parked
vehicles.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4513.14)
§ 438.14  USE OF HEADLIGHT BEAMS.
   (a)   Whenever a motor vehicle is being operated on a roadway or shoulder
adjacent thereto during the times specified in Ohio R.C. 4513.03 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the driver shall use a
distribution of light, or composite beam, directed high enough and of
sufficient intensity to reveal persons, vehicles and substantial objects at a
safe distance in advance of the vehicle, subject to the following requirements:
      (1)   Whenever the driver of a vehicle approaches an oncoming vehicle,
such driver shall use a distribution of light, or composite beam, so aimed that
the glaring rays are not projected into the eyes of the oncoming driver.
      (2)   Every new motor vehicle registered in this state which has
multiple-beam road lighting equipment shall be equipped with a beam indicator,
which shall be lighted whenever the uppermost distribution of light from the
headlights is in use, and shall not otherwise be lighted. This indicator shall
be so designed and located that, when lighted, it will be readily visible
without glare to the driver of the vehicle.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4513.15)
§ 438.15  LIGHTS OF LESS INTENSITY ON SLOW-MOVING VEHICLES.
   (a)   Any motor vehicle may be operated under the conditions specified in
Ohio R.C. 4513.03 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance when it is
equipped with two lighted lights upon the front thereof capable of revealing
persons and substantial objects 75 feet ahead, in lieu of lights required in
Ohio R.C. 4513.14 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, provided
that such vehicle shall not be operated at a speed in excess of 20 miles per
hour.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4513.16)
§ 438.16  NUMBER OF LIGHTS PERMITTED; RED AND FLASHING LIGHTS.
   (a)   Whenever a motor vehicle equipped with headlights is also equipped
with any auxiliary lights or spotlight or any other light on the front thereof
projecting a beam of an intensity greater than 300 candlepower, not more than a
total of five of any such lights on the front of a vehicle shall be lighted at
any one time when the vehicle is upon a highway.
   (b)   Any lighted light or illuminating device upon a motor vehicle, other
than headlights, spotlights, signal lights, or auxiliary driving lights, that
projects a beam of light of an intensity greater than 300 candlepower shall be
so directed that no part of the beam will strike the level of the roadway on
which the vehicle stands at a distance of more than 75 feet from the vehicle.
   (c)   (1)   Flashing lights are prohibited on motor vehicles, except as a
means for indicating a right or a left turn, or in the presence of vehicular
traffic hazard requiring unusual care in approaching, or overtaking or passing.
This prohibition does not apply to emergency vehicles, road service vehicles
servicing or towing a disabled vehicle, rural mail delivery vehicles, vehicles
as provided in Ohio R.C. 4513.182 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, highway maintenance vehicles, funeral hearses, funeral escort
vehicles, and similar equipment operated by the Department or local
authorities, which shall be equipped with and display, when used on a street or
highway for the special purpose necessitating such lights, a flashing,
oscillating or rotating amber light, but shall not display a flashing,
oscillating or rotating light of any other color, nor to vehicles or machinery
permitted by Ohio R.C. 4513.11 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance to have a flashing red light.
      (2)   When used on a street or highway, farm machinery and vehicles
escorting farm machinery may be equipped with and display a flashing,
oscillating or rotating amber light, and the prohibition contained in
subsection (c)(1) of this section does not apply to such machinery or vehicles.
Farm machinery may also display the lights described in Ohio R.C. 4513.11 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (d)   Except a person operating a public safety vehicle, as defined in Ohio
R.C. 4511.01(E), or a school bus, no person shall operate, move, or park upon
or permit to stand within the right-of-way of any public street or highway any
vehicle or equipment that is equipped with and displaying a flashing red or a
flashing combination red and white light, or an oscillating or rotating red
light, or a combination red and white oscillating or rotating light; and except
a public law enforcement officer, or other person sworn to enforce the criminal
and traffic laws of the State, operating a public safety vehicle when on duty,
no person shall operate, move or park upon or permit to stand within the right-
of-way of any street or highway any vehicle or equipment that is equipped with,
or upon which is mounted, and displaying a flashing blue or a flashing
combination blue and white light, or an oscillating or rotating blue light, or
a combination blue and white oscillating or rotating light.
   (e)   This section does not prohibit the use of warning lights required by
law or the simultaneous flashing of turn signals on disabled vehicles or on
vehicles being operated in unfavorable atmospheric conditions in order to
enhance their visibility. This section also does not prohibit the simultaneous
flashing of turn signals or warning lights whether on farm machinery or
vehicles escorting farm machinery when used on a street or highway.
   (f)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4513.17)
§ 438.165  LIGHTS AND SOUND-PRODUCING DEVICES ON CORONERS' VEHICLES.
   (a)   Notwithstanding any other provision of law, a motor vehicle operated
by a coroner, deputy coroner or coroner's investigator may be equipped with a
flashing, oscillating or rotating red or blue light and siren, whistle or bell
capable of emitting sound audible under normal conditions from a distance of
not less than 500 feet. Such a vehicle may display the flashing, oscillating or
rotating red or blue light and may give the audible signal of the siren,
whistle or bell only when responding to a fatality or a fatal motor vehicle
accident on a street or highway and only at those locations where the stoppage
of traffic impedes the ability of the coroner, deputy coroner or coroner's
investigator to arrive at the site of the fatality.
   (b)   This section does not relieve the coroner, deputy coroner or coroner's
investigator operating a motor vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard
for the safety of all persons and property upon the highway.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4513.171)
§ 438.17  VEHICLES TRANSPORTING PRESCHOOL CHILDREN.
   (a)   No person shall operate any motor vehicle owned, leased, or hired by a
nursery school, kindergarten, or day-care center, while transporting preschool
children to or from such an institution unless the motor vehicle is equipped
with and displaying two amber flashing lights mounted on a bar attached to the
top of the vehicle, and a sign bearing the designation "caution — children",
which shall be attached to the bar carrying the amber flashing lights in such a
manner as to be legible to persons both in front of and behind the vehicle. The
lights and sign shall meet standards and specifications adopted by the Director
of Public Safety.
   (b)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle displaying the lights and sign
required by this section for any purpose other than the transportation of
preschool children as provided in this section.
(ORC 4513.182)
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4513.99)
§ 438.18  FOCUS AND AIM OF HEADLIGHTS.
   (a)   No person shall use any lights mentioned in Ohio R.C. 4513.03 through
4513.18, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinances, upon any motor
vehicle, trailer or semitrailer unless these lights are equipped, mounted and
adjusted as to focus and aim in accordance with regulations which are
prescribed by the Director of Public Safety.
   (b)   The headlights on any motor vehicle shall comply with the headlamp
color requirements contained in Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard Number
108, 49 C.F.R. § 571.108. No person shall operate a motor vehicle in violation
of this division.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4513.19)
§ 438.19  MOTOR VEHICLE AND MOTORCYCLE BRAKES.
   (a)   The following requirements govern as to brake equipment on vehicles:
      (1)   Every motor vehicle, other than a motorcycle, when operated upon a
highway shall be equipped with brakes adequate to control the movement of and
to stop and hold the motor vehicle, including two separate means of applying
the brakes, each of which means shall be effective to apply the brakes to at
least two wheels. If these two separate means of applying the brakes are
connected in any way, then on such motor vehicles, manufactured or assembled
after January 1, 1942, they shall be so constructed that failure of any one
part of the operating mechanism shall not leave the motor vehicle without
brakes on at least two wheels.
      (2)   Every motorcycle, when operated upon a highway shall be equipped
with at least one adequate brake, which may be operated by hand or by foot.
      (3)   Every motorized bicycle shall be equipped with brakes meeting the
rules adopted by the Director of Public Safety under Ohio R.C. 4511.521.
      (4)   When operated upon the highways, the following vehicles shall be
equipped with brakes adequate to control the movement of and to stop and to
hold the vehicle, designed to be applied by the driver of the towing motor
vehicle from its cab, and also designed and connected so that, in case of a
breakaway of the towed vehicle, the brakes shall be automatically applied:
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in this section, every trailer or
semitrailer, except a pole trailer, with an empty weight of 2,000 pounds or
more, manufactured or assembled on or after January 1, 1942;
         B.   Every manufactured home or travel trailer with an empty weight of
2,000 pounds or more, manufactured or assembled on or after January 1, 2001.
      (5)   Every watercraft trailer with a gross weight or manufacturer's
gross vehicle weight rating of 3,000 pounds or more that is manufactured or
assembled on or after January 1, 2008, shall have separate brakes equipped with
hydraulic surge or electrically operated brakes on two wheels.
      (6)   In any combination of motor-drawn trailers or semitrailers equipped
with brakes, means shall be provided for applying the rearmost brakes in
approximate synchronism with the brakes on the towing vehicle, and developing
the required braking effort on the rearmost wheels at the fastest rate; or
means shall be provided for applying braking effort first on the rearmost
brakes; or both of the above means, capable of being used alternatively, may be
employed.
      (7)   Every vehicle and combination of vehicles, except motorcycles and
motorized bicycles, and except trailers and semitrailers of a gross weight of
less than 2,000 pounds, and pole trailers, shall be equipped with parking
brakes adequate to hold the vehicle on any grade on which it is operated, under
all conditions of loading, on a surface free from snow, ice, or loose material.
The parking brakes shall be capable of being applied in conformance with the
foregoing requirements by the driver's muscular effort or by spring action or
by equivalent means. Their operation may be assisted by the service brakes or
other source of power provided that failure of the service brake actuation
system or other power assisting mechanism will not prevent the parking brakes
from being applied in conformance with the foregoing requirements. The parking
brakes shall be so designed that when once applied they shall remain applied
with the required effectiveness despite exhaustion of any source of energy or
leakage of any kind.
      (8)   The same brake drums, brake shoes and lining assemblies, brake shoe
anchors, and mechanical brake shoe actuation mechanism normally associated with
the wheel brake assemblies may be used for both the service brakes and the
parking brakes. If the means of applying the parking brakes and the service
brakes are connected in any way, they shall be so constructed that failure of
any one part shall not leave the vehicle without operative brakes.
      (9)   Every motor vehicle or combination of motor-drawn vehicles shall,
at all times and under all conditions of loading, be capable of being stopped
on a dry, smooth, level road free from loose material, upon application of the
service or foot brake, within the following specified distances, or shall be
capable of being decelerated at a sustained rate corresponding to these
distances:
         A.   Vehicles or combinations of vehicles having brakes on all wheels
shall come to a stop in 30 feet or less from a speed of 20 miles per hour.
         B.   Vehicles or combinations of vehicles not having brakes on all
wheels shall come to a stop in 40 feet or less from a speed of 20 miles per
hour.
      (10)   All brakes shall be maintained in good working order and shall be
so adjusted as to operate as equally as practicable with respect to the wheels
on opposite sides of the vehicle.
(ORC 4513.20)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4513.99)
§ 438.20  HORN, SIREN AND THEFT ALARM SIGNAL.
   (a)   (1)   Every motor vehicle when operated upon a highway shall be
equipped with a horn which is in good working order and capable of emitting
sound audible, under normal conditions, from a distance of not less than 200
feet.
      (2)   No motor vehicle shall be equipped with, nor shall any person use
upon a vehicle, any siren, whistle, or bell. Any vehicle may be equipped with a
theft alarm signal device which shall be so arranged that it cannot be used as
an ordinary warning signal. Every emergency vehicle shall be equipped with a
siren, whistle or bell, capable of emitting sound audible under normal
conditions from a distance of not less than 500 feet and of a type approved by
the Director of Public Safety. Such equipment shall not be used except when
such vehicle is operated in response to an emergency call or is in the
immediate pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the law, in which case
the driver of the emergency vehicle shall sound such equipment when it is
necessary to warn pedestrians and other drivers of the approach thereof.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4513.21)
§ 438.21  MUFFLER; MUFFLER CUTOUT; EXCESSIVE SMOKE, GAS OR NOISE.
   (a)   (1)   Every motor vehicle and motorcycle with an internal combustion
engine shall at all times be equipped with a muffler which is in good working
order and in constant operation to prevent excessive or unusual noise, and no
person shall use a muffler cutout, bypass or similar device upon a motor
vehicle on a highway. Every motorcycle muffler shall be equipped with baffle
plates.
      (2)   No person shall own, operate or have in the person's possession any
motor vehicle or motorcycle equipped with a device for producing excessive
smoke or gas, or so equipped as to permit oil or any other chemical to flow
into or upon the exhaust pipe or muffler of such vehicle, or equipped in any
way to produce or emit smoke or dangerous or annoying gases from any portion of
such vehicle, other than the ordinary gases emitted by the exhaust of an
internal combustion engine under normal operation.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4513.22)
§ 438.22  REAR-VIEW MIRROR; CLEAR VIEW TO FRONT, BOTH SIDES AND REAR.
   (a)   Every motor vehicle and motorcycle shall be equipped with a mirror so
located as to reflect to the operator a view of the highway to the rear of such
vehicle or motorcycle. Operators of vehicles and motorcycles shall have a clear
and unobstructed view to the front and to both sides of their vehicles and
motorcycles and shall have a clear view to the rear of their vehicles and
motorcycles by mirror.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4513.23)
§ 438.23  WINDSHIELD REQUIRED; SIGN OR POSTER UPON WINDSHIELD; WINDSHIELD
WIPER.
   (a)   No person shall drive any motor vehicle on a street or highway in this
Municipality, other than a motorcycle or motorized bicycle, that is not
equipped with a windshield.
   (b)   (1)   No person shall drive any motor vehicle, other than a bus, with
any sign, poster, or other nontransparent material upon the front windshield,
sidewings, side, or rear windows of such vehicle other than a certificate or
other paper required to be displayed by law, except that there may be in the
lower left- hand or right-hand corner of the windshield a sign, poster, or
decal not to exceed four inches in height by six inches in width. No sign,
poster, or decal shall be displayed in the front windshield in such a manner as
to conceal the vehicle identification number for the motor vehicle when, in
accordance with Federal law, that number is located inside the vehicle
passenger compartment and so placed as to be readable through the vehicle
glazing without moving any part of the vehicle.
      (2)   Subsection (b)(1) of this section does not apply to a person who is
driving a passenger car with an electronic device, including an antenna,
electronic tolling or other transponder, camera, directional navigation device,
or other similar electronic device located in the front windshield if the
device meets both of the following:
         A.   It does not restrict the vehicle operator’s sight lines to the
road and highway signs and signals.
         B.   It does not conceal the vehicle identification number.
      (3)   Subsection (b)(1) of this section does not apply to a person who is
driving a commercial car with an electronic device, including an antenna,
electronic tolling or other transponder, camera, directional navigation device,
or other similar electronic device located in the front windshield if the
device meets both of the following:
         A.   It does not restrict the vehicle operator’s sight lines to the
road and highway signs and signals.
         B   It is mounted not more than six inches below the upper edge of the
windshield and is outside the area swept by the vehicle’s windshield wipers.
   (c)   The windshield on every motor vehicle shall be equipped with a device
for cleaning rain, snow, or other moisture from the windshield. The device
shall be maintained in good working order and so constructed as to be
controlled or operated by the operator of the vehicle.
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4513.24)
§ 438.235  TINTED GLASS; MATERIALS ON GLASS.
   (a)   No person shall operate, on any highway or other public or private
property open to the public for vehicular travel or parking, lease, or rent any
motor vehicle that is registered in this state unless the motor vehicle
conforms to the requirements concerning tinted glass and reflectorized material
of Ohio R.C. 4513.241 and of any applicable rule adopted under that section.
   (b)   No person shall install in or on any motor vehicle any glass or other
material that fails to conform to the requirements of Ohio R.C. 4513.241 or of
any rule adopted under that section.
   (c)   (1)   No used motor vehicle dealer or new motor vehicle dealer, as
defined in Ohio R.C. 4517.01, shall sell any motor vehicle that fails to
conform to the requirements of Ohio R.C. 4513.241 or of any rule adopted under
that section.
      (2)   No manufacturer, remanufacturer, or distributor, as defined in R.C.
§ 4517.01, shall provide to a motor vehicle dealer licensed under R.C. Chapter
4517 or to any other person, a motor vehicle that fails to conform to the
requirements of R.C. § 4513.241  or of any rule adopted under that section.
   (d)   No reflectorized materials shall be permitted upon or in any front
windshield, side windows, sidewings, or rear window.
   (e)   This section does not apply to the manufacturer’s tinting or glazing
of motor vehicle windows or windshields that is otherwise in compliance with or
permitted by Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard #205.
   (f)   With regard to any side window behind a driver’s seat or any rear
window other than any window on an emergency door, this subsection (b) does not
apply to any school bus used to transport a child with disabilities pursuant to
Ohio R.C. Chapter 3323, whom it is impossible or impractical to transport by
regular school bus in the course of regular route transportation provided by a
school district. As used in this subsection, “child with disabilities” has the
same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 3323.01.
   (g)   This section does not apply to any school bus that is to be sold and
operated outside the municipality.
   (h)   (1)   This section does not apply to a motor vehicle used by a law
enforcement agency under either of the following circumstances:
         A.   The vehicle does not have distinctive markings of a law
enforcement vehicle but is operated by or on behalf of the law enforcement
agency in an authorized investigation or other activity requiring that the
presence and identity of the vehicle occupants be undisclosed.
         B.   The vehicle primarily is used by the law enforcement canine unit
for transporting a police dog.
      (2)   As used in this division, “law enforcement agency” means a police
department, the office of a sheriff, the State Highway Patrol, a county
prosecuting attorney, or a federal, state, or local governmental body that
enforces criminal laws and that has employees who have a statutory power of
arrest.
(R.C. § 4513.241(C) - (J))
   (i)   (1)   Whoever violates division (a), (c)(2) or (d) of this section is
guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (c)(1) of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor if the dealer or the dealer’s agent knew of the nonconformity
at the time of sale.
      (3)   A.   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree, except that an organization may not be
convicted unless the act of installation was authorized by the board of
directors, trustees, partners, or by a high managerial officer acting on behalf
of the organization, and installation was performed by an employee of the
organization acting within the scope of the person’s employment.
         B.   In addition to any other penalty imposed under this section,
whoever violates division (b) of this section is liable in a civil action to
the owner of a motor vehicle on which was installed the nonconforming glass or
material for any damages incurred by that person as a result of the
installation of the nonconforming glass or material, costs of maintaining the
civil action, and attorney fees.
         C.   In addition to any other penalty imposed under this section, if
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation
of division (b) of this section and the offender is a motor vehicle repair
operator registered under R.C. Chapter 4775 or a motor vehicle dealer licensed
under R.C. Chapter 4517, whoever violates division (b) of this section is
subject to a registration or license suspension, as applicable, for a period of
not more than 180 days.
(R.C. § 4513.241(K))
Statutory reference:
   Administrative regulations, see O.A.C. Chapter 4501-41
§ 438.24  LIMITED LOAD EXTENSION ON LEFT SIDE OF PASSENGER VEHICLE.
   (a)   No passenger-type vehicle shall be operated on a highway with any load
carried on the vehicle which extends more than six inches beyond the line of
the fenders on the vehicle's left side.
(ORC 4513.30)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4513.99)
§ 438.25  MOTOR VEHICLE STOP LIGHTS.
   (a)   (1)   Every motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer, and pole trailer when
operated upon a highway shall be equipped with two or more stop lights, except
that passenger cars manufactured or assembled prior to January 1, 1967,
motorcycles, and motor-driven cycles shall be equipped with at least one stop
light. Stop lights shall be mounted on the rear of the vehicle, actuated upon
application of the service brake, and may be incorporated with other rear
lights. Such stop lights when actuated shall emit a red light visible from a
distance of 500 feet to the rear; provided that in the case of a train of
vehicles only the stop lights on the rearmost vehicle need be visible from the
distance specified.
      (2)   Such stop lights when actuated shall give a steady warning light to
the rear of a vehicle or train of vehicles to indicate the intention of the
operator to diminish the speed of or stop a vehicle or train of vehicles.
      (3)   When stop lights are used as required by this section, they shall
be constructed or installed so as to provide adequate and reliable illumination
and shall conform to the appropriate rules and regulations established under
Ohio R.C. 4513.19.
      (4)   Historical motor vehicles as defined in Ohio R.C. 4503.181, not
originally manufactured with stop lights, are not subject to this section.
(ORC 4513.071)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor on a
first offense; on a second offense within one year after the first offense, the
person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree; on each subsequent
offense within one year after the first offense, the person is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(ORC 4513.99)
§ 438.26  BUMPERS.
   (a)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   "Gross vehicle weight rating" means the manufacturer's gross
vehicle weight rating established for that vehicle.
      (2)   "Manufacturer" has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 4501.01.
      (3)   "Multipurpose passenger vehicle" means a motor vehicle with motive
power, except a motorcycle, designed to carry ten persons or less, that is
constructed either on a truck chassis or with special features for occasional
off-road operation.
      (4)   "Passenger car" means any motor vehicle with motive power, designed
for carrying ten persons or less, except a multipurpose passenger vehicle or
motorcycle.
      (5)   "Truck" means every motor vehicle, except trailers and
semitrailers, designed and used to carry property and having a gross vehicle
weight rating of 10,000 pounds or less.
   (b)   Rules adopted by the Director of Public Safety, in accordance with
Ohio R.C. Chapter 119, shall govern the maximum bumper height or, in the
absence of bumpers and in cases where bumper height have been lowered or
modified, the maximum height to the bottom of the frame rail of any passenger
car, multipurpose passenger vehicle or truck.
   (c)   No person shall operate upon a street or highway any passenger car,
multipurpose passenger vehicle or truck registered in this state that does not
conform to the requirements of this section or any applicable rule adopted
pursuant to Ohio R.C. 4513.021.
   (d)   No person shall modify any motor vehicle registered in this state in
such a manner as to cause the vehicle body or chassis to come in contact with
the ground, expose the fuel tank to damage from collision, or cause the wheels
to come in contact with the body under normal operation, and no person shall
disconnect any part of the original suspension system of the vehicle to defeat
the safe operation of that system.
   (e)   Nothing contained in this section or in the rules adopted pursuant to
Ohio R.C. 4513.021 shall be construed to prohibit either of the following:
      (1)   The installation upon a passenger car, multipurpose passenger
vehicle or truck registered in this state of heavy duty equipment, including
shock absorbers and overload springs.
      (2)   The operation on a street or highway of a passenger car,
multipurpose passenger vehicle, or truck registered in this state with normal
wear to the suspension system if the normal wear does not adversely affect the
control of the vehicle.
   (f)   This section and the rules adopted pursuant to Ohio R.C. 4513.021 do
not apply to any specially designed or modified passenger car, multipurpose
passenger vehicle, or truck when operated off a street or highway in races and
similar events.
   (g)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4513.021)
Statutory reference:
   Maximum height on bumpers, see O.A.C. Chapter 4501-43
§ 438.27  AIR CLEANER REQUIRED.
   No person shall operate upon any street, alley or other public place any
motor vehicle which is not equipped with a functioning air cleaner, except for
motor vehicles equipped with electronic fuel-injection engines.
§ 438.28  USE OF CHILD RESTRAINTS.
   (a)   When any child who is in either or both of the following categories is
being transported in a motor vehicle, other than a taxicab or public safety
vehicle as defined in Ohio R.C. 4511.01, that is required by the United States
Department of Transportation to be equipped with seat belts at the time of
manufacture or assembly, the operator of the motor vehicle shall have the child
properly secured in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions in a child
restraint system that meets Federal motor vehicle safety standards:
      (1)   A child who is less than four years of age;
      (2)   A child who weighs less than 40 pounds.
   (b)   When any child who is in either or both of the following categories is
being transported in a motor vehicle, other than a taxicab, that is owned,
leased, or otherwise under the control of a nursery school or day-care center,
the operator of the motor vehicle shall have the child properly secured in
accordance with the manufacturer's instructions in a child restraint system
that meets Federal motor vehicle safety standards:
      (1)   A child who is less than four years of age;
      (2)   A child who weighs less than 40 pounds.
   (c)   When any child who is less than eight years of age and less than four
feet nine inches in height, who is not required by subsection (a) or (b) of
this section to be secured in a child restraint system, is being transported in
a motor vehicle, other than a taxicab or public safety vehicle as defined in
Ohio R.C. 4511.01 or a vehicle that is regulated under Ohio R.C. 5104.015, that
is required by the United States Department of Transportation to be equipped
with seat belts at the time of manufacture or assembly, the operator of the
motor vehicle shall have the child properly secured in accordance with the
manufacturer’s instructions on a booster seat that meets federal motor vehicle
safety standards.
   (d)   When any child who is at least eight years of age but not older than
15 years of age, and who is not otherwise required by subsection (a), (b), or
(c) of this section to be secured in a child restraint system or booster seat,
is being transported in a motor vehicle, other than a taxicab or public safety
vehicle as defined in Ohio R.C. 4511.01, that is required by the United States
Department of Transportation to be equipped with seat belts at the time of
manufacture or assembly, the operator of the motor vehicle shall have the child
properly restrained either in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions
in a child restraint system that meets Federal motor vehicle safety standards
or in an occupant restraining device as defined in Ohio R.C. 4513.263.
   (e)   Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, no law
enforcement officer shall cause an operator of a motor vehicle being operated
on any street or highway to stop the motor vehicle for the sole purpose of
determining whether a violation of subsection (c) or (d) of this section has
been or is being committed or for the sole purpose of issuing a ticket,
citation, or summons for a violation of subsection (c) or (d) of this section
or causing the arrest of or commencing a prosecution of a person for a
violation of subsection (c) or (d) of this section, and absent another
violation of law, a law enforcement officer’s view of the interior or visual
inspection of a motor vehicle being operated on any street or highway may not
be used for the purpose of determining whether a violation of subsection (c) or
(d) of this section has been or is being committed.
   (f)   The Director of Public Safety shall adopt such rules as are necessary
to carry out this section.
   (g)   The failure of an operator of a motor vehicle to secure a child in a
child restraint system, a booster seat, or an occupant restraining device as
required in this section is not negligence imputable to the child, is not
admissible as evidence in any civil action involving the rights of the child
against any other person allegedly liable for injuries to the child, is not to
be used as a basis for a criminal prosecution of the operator of the motor
vehicle other than a prosecution for a violation of this section, and is not
admissible as evidence in any criminal action involving the operator of the
motor vehicle other than a prosecution for a violation of this section.
   (h)   This section does not apply when an emergency exists that threatens
the life of any person operating or occupying a motor vehicle that is being
used to transport a child who otherwise would be required to be restrained
under this section. This section does not apply to a person operating a motor
vehicle who has an affidavit signed by a physician licensed to practice in this
state under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4731 or a chiropractor licensed to practice in
this state under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4734 that states that the child who
otherwise would be required to be restrained under this section has a physical
impairment that makes use of a child restraint system, booster seat or an
occupant restraining device impossible or impractical, provided that the person
operating the vehicle has safely and appropriately restrained the child in
accordance with any recommendations of the physician or chiropractor as noted
on the affidavit.
   (i)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to require any person to
carry with the person the birth certificate of a child to prove the age of the
child, but the production of a valid birth certificate for a child showing that
the child was not of an age to which this section applies is a defense against
any ticket, citation or summons issued for violating this section.
   (j)   (1)   Whoever violates subsection (a), (b), (c), or (d) of this
section shall be punished as follows, provided that the failure of an operator
of a motor vehicle to secure more than one child in a child restraint system,
booster seat or occupant restraining device as required by this section that
occurred at the same time, on the same day and at the same location is deemed
to be a single violation of this section:
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in subsection (j)(1)B. of this
section, the offender is guilty of a minor misdemeanor and shall be fined not
less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than seventy-five dollars
($75.00).
         B.   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of subsection (a), (b), (c), or (d) of this section or of
a state law or municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent any of
those subsections, the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.
      (2)   All fines imposed pursuant to subsection (j)(1) of this section
shall be forwarded to the state Treasurer for deposit in the Child Highway
Safety Fund created by Ohio R.C. 4511.81(I).
(ORC 4511.81(A)-(H), (K), (L))
§ 438.285  USE OF OCCUPANT RESTRAINING DEVICES.
   (a)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      (1)   "Automobile" means any commercial tractor, passenger car,
commercial car, or truck that is required to be factory-equipped with an
occupant restraining device for the operator or any passenger by regulations
adopted by the United States Secretary of Transportation pursuant to the
"National Traffic and Motor Vehicle Safety Act of 1966", 80 Stat. 719, 15
U.S.C. 1392.
      (2)   "Commercial tractor", "passenger car", and "commercial car" have
the same meanings as in Ohio R.C. 4501.01.
      (3)   "Occupant restraining device" means a seat safety belt, shoulder
belt, harness, or other safety device for restraining a person who is an
operator of or passenger in an automobile and that satisfies the minimum
Federal vehicle safety standards established by the United States Department of
Transportation.
      (4)   "Passenger" means any person in an automobile, other than its
operator, who is occupying a seating position for which an occupant restraining
device is provided.
      (5)   "Tort action" means a civil action for damages for injury, death,
or loss to person or property. "Tort action" includes a product liability
claim, as defined in Ohio R.C. 2307.71, and as asbestos claim, as defined in
Ohio R.C. 2307.91, but does not include a civil action for damages for breach
of contract or another agreement between persons.
      (6)   "Vehicle" and "motor vehicle", as used in the definitions of the
terms set forth above, have the same meanings as in Ohio R.C. 4511.01.
   (b)   Prohibited acts. No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Operate an automobile on any street or highway unless he or she is
wearing all of the available elements of a properly adjusted occupant
restraining device, or operate a school bus that has an occupant restraining
device installed for use in its operator's seat unless he or she is wearing all
of the available elements of the device, as properly adjusted.
      (2)   Operate an automobile on any street or highway unless each
passenger in the automobile who is subject to the requirement set forth in
subsection (b)(3) of this section is wearing all of the available elements of a
properly adjusted occupant restraining device.
      (3)   Occupy, as a passenger, a seating position on the front seat of an
automobile being operated on any street or highway unless he or she is wearing
all of the available elements of a properly adjusted occupant restraining
device.
      (4)   Operate a taxicab on any street or highway unless all factory-
equipped occupant restraining devices in the taxicab are maintained in usable
form.
   (c)   Exceptions. Subsection (b)(3) of this section does not apply to a
person who is required by Ohio R.C. 4511.81 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance to be secured in a child restraint device or booster seat.
Subsection (b)(1) of this section does not apply to a person who is an employee
of the United States Postal Service or of a newspaper home delivery service,
during any period in which the person is engaged in the operation of an
automobile to deliver mail or newspapers to addressees. Subsections (b)(1) and
(b)(3) of this section do not apply to a person who has an affidavit signed by
a physician licensed to practice in this state under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4731 or
a chiropractor licensed to practice in this state under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4734
that states that the person has a physical impairment that makes use of an
occupant restraining device impossible or impractical.
   (d)   Officers not permitted to stop cars to determine violation.
Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, no law enforcement
officer shall cause an operator of an automobile being operated on any street
or highway to stop the automobile for the sole purpose of determining whether a
violation of subsection (b) of this section has been or is being committed or
for the sole purpose of issuing a ticket, citation, or summons for the
violation or for causing the arrest of or commencing a prosecution of a person
for the violation. No law enforcement officer shall view the interior or
visually inspect any automobile being operated on any street or highway for the
sole purpose of determining whether the violation has been or is being
committed.
   (e)   Use of fines for educational program. All fines collected for
violations of subsection (b) of this section shall be forwarded to the state
Treasurer for deposit in the funds as set forth in Ohio R.C. 4513.263(E).
   (f)   Limitations on evidence used for prosecution.
      (1)   Subject to subsection (f)(2) of this section, the failure of a
person to wear all of the available elements of a properly adjusted occupant
restraining device in violation of subsection (b)(1) or (b)(3) of this section
or the failure of a person to ensure that each minor who is a passenger of an
automobile being operated by that person is wearing all of the available
elements of a properly adjusted occupant restraining device in violation of
subsection (b)(2) of this section shall not be considered or used by the trier
of fact in a tort action as evidence of negligence or contributory negligence.
But, the trier of fact may determine based on evidence admitted consistent with
the Ohio Rules of Evidence that the failure contributed to the harm alleged in
the tort action and may diminish a recovery of compensatory damages that
represents non-economic loss, as defined in Ohio R.C. 2307.011, in a tort
action that could have been recovered but for the plaintiff's failure to wear
all of the available elements of a properly adjusted occupant restraining
device. Evidence of that failure shall not be used as a basis for a criminal
prosecution of the person other than a prosecution for a violation of this
section; and shall not be admissible as evidence in a criminal action involving
the person other than a prosecution for a violation of this section.
      (2)   If, at the time of an accident involving a passenger car equipped
with occupant restraining devices, any occupant of the passenger car who
sustained injury or death was not wearing an available occupant restraining
device, was not wearing all of the available elements of such a device, or was
not wearing such a device as properly adjusted, then, consistent with the Rules
of Evidence, the fact that the occupant was not wearing the available occupant
restraining device, was not wearing all of the available elements of such a
device, or was not wearing such a device as properly adjusted is admissible in
evidence in relation to any claim for relief in a tort action to the extent
that the claim for relief satisfies all of the following:
         A.   It seeks to recover damages for injury or death to the occupant;
         B.   The defendant in question is the manufacturer, designer,
distributor, or seller of the passenger car;
         C.   The claim for relief against the defendant in question is that
the injury or death sustained by the occupant was enhanced or aggravated by
some design defect in the passenger car or that the passenger car was not
crashworthy.
   (g)   Penalty.
      (1)   Whoever violates subsection (b)(1) of this section shall be fined
thirty dollars ($30.00).
      (2)   Whoever violates subsection (b)(2) of this section shall be subject
to the penalty set forth in §
408.02.
      (3)   Whoever violates subsection (b)(3) of this section shall be fined
twenty dollars ($20.00).
      (4)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates
subsection (b)(4) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If the
offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of
subsection (b)(4) of this section, whoever violates subsection (b)(4) of this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(ORC 4513.263)
§ 438.29  IGNITION INTERLOCK DEVICES.(Repealed)
Editor's note:
   Section
438.29 was repealed as part of the 2003 updating and revision of this Model
Ohio Municipal Code because substantially equivalent state law (Ohio R.C.
4511.83(A), (B), (E)) was repealed by the Ohio General Assembly.
§ 438.30  AIR BAGS.
   (a)   As used in this section:
      (1)   “Air bag.” Has the same meaning as in 49 C.F.R. § 579.4, as
amended.
      (2)   “Counterfeit air bag.” An air bag displaying a mark identical or
similar to the genuine mark of a motor vehicle manufacturer, without the
authorization of the motor vehicle manufacturer.
      (3)   “Nonfunctional air bag.” Any of the following:
         A.   A replacement air bag that has been previously deployed or
damaged;
         B.   A replacement air bag that has an electrical fault that is
detected by the air bag diagnostic system of a vehicle after the air bag is
installed;
         C.   A counterfeit air bag, air bag cover, or some other object that
is installed in a vehicle to deceive an owner or operator of the vehicle into
believing that a functional air bag has been installed.
   (b)   No person shall install or reinstall in any motor vehicle a
counterfeit or nonfunctional air bag or any object intended to fulfill the
function of an air bag other than an air bag that was designed in conformance
with or that is regulated by Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard Number 208
for the make, model, and model year of the vehicle, knowing that the object is
not in accordance with that standard.
   (c)   No person shall knowingly manufacture, import, sell, or offer for sale
any of the following:
      (1)   A counterfeit air bag;
      (2)   A nonfunctional air bag;
      (3)   Any other object that is intended to be installed in a motor
vehicle to fulfill the function of an air bag and that is not in conformance
with Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard Number 208 for the make, model, and
model year of the vehicle in which the object is intended to be installed.
   (d)   No person shall knowingly sell, install, or reinstall a device in a
motor vehicle that causes the diagnostic system of a vehicle to inaccurately
indicate that the vehicle is equipped with a functional air bag.
   (e)   (1)   Whoever violates division (b) or (d) of this section is guilty
of improper replacement of a motor vehicle air bag, a misdemeanor of the first
degree on a first offense. On each subsequent offense, or if the violation
results in serious physical harm to an individual, the person is guilty of a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   A violation of division (c) of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (3)   Each manufacture, importation, installation, reinstallation, sale,
or offer for sale in violation of this section shall constitute a separate and
distinct violation.
(R.C. § 4549.20)
§ 438.99  PENALTY.
Editor's note:
   See §§
408.01 and
408.02 for general Traffic Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 440:  COMMERCIAL AND HEAVY VEHICLES
Section
440.01   Load limits.
440.02   Maximum width, height and length.
440.03   Wheel protectors.
440.04   Vehicles transporting explosives.
440.05   Towing requirements; exception to size and weight restrictions.
440.06   Loads dropping or leaking; tracking mud; removal required.
440.07   Vehicles with spikes, lugs and chains.
440.08   Occupying travel trailer or manufactured home while in motion.
440.09   Route and load information.
440.10   Shifting load; loose loads.
440.11   Commercial motor vehicles prohibited on Worrell, Tibbits, Sperry,
Wisner, Woodhill, Hobart, Booth, Eagle, Garfield and Heath Roads and Forestdale
and Westwood Drives, and Joseph Street.
440.12   Chauffeured limousines.
440.99   Penalty.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Arrest notice of drivers - see Ohio R.C. 5577.14
   Bus stops and taxicab stands - see TRAF.
452.10
   Display of certificates of registration - see Ohio R.C. 4549.18
   Fatigued or ill drivers - see TRAF.
442.09
   Riding in cargo storage areas - see TRAF.
416.06
   See section histories for similar state law
   Truck loading zones - see TRAF.
452.09
§ 440.01  LOAD LIMITS.
   (a)   State routes.
      (1)   No person shall operate or move a vehicle or combination of
vehicles of a size or weight of vehicle or load exceeding the maximum specified
in Ohio R.C. Chapter 5577, or otherwise not in conformity with Ohio R.C.
Chapter 4513, inclusive, upon any state route within the Municipality, except
pursuant to special written permit issued by the Ohio Director of
Transportation. Every such permit shall be carried in the vehicle or
combination of vehicles to which it refers and shall be open to inspection by
any police officer.
      (2)   No holder of a permit issued by the Ohio Director of Transportation
shall be required to obtain any local permit or license or pay any local fee or
charge for movement on any state route within the municipality. However, no
person shall operate any such vehicle or combination of vehicles upon any
roadway within the municipality which is not a state route, except as may be
otherwise provided in any local ordinance or regulation or elsewhere in this
Traffic Code.
(Adopting Ordinance)
   (b)   Local streets.
      (1)   No person shall operate a vehicle exceeding a size as specified in
§
440.02, or exceeding a gross weight of 15 tons, upon any street in the
municipality other than state routes, except those local streets designated as
truck routes and marked as such by appropriate traffic signs, and except when
such operation is necessary to load or unload property, to go to or from the
usual place of storage of such vehicle or to perform any other legitimate
business or act other than passage through the municipality. Operators of
vehicles so deviating from either a state route or a designated truck route in
the municipality shall confine such deviation to that required in order to
accomplish the purpose of the departure.
      (2)   The 15-ton gross weight limit shall be reduced to seven and one-
half tons between January 1 and April 30 of each year.
(Ord. 96-O-43, passed 8-19-1996)
   (c)   Local permit and conditions. Upon application and for good cause, the
Police Chief may issue a local permit authorizing an applicant to move an
oversize or overweight vehicle or combination of vehicles upon local streets
and highways.
      (1)   No permittee shall be required to obtain a special permit from the
Ohio Director of Transportation for the movement of the vehicle or combination
of vehicles on streets or highways under local jurisdiction. However, the
approval of the Ohio Director of Transportation shall be required for movement
upon state routes as provided in subsection (a) of this section.
      (2)   The Police Chief may grant a permit for a single or round trip, or
for such period of time, not to exceed one year, as the Police Chief in his or
her discretion deems advisable, or for the duration of any construction
project. The Police Chief may limit or prescribe terms or conditions of
operation for such vehicle or combination of vehicles by designating the route,
hours, speed or such other restrictions as may be necessary for the
preservation of the public peace, property, health and safety. The Police Chief
may require the posting of bond or other security necessary to compensate for
any damage to a roadway or road structure.
      (3)   For each such permit, the Police Chief shall charge a fee as stated
in the Fee Schedule in § 236.07 of the City of Kirtland Codified Ordinances,
and for each hour of time or any part thereof spent by the Police Division in
supervising the movement of such vehicle, the applicant shall pay a fee as
stated in the Fee Schedule in § 236.07 of the City of Kirtland Codified
Ordinances.
      (4)   Except as provided in subsections (a) and (b) of this section,
streets and highways shall be posted with signs indicating "no thru trucks -
gross weight 15 tons" or words of similar import to apprise drivers of the
limitations imposed by this section. No driver shall disobey the instructions
indicated on any such sign.
      (5)   Violation of any of the limitations, terms or conditions of the
permit granted by the Police Chief shall be cause for immediate revocation or
suspension of such permit and denial of request for any future permit. Such
violation shall also subject the violator to the penalties prescribed by §§
408.01 and
408.02.
(Adopting Ordinance)
   (d)   Emergency conditions. When, in the opinion of the Director of Public
Service, an emergency has developed and operation of through truck traffic will
damage and destroy a local street, the Director shall cause such roadway to be
properly posted and no person shall operate  a truck which has a gross weight
that exceeds that of a three-quarter ton loaded pick-up truck, over and upon
such roadway.
(Ord. 77-O-44, passed 4-4-1977; Am. Ord. 17-O-20, passed 7-3-2017)
§ 440.02  MAXIMUM WIDTH, HEIGHT AND LENGTH.
   (a)   No vehicle shall be operated upon the public highways, streets,
bridges, and culverts within this municipality whose dimensions exceed those
specified in this section.
   (b)   No such vehicle shall have a width in excess of:
      (1)   104 inches for passenger bus type vehicles operated exclusively
within the municipality;
      (2)   102 inches, excluding such safety devices as are required by law,
for passenger bus type vehicles operated over freeways, and such other state
roads with minimum pavement widths of 22 feet, except those roads or portions
of roads over which operation of 102-inch buses is prohibited by order of the
Director of Transportation;
      (3)   132 inches for traction engines;
      (4)   102 inches for recreational vehicles, excluding safety devices and
retracted awnings and other appurtenances of six inches or less in width and
except that the Director may prohibit the operation of 102-inch recreational
vehicles on designated state highways or portions of highways;
      (5)   102 inches, including load, for all other vehicles, except that the
Director may prohibit the operation of 102-inch vehicles on such state highways
or portions of state highways as the Director designates.
   (c)   No such vehicle shall have a length in excess of:
      (1)   66 feet for passenger bus type vehicles and articulated passenger
bus type vehicles operated by a regional transit authority pursuant to Ohio
R.C. 306.30 to 306.54;
      (2)   45 feet for all other passenger bus type vehicles;
      (3)   53 feet for any semitrailer when operated in a commercial tractor-
semitrailer combination, with or without load, except that the Director may
prohibit the operation of any such commercial tractor-semitrailer combination
on such state highways or portions of state highways as the Director
designates;
      (4)   28.5 feet for any semitrailer or trailer when operated in a
commercial tractor- semitrailer-trailer or commercial tractor-semitrailer-
semitrailer combination, except that the Director may prohibit the operation of
any such commercial tractor-semitrailer-trailer or commercial tractor-
semitrailer-semitrailer combination on such state highways or portions of state
highways as the Director designates;
      (5)   A.   97 feet for drive-away saddlemount vehicle transporter
combinations and drive-away saddlemount with fullmount vehicle transporter
combinations when operated on any interstate, United States route, or state
route, including reasonable access travel on all other roadways for a distance
not to exceed one road mile from any interstate, United States route, or state
route, not to exceed three saddlemounted vehicles, but which may include one
fullmount;
         B.   75 feet for drive-away saddlemount vehicle transporter
combinations and drive-away saddlemount with fullmount vehicle transporter
combinations when operated on any roadway not designated as an interstate,
United States route, or state route, not to exceed three saddlemounted
vehicles, but which may include one fullmount.
      (6)   65 feet for any other combination of vehicles coupled together,
with or without load, except as provided in subsection (c)(3) and (4), and in
subsection (e) below;
      (7)   45 feet for recreational vehicles;
      (8)   50 feet for all other vehicles, except trailers and semitrailers,
with or without load.
   (d)   No such vehicle shall have a height in excess of 13.5 feet, with or
without load.
   (e)   An automobile transporter or boat transporter shall be allowed a
length of 65 feet, and a stinger-steered automobile transporter or stinger-
steered boat transporter shall be allowed a length of 75 feet, except that the
load thereon may extend no more than four feet beyond the rear of such vehicles
and may extend no more than three feet beyond the front of such vehicles, and
except further that the Director may prohibit the operation of a stinger-
steered automobile transporter, stinger-steered boat transporter, or a B-train
assembly on any state highway or portion of any state highway that the Director
designates.
   (f)   (1)   The widths prescribed in subsection (b) of this section shall
not include side mirrors, turn signal lamps, marker lamps, handholds for cab
entry and egress, flexible fender extensions, mud flaps, splash and spray
suppressant devices, and load-induced tire bulge.
      (2)   The widths prescribed in subsection (b)(5) of this section shall
not include automatic covering devices, tarp and tarp hardware, and tiedown
assemblies, provided these safety devices do not extend more than three inches
from either side of the vehicle.
      (3)   The lengths prescribed in subsections (c)(2) to (c)(7) shall not
include safety devices, bumpers attached to the front or rear of such bus or
combination, non-property carrying devices or components that do not extend
more than 24 inches beyond the rear of the vehicle and are needed for loading
or unloading, B-train assembly used between the first and second semitrailer of
a commercial tractor-semitrailer-semitrailer combination, energy conservation
devices as provided in any regulations adopted by the Secretary of the United
States Department of Transportation, or any noncargo-carrying refrigerator
equipment attached to the front of trailers and semitrailers. In special cases,
vehicles that dimensions exceed those prescribed by this section may operate in
accordance with rules adopted by the Director.
   (g)   (1)   This section does not apply to fire engines, fire trucks, or
other vehicles or apparatus belonging to the municipality or to the volunteer
fire department thereof or used by such department in the discharge of its
functions. This section does not apply to vehicles and pole trailers used in
the transportation of wooden and metal poles, nor to the transportation of
pipes or well-drilling equipment, nor to farm machinery and equipment.
      (2)   The owner or operator of any vehicle, machinery, or equipment not
specifically enumerated in this section but the dimensions of which exceed the
dimensions provided by this section, when operating the same on the highways
and streets of the Municipality, shall comply with the rules of the Director
governing such movement. Any person adversely affected shall have the same
right of appeal as provided in Ohio R.C. Chapter 119.
      (3)   This section does not require the Municipality or any railroad or
other private corporation to provide sufficient vertical clearance to permit
the operation of such vehicle, or to make any changes in or about existing
structures now crossing streets, roads, and other public thoroughfares.
   (h)   As used in this section, "recreational vehicle" has the same meaning
as in Ohio R.C. 4501.01.
(ORC 5577.05)
   (i)   No person shall violate any rule or regulation promulgated by the
Director of Transportation in accordance with Ohio R.C. 5577.05.
(ORC 5577.06)
   (j)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor on a
first offense; on a second or subsequent offense, such person is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(ORC 5577.99(C))
§ 440.03  WHEEL PROTECTORS.
   (a)   No person shall drive or operate, or cause to be driven or operated,
any commercial car, trailer, or semitrailer, used for the transportation of
goods or property, the gross weight of which, with load, exceeds three tons,
upon the public highways, streets, bridges, and culverts within the
Municipality, unless such vehicle is equipped with suitable metal protectors or
substantial flexible flaps on the rearmost wheels of such vehicle or
combination of vehicles to prevent, as far as practicable, the wheels from
throwing dirt, water, or other materials on the windshields of following
vehicles. Such protectors or flaps shall have a ground clearance of not more
than one-third of the distance from the center of the rearmost axle to the
center of the flaps under any conditions of loading of the vehicle, and they
shall be at least as wide as the tires they are protecting. If the vehicle is
so designed and constructed that such requirements are accomplished by means of
fenders, body construction, or other means of enclosure, then no such
protectors or flaps are required. Rear wheels not covered at the top by
fenders, bodies, or other parts of the vehicle shall be covered at the top by
protective means extending at least to the center line of the rearmost axle.
(ORC 5577.11)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not more than twenty-five
dollars ($25.00).
(ORC 5577.99(E))
§ 440.04  VEHICLES TRANSPORTING EXPLOSIVES.
   (a)   Any person operating any vehicle transporting explosives upon a
highway shall at all times comply with the following requirements:
      (1)   The vehicle shall be marked or placarded on each side and on the
rear with the word "EXPLOSIVES" in letters not less than eight inches high, or
there shall be displayed on the rear of such vehicle a red flag not less than
24 inches square marked with the word "DANGER" in white letters six inches
high, or shall be marked or placarded in accordance with § 177.823 of the
United States Department of Transportation regulations.
      (2)   The vehicle shall be equipped with not less than two fire
extinguishers, filled and ready for immediate use, and placed at convenient
points on such vehicle.
(ORC 4513.29)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4513.99)
§ 440.05  TOWING REQUIREMENTS; EXCEPTION TO SIZE AND WEIGHT RESTRICTIONS.
   (a)   (1)   When one vehicle is towing another vehicle, the drawbar or other
connection shall be of sufficient strength to pull all the weight towed
thereby, and the drawbar or other connection shall not exceed 15 feet from one
vehicle to the other, except the connection between any two vehicles
transporting poles, pipe, machinery, or other objects of structural nature
which cannot readily be dismembered.
      (2)   When one vehicle is towing another and the connection consists only
of a chain, rope, or cable, there shall be displayed upon such connection a
white flag or cloth not less than 12 inches square.
      (3)   In addition to such drawbar or other connection, each trailer and
each semitrailer which is not connected to a commercial tractor by means of a
fifth wheel shall be coupled with stay chains or cables to the vehicle by which
it is being drawn. These chains or cables shall be of sufficient size and
strength to prevent the towed vehicle's parting from the drawing vehicle in
case the drawbar or other connection should break or become disengaged. In case
of a loaded pole trailer, the connecting pole to the drawing vehicle shall be
coupled to the drawing vehicle with stay chains or cables of sufficient size
and strength to prevent the towed vehicle's parting from the drawing vehicle.
      (4)   Every trailer or semitrailer, except pole and cable trailers and
pole and cable dollies operated by a public utility as defined in Ohio R.C.
5727.01, shall be equipped with a coupling device which shall be so designed
and constructed that the trailer will follow substantially in the path of the
vehicle drawing it, without whipping or swerving from side to side. Vehicles
used to transport agricultural produce or agricultural production materials
between a local place of storage and supply and the farm, when drawn or towed
on a street or highway at a speed of 25 miles per hour or less, and vehicles
designed and used exclusively to transport a boat between a place of storage
and a marina, or in and around a marina, when drawn or towed on a street or
highway for a distance of no more than ten miles and at a speed of 25 miles per
hour or less, shall have a drawbar or other connection, including the hitch
mounted on the towing vehicle, which shall be of sufficient strength to pull
all the weight towed thereby. Only one such vehicle used to transport
agricultural produce or agricultural production materials as provided in this
section may be towed or drawn at one time except as follows:
         A.   An agricultural tractor may tow or draw more than one such
vehicle;
         B.   A pickup truck or straight truck designed by the manufacturer to
carry a load of not less than one-half ton and not more than two tons may tow
or draw not more than two such vehicles that are being used to transport
agricultural produce from the farm to a local place of storage. No vehicle
being so towed by such a pickup truck or straight truck shall be considered to
be a motor vehicle.
(ORC 4513.32)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4513.99)
   (c)   Exception to size and weight restrictions.
      (1)   The size and weight provisions of this chapter and Ohio R.C.
Chapter 5577 do not apply to a person who is engaged in the initial towing or
removal or a wrecked or disabled motor vehicle from the site of an emergency on
a public highway where the vehicle became wrecked or disabled to the nearest
site where the vehicle can be brought into conformance with the requirements of
this chapter and Ohio R.C. Chapter 5577 or to the nearest qualified repair
facility.
      (2)   Any subsequent towing of a wrecked or disabled vehicle shall comply
with the size and weight provisions of this chapter and Ohio R.C. Chapter 5577.
      (3)   No court shall impose any penalty prescribed in Ohio R.C. 5577.99,
or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, or the civil liability
established in Ohio R.C. 5577.12 upon a person towing or removing a vehicle in
the manner described in subsection (c)(1) of this section.
(ORC 5577.15)
§ 440.06  LOADS DROPPING OR LEAKING; TRACKING MUD; REMOVAL REQUIRED.
   (a)   (1)   No vehicle shall be driven or moved on any highway unless the
vehicle is so constructed, loaded, or covered as to prevent any of its load
from dropping, sifting, leaking, or otherwise escaping therefrom, except that
sand or other substances may be dropped for the purpose of securing traction,
or water or other substances may be sprinkled on a roadway in cleaning or
maintaining the roadway.
      (2)   Except for a farm vehicle used to transport agricultural produce or
agricultural production materials or a rubbish vehicle in the process of
acquiring its load, no vehicle loaded with garbage, swill, cans, bottles, waste
paper, ashes, refuse, trash, rubbish, waste, wire, paper, cartons, boxes,
glass, solid waste, or any other material of an unsanitary nature that is
susceptible to blowing or bouncing from a moving vehicle shall be driven or
moved on any highway unless the load is covered with a sufficient cover to
prevent the load or any part of the load from spilling onto the highway.
(ORC 4513.31)
   (b)   Whoever violates subsection (a) of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
(ORC 4513.99)
   (c)   No person shall operate any vehicle so as to track mud on any public
way or place.
   (d)   It shall be the duty of the driver of a vehicle who unlawfully drops
or deposits mud or permits the load or any portion thereof to be dropped or
deposited upon any public way or place to immediately remove the same or cause
it to be removed.
§ 440.07  VEHICLES WITH SPIKES, LUGS AND CHAINS.
   (a)   No person shall drive over the improved highways of this municipality
a traction engine or tractor with tires or wheels equipped with ice picks,
spuds, spikes, chains or other projections of any kind extending beyond the
cleats, and no person shall tow or in any way pull another vehicle over the
improved highways of this municipality which towed or pulled vehicle has tires
or wheels equipped with ice picks, spuds, spikes, chains or other projections
of any kind. "Traction engine" or "tractor", as used in this section, applies
to all self-propelling engines equipped with metal-tired wheels operated or
propelled by any form of engine, motor or mechanical power.
   (b)   This municipality shall not adopt, enforce, or maintain any ordinance,
rule or regulation contrary to or inconsistent with subsection (a), nor shall
this Municipality require any license tax upon or registration fee for any
traction engine, tractor, or trailer, or any permit or license to operate.
Operators of traction engines or tractors shall have the same rights upon the
public streets and highways as the drivers of any other vehicles, unless some
other safe and convenient way is provided, and no public road open to traffic
shall be closed to traction engines or tractors.
(ORC 5589.08)
   (c)   For the purposes of this section, "studded tire" means any tire
designed for use on a vehicle and equipped with metal studs or studs of wear-
resisting material that project beyond the tread of the traction surface of the
tire.
   (d)   (1)   Except as provided in division (d)(2) of this section, no person
shall operate any motor vehicle other than a public safety vehicle or school
bus that is equipped with studded tires on any street or highway in this
municipality, except during the period extending from the first day of November
of each year through the fifteenth day of April of the succeeding year.
      (2)   A person may operate a motor vehicle that is equipped with
retractable studded tires with the studs retracted at any time of the year, but
shall operate the motor vehicle with the studs extended only as provided in
division (b)(1) of this section.
   (e)   Division (d) of this section does not apply to the use of tire chains
when there is snow or ice on the streets or highways where such chains are
being used, or the immediate vicinity thereof.
(ORC 5589.081)
   (f)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 5589.99(B))
§ 440.08  OCCUPYING TRAVEL TRAILER OR MANUFACTURED HOME WHILE IN MOTION.
   (a)   No person shall occupy any travel trailer or manufactured or mobile
home while it is being used as a conveyance upon a street or highway.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(ORC 4511.701)
§ 440.09  ROUTE AND LOAD INFORMATION.
   Drivers of vehicles described in this chapter are required, upon request by
a police officer, to give full and true information as to the route they are
following and the name of the consignor and consignee and place of delivery or
removal and the location of any consignment being hauled or goods being
removed, and upon a designation by such police officer of a route to be
followed, shall immediately adopt and pursue such route.
§ 440.10  SHIFTING LOAD; LOOSE LOADS.
   (a)   In addition to any other lawful requirements of load distribution, no
person shall operate any vehicle upon a street or highway unless such vehicle
is so laden as to prevent its contents from shifting or otherwise unbalancing
the vehicle to such an extent as to interfere with the safe operation of the
same.
   (b)   No motor vehicle or trailer shall be driven unless the tailboard or
tailgate, tarpaulins, chains (except ground or contact chains), ropes, stakes,
poles, and the like, or any part of the load, are securely fastened to prevent
dangling, flapping, swinging or falling from the side, end or top of the load
or body. All projecting cargo shall be properly guarded by a red flag or cloth
or a red light or lantern as required by Ohio R.C. 4513.09, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
§ 440.11  COMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLES PROHIBITED ON WORRELL, TIBBITTS, SPERRY,
WISNER, WOODHILL, HOBART, BOOTH, EAGLE, GARFIELD AND HEATH ROADS AND FORESTDALE
AND WESTWOOD DRIVES, AND JOSEPH STREET.
   (a)   As used in this section, "commercial motor vehicle" means a motor
vehicle having motor power designed and/or used for the carrying or
transportation of goods, wares, merchandise, rubbish, freight, soil, gravel,
fill, vegetation, stumps and logs or products of any kind; or for carrying more
than seven persons; or licensed as a commercial motor vehicle; and/or used for
commercial purposes.
   (b)   No person shall drive a commercial motor vehicle upon Worrell Road
between U.S. Route 6 and the city corporation line.
   (c)   No person shall drive a commercial motor vehicle upon Tibbitts Road
between U.S. Route 6 and the city corporation line.
   (d)   No person shall drive a commercial motor vehicle upon Sperry Road
between U.S. Route 6 and Kirtland-Chardon Road.
   (e)   No person shall drive a commercial motor vehicle on Wisner and
Woodhill roads or Forestdale and Westwood Drives between Kirtland-Chardon Road
and Riverwood Way.
   (f)   No person shall drive a commercial motor vehicle upon Hobart Road
between U.S. Route 6 and the city corporation line.
   (g)   No person shall drive a commercial motor vehicle upon Booth Road
between Eagle Road and the city corporation line.
   (h)   No person shall drive a commercial motor vehicle upon Eagle Road
between Kirtland-Chardon Road and the city corporation line.
   (i)   No person shall drive a commercial motor vehicle upon Garfield Road
between Kirtland-Chardon Road and the city corporation line.
   (j)   No person shall drive a motor vehicle upon Heath Road between Euclid-
Chardon Road and the city corporation line.
   (k)   No person shall drive a commercial motor vehicle upon Joseph Street
between State Route 306 and the city corporation line.
   (l)   Nothing in subsections (b) through (k) hereof shall be construed to
prohibit the use of such roads by commercial motor vehicles if such vehicles
are receiving goods or making deliveries to properties located on such roads.
(Ord. 98-O-57, passed 9-9-1998; Am. Ord. 08-O-11, passed 4-21-2008)
§ 440.12  CHAUFFEURED LIMOUSINES.
   (a)   The operator of a chauffeured limousine shall accept passengers only
on the basis of prearranged contracts, as defined in Ohio R.C. 4501.01, and
shall not cruise in search of patronage unless the limousine is in compliance
with any statute or ordinance governing the operation of taxicabs or other
similar vehicles for hire.
   (b)   The operator of a chauffeured limousine may provide transportation to
passengers who arrange for the transportation through an intermediary,
including a digital dispatching service. Notwithstanding any law to the
contrary, when providing transportation arranged through an intermediary, the
operator of a chauffeured limousine may establish the fare and method of fare
calculation, so long as the method of fare calculation is provided to the
passenger upon request.
   (c)   No person shall advertise or hold himself or herself out as doing
business as a limousine service or livery service or other similar designation
unless each vehicle used by the person to provide the service is registered in
accordance with Ohio R.C. 4503.24 and is in compliance with Ohio R.C. 4509.80.
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(ORC 4511.85)
§ 440.99  PENALTY.
Editor's note:
   See §§
408.01 and
408.02 for general Traffic Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 442:  DRIVERS OF COMMERCIAL VEHICLES
Section
442.01   Definitions.
442.02   Use of actual gross weight in lieu of rating.
442.03   Licensing requirements.
442.04   Physical qualification to operate commercial motor vehicles.
442.05   Criminal offenses.
442.06   Application of 49 C.F.R. part 383.
442.07   Information required of prospective drivers by employers; unauthorized
driving.
442.08   Authority of peace officers re drunk driving.
442.09   Permitting or driving while fatigued or ill prohibited.
442.10   Driver's consecutive service and off-duty hours. (Repealed)
442.99   Penalty.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Arrest notice of drivers - see Ohio R.C. 5577.14
   Driving under the influence, generally - see TRAF.
434.01
   Hours of service of truck drivers - see Ohio R.C. 4921.30
   Load limits - see TRAF.
440.01
   Route and load information - see TRAF.
440.09
   See section histories for similar state law
   Stopping after accidents, generally - see TRAF.
436.11,
436.12
   Warning devices when disabled on freeways - see Ohio R.C. 4513.28
§ 442.01  DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this chapter:
   (a)   "Alcohol concentration." The concentration of alcohol in a person's
blood, breath or urine. When expressed as a percentage, it means grams of
alcohol per the following:
      (1)   100 milliliters of whole blood, blood serum, or blood plasma;
      (2)   210 liters of breath;
      (3)   100 milliliters of urine.
   (b)   "Commercial driver's license." A license issued in accordance with
Ohio R.C. Chapter 4506 that authorizes an individual to drive a commercial
motor vehicle.
   (c)   "Commercial driver's license information system." The information
system established pursuant to the requirements of the "Commercial Motor
Vehicle Safety Act of 1986", 100 Stat. 3207-171, 49 U.S.C. App. 2701.
   (d)   "Commercial motor vehicle." Except when used in Ohio R.C. 4506.25, any
motor vehicle designed or used to transport persons or property that meets any
of the following qualifications:
      (1)   Any combination of vehicles with a gross vehicle weight or combined
gross vehicle weight rating of 26,001 pounds or more, provided that the gross
vehicle weight or gross vehicle weight rating of the vehicle or vehicles being
towed is in excess of 10,000 pounds;
      (2)   Any single vehicle with a gross vehicle weight or gross vehicle
weight rating of 26,001 pounds or more;
      (3)   Any single vehicle or combination of vehicles that is not a Class A
or Class B vehicle, but is designed to transport 16 or more passengers
including the driver;
      (4)   Any school bus with a gross vehicle weight or gross vehicle weight
rating of less than 26,001 pounds that is designed to transport fewer than 16
passengers including the driver;
      (5)   Is transporting hazardous materials for which placarding is
required under 49 C.F.R. Part 172, Subpart F, as amended; or
      (6)   Any single vehicle or combination of vehicles that is designed to
be operated and to travel on a public street or highway and is considered by
the Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration to be a commercial motor
vehicle, including, but not limited to, a motorized crane, a vehicle whose
function is to pump cement, a rig for drilling wells, and a portable crane.
   (e)   "Controlled substance." Includes all of the following:
      (1)   Any substance classified as a controlled substance under the
"Controlled Substances Act", 80 Stat. 1242 (1970), 21 U.S.C. 802(6), as
amended;
      (2)   Any substance included in Schedules I through V of 21 C.F.R. Part
1308, as amended;
      (3)   Any drug of abuse.
   (f)   "Conviction." An unvacated adjudication of guilt or a determination
that a person has violated or failed to comply with the law in a court of
original jurisdiction or an authorized administrative tribunal, an unvacated
forfeiture of bail or collateral deposited to secure the person's appearance in
court, a plea of guilty or nolo contendere accepted by the court, the payment
of a fine or court cost, or violation of a condition of release without bail,
regardless of whether or not the penalty is rebated, suspended or probated.
   (g)   "Disqualification." Means any of the following:
      (1)   The suspension, revocation, or cancellation of a person's
privileges to operate a commercial motor vehicle;
      (2)   Any withdrawal of a person's privileges to operate a commercial
motor vehicle as the result of a violation of state or local law relating to
motor vehicle traffic control other than parking, vehicle weight, or vehicle
defect violations;
      (3)   A determination by the Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration
that a person is not qualified to operate a commercial motor vehicle under 49
C.F.R. 391.
   (h)   “Domiciled.” Having a true, fixed, principal, and permanent residence
to which an individual intends to return.
   (i)   “Downgrade.”  Any of the following, as applicable:
      (1)   A change in the commercial driver’s license, or commercial driver’s
license temporary instruction permit, holder’s self-certified status as
described in Ohio R.C. 4506.10(A)(2);
      (2)   A change to a lesser class of vehicle;
      (3)   Removal of commercial driver’s license privileges from the
individual’s driver’s license.
   (j)   “Drive.” To drive, operate or be in physical control of a motor
vehicle.
   (k)   “Driver.” Any person who drives, operates or is in physical control of
a commercial motor vehicle or is required to have a commercial driver’s
license.
   (l)   “Driver’s license.” A license issued by the Bureau of Motor Vehicles
that authorizes an individual to drive.
   (m)   “Drug of abuse.” Any controlled substance, dangerous drug as defined
in Ohio R.C. 4729.01, or over-the-counter medication that, when taken in
quantities exceeding the recommended dosage, can result in impairment of
judgment or reflexes.
   (n)   “Electronic device.”  Includes a cellular telephone, a personal
digital assistant, a pager, a computer, and any other device used to input,
write, send, receive, or read text.
   (o)   “Eligible unit of local government.” A village, township, or county
that has a population of not more than 3,000 persons according to the most
recent Federal census.
   (p)   “Employer.” Any person, including the Federal government, any state,
and a political subdivision of any state, that owns or leases a commercial
motor vehicle or assigns a person to drive such a motor vehicle.
   (q)   “Endorsement.” An authorization on a person’s commercial driver’s
license that is required to permit the person to operate a specified type of
commercial motor vehicle.
   (r)   “Farm truck.” A truck controlled and operated by a farmer for use in
the transportation to or from a farm, for a distance of not more than 150
miles, of products of the farm, including livestock and its products, poultry
and its products, floricultural and horticultural products, and in the
transportation to the farm, from a distance of not more than 150 miles, of
supplies for the farm, including tile, fence and every other thing or commodity
used in agricultural, floricultural, horticultural, livestock, and poultry
production, and livestock, poultry, and other animals and things used for
breeding, feeding, or other purposes connected with the operation of the farm,
when the truck is operated in accordance with this definition and is not used
in the operations of a motor carrier as defined in Ohio R.C. 4923.01.
   (s)   “Fatality.” The death of a person as the result of a motor vehicle
accident occurring not more than 365 days prior to the date of death.
   (t)   “Felony.” Any offense under Federal or state law that is punishable by
death or imprisonment for a term exceeding one year and includes any offense
specifically classified as a felony under the law of this state, regardless of
the penalty that may be imposed.
   (u)   “Foreign jurisdiction.” Any jurisdiction other than a state.
   (v)   “Gross vehicle weight rating.” The value specified by the manufacturer
as the maximum loaded weight of a single or a combination vehicle. The gross
vehicle weight rating of a combination vehicle is the gross vehicle weight
rating of the power unit plus the gross vehicle weight rating of each towed
unit.
   (w)   “Hazardous materials.” Any material that has been designated as
hazardous under 49 U.S.C. 5103 and is required to be placarded under 49 C.F.R.
Part 172, Subpart F or any quantity of a material listed as a select agent or
toxin in 42 C.F.R. Part 73, as amended.
   (x)   “Imminent hazard.” The existence of a condition that presents a
substantial likelihood that death, serious illness, severe personal injury, or
a substantial endangerment to health, property, or the environment may occur
before the reasonably foreseeable completion date of a formal proceeding begun
to lessen the risk of death, illness, injury, or endangerment.
   (y)   “Medical variance.”  One of the following received by a driver from
the Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration that allows the driver to be
issued a medical certificate:
      (1)   An exemption letter permitting operation of a commercial motor
vehicle under 49 C.F.R. part 381, subpart C or 49 C.F.R. § 391.64;
      (2)   A skill performance evaluation certificate permitting operation of
a commercial motor vehicle pursuant to 49 C.F.R. § 391.49.
   (z)   “Mobile telephone.” A mobile communication device that falls under or
uses any commercial mobile radio service as defined in 47 C.F.R. part 20,
except that mobile telephone does not include two-way or citizens band radio
services.
   (aa)   “Motor vehicle.” A vehicle, machine, tractor, trailer, or semitrailer
propelled or drawn by mechanical power used on highways, except that such term
does not include a vehicle, machine, tractor, trailer, or semitrailer operated
exclusively on a rail.
   (bb)   “Out-of-service order.” A declaration by an authorized enforcement
officer of a Federal, State, local, Canadian, or Mexican jurisdiction declaring
that the driver, commercial motor vehicle, or commercial motor carrier
operation is out of service as defined in 49 C.F.R. 390.5.
   (cc)   “Peace officer.” Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2935.01.
   (dd)   “Portable tank.” A liquid or gaseous packaging designed primarily to
be loaded on or temporarily attached to a vehicle and equipped with skids,
mountings, or accessories to facilitate handling of the tank by mechanical
means.
   (ee)   “Public safety vehicle.” Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 4511.01
(E)(1) and (E)(3).
   (ff)   “Recreational vehicle.” Includes every vehicle that is defined as a
recreational vehicle in Ohio R.C. 4501.01 and is used exclusively for purposes
other than engaging in business for profit.
   (gg)   “Residence.” Any person’s residence determined in accordance with
standards prescribed in the rules adopted by the Registrar.
   (hh)   “School bus.” Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 4511.01.
   (ii)   “Serious traffic violation.” Any of the following:
      (1)   A conviction arising from a single charge of operating a commercial
motor vehicle in violation of any provision of Ohio R.C. 4506.03;
      (2)   A.   Except as provided in subsection (2)B. of this definition, a
violation while operating a commercial motor vehicle of a law of this state, or
any municipal ordinance or county or township resolution, or any other
substantially similar law of another state or political subsubsection of
another state, prohibiting either of the following:
            1.   Texting while driving;
            2.   Using a handheld mobile telephone.
         B.   It is not a serious traffic violation if the person was texting
or using a handheld mobile telephone to contact law enforcement or other
emergency services.
      (3)   A conviction arising from the operation of any motor vehicle that
involves any of the following:
         A.   A single charge of any speed in excess of the posted speed limit
by 15 miles per hour or more;
         B.   Violations of Ohio R.C. 4511.20 or 4511.201 or any substantially
equivalent ordinance or resolution, or of any substantially equivalent law of
another state or political subdivision of another state;
         C.   Violation of a law of this state or an ordinance or resolution
relating to traffic control, other than a parking violation, or of any
substantially equivalent law of another state or political subdivision of
another state, that results in a fatal accident;
         D.   Violation of Ohio R.C. 4506.03 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance or county or township resolution, or of any substantially
equivalent law of another state or political subdivision of another state, that
involves the operation of a commercial motor vehicle without a valid commercial
driver’s license with the proper class or endorsement for the specific vehicle
group being operated or for the passengers or type of cargo being transported;
         E.   Violation of Ohio R.C. 4506.03 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance or county or township resolution, or of any substantially
equivalent law of another state or political subdivision of another state, that
involves the operation of a commercial motor vehicle without a valid commercial
driver’s license being in the person’s possession;
         F.   Violation of Ohio R.C. 4511.33 or 4511.34, or any municipal
ordinance or county or township resolution substantially equivalent to either
of those sections, or any substantially equivalent law of another state or
political subdivision of another state;
         G.   Violation of any other law of this state, any law of another
state, or any ordinance or resolution of a political subdivision of this state
or another state that meets both of the following requirements:
            1.   It relates to traffic control, other than a parking violation;
            2.   It is determined to be a serious traffic violation by the
United States Secretary of Transportation and is designated by the director as
such by rule.
   (jj)   “State.” A state of the United States and includes the District of
Columbia.
   (kk)   “Tank vehicle.” Any commercial motor vehicle that is designed to
transport any liquid or gaseous materials within a tank or tanks that are
either permanently or temporarily attached to the vehicle or its chassis and
have an individual rated capacity of more than 119 gallons and an aggregate
rated capacity of 1,000 gallons or more. The term does not include a commercial
motor vehicle transporting an empty storage container tank that is not designed
for transportation, has a rated capacity of 1,000 gallons or more, and is
temporarily attached to a flatbed trailer.
   (ll)   “Tester.” Means a person or entity acting pursuant to a valid
agreement entered into pursuant to Ohio R.C. 4506.09(B).
   (mm)   “Texting.”  Manually entering alphanumeric text into, or reading text
from, an electronic device. “Texting” includes short message service (SMS), e-
mail, instant messaging, a command or request to access a world wide web page,
pressing more than a single button to initiate or terminate a voice
communication using a mobile telephone, or engaging in any other form of
electronic text retrieval or entry, for present or future communication.
“Texting” does not include the following:
      (1)   Using voice commands to initiate, receive, or terminate a voice
communication using a mobile telephone;
      (2)   Inputting, selecting, or reading information on a global
positioning system or navigation system;
      (3)   Pressing a single button to initiate or terminate a voice
communication using a mobile telephone; or
      (4)   Using, for a purpose that is not otherwise prohibited by law, a
device capable of performing multiple functions, such as a fleet management
system, a dispatching device, a mobile telephone, a citizens band radio, or a
music player.
   (nn)   “Texting while driving.”  Texting while operating a commercial motor
vehicle, with the motor running, including while temporarily stationary because
of traffic, a traffic control device, or other momentary delays.  Texting while
driving does not include operating a commercial motor vehicle with or without
the motor running when the driver has moved the vehicle to the side of, or off,
a highway and is stopped in a location where the vehicle can safely remain
stationary.
   (oo)   “United States.” Means the 50 states and the District of Columbia.
   (pp)   “Upgrade.”  A change in the class of vehicles, endorsements, or self-
certified status as described in Ohio R.C. 4506.10(A)(1) that expands the
ability of a current commercial driver’s license holder to operate commercial
motor vehicles under this chapter or R.C. Chapter 4506.
   (qq)   “Use of a handheld mobile telephone.” Means:
      (1)   Using at least one hand to hold a mobile telephone to conduct a
voice communication;
      (2)   Dialing or answering a mobile telephone by pressing more than a
single button; or
      (3)   Reaching for a mobile telephone in a manner that requires a driver
to maneuver so that the driver is no longer in a seated driving position, or
restrained by a seat belt that is installed in accordance with 49 C.F.R. §
393.93 and adjusted in accordance with the vehicle manufacturer’s instructions.
   (rr)   “Vehicle.” Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 4511.01.
(ORC 4506.01)
§ 442.02  USE OF ACTUAL GROSS WEIGHT IN LIEU OF RATING.
   For purposes of this chapter, the actual gross weight of a vehicle or
combination of vehicles may be used in lieu of a gross vehicle weight rating to
determine whether a vehicle or combination of vehicles qualifies as a
commercial motor vehicle if the gross vehicle weight rating specified by the
manufacturer for the vehicle of combination of vehicles is not determinable, or
if the manufacturer of the vehicle has not specified a gross vehicle weight
rating.
(ORC 4506.011)
Editor's note:
   This section replaced the old "Exclusions" section due to the state law
reference in the prior section having been replaced in 2006.
§ 442.03  LICENSING REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Drive a commercial motor vehicle while having in the person's
possession or otherwise under the person's control more than one valid driver's
license issued by this state, any other state, or by a foreign jurisdiction;
      (2)   Drive a commercial motor vehicle on a highway in this municipality
in violation of an out-of-service order while the person's driving privilege is
suspended, revoked, or cancelled, or while the person is subject to
disqualification;
      (3)   Drive a motor vehicle on a highway in the municipality under the
authority of a commercial driver's license issued by another state or a foreign
jurisdiction, after having been a resident of this state for 30 days or longer;
      (4)   Knowingly give false information in any application or
certification required by Ohio R.C. 4506.07.
   (b)   The municipality shall give every conviction occurring out of this
state and notice of which was received by the state Department of Public Safety
after December 31, 1989, full faith and credit and treat it for sanctioning
purposes under this chapter as though the conviction had occurred in this
state.
(ORC 4506.04(A), (B))
   (c)   No person shall drive any commercial motor vehicle for which an
endorsement is required under Ohio R.C. 4506.12 unless the proper endorsement
appears on the person’s commercial driver’s license or commercial driver’s
license temporary instruction permit. No person shall drive a commercial motor
vehicle in violation of a restriction established under Ohio R.C. 4506.12 that
appears on the person’s commercial driver’s license or commercial driver’s
license temporary instruction permit.
(ORC 4506.12(I))
   (d)   (1)   Whoever violates subsection (a)(1), (2) or (3) of this section
is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (2)   Whoever violates subsection (a)(4) of this section is guilty of
falsification, a misdemeanor of the first degree. In addition, the provisions
of Ohio R.C. 4507.19 apply.
(ORC 4506.04(C))
      (3)   A.   Whoever violates subsection (c) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
         B.   The offenses established under subsection (c) of this section are
strict liability offenses and Ohio R.C. 2901.20 does not apply. The designation
of these offenses as strict liability offenses shall not be construed to imply
that any other offense for which there is no specified degree of culpability,
whether in this section or another section of this code or the Ohio Revised
Code, is not a strict liability offense.
(ORC 4506.12(J))
§ 442.04  PHYSICAL QUALIFICATION TO OPERATE COMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLES.
   (a)   No person who holds a valid commercial driver’s license shall drive a
commercial motor vehicle unless the person is physically qualified to do so.
      (1)   Any person applying for a commercial driver’s license or commercial
driver’s license temporary instruction permit, the renewal or upgrade of a
commercial driver’s license or commercial driver’s license temporary
instruction permit, or the transfer of a commercial driver’s license from out
of state shall self-certify to the Registrar for purposes of 49 C.F.R. § 383.71
one of the following in regard to the applicant’s operation of a commercial
motor vehicle, as applicable:
         A.   1.   If the applicant operates or expects to operate a commercial
motor vehicle in interstate or foreign commerce and is subject to and meets the
requirements under 49 C.F.R. part 391, the applicant shall self-certify that
the applicant is non-excepted interstate and shall provide the Registrar with
the original or a copy of a medical examiner’s certificate and each
subsequently issued medical examiner’s certificate prepared by a qualified
medical examiner to maintain a medically certified status on the applicant’s
commercial driver licensing system driver record;
            2.   If the applicant operates or expects to operate a commercial
motor vehicle in interstate commerce, but engages in transportation or
operations excepted under 49 C.F.R. §§ 390.3(f), 391.2, 391.68, or 398.3 from
all or parts of the qualification requirements of 49 C.F.R. part 391, the
applicant shall self-certify that the applicant is excepted interstate and is
not required to obtain a medical examiner’s certificate;
         B.   1.   If the applicant operates only in intrastate commerce and is
subject to state driver qualification requirements, the applicant shall self-
certify that the applicant is non-excepted intrastate;
            2.   If the applicant operates only in intrastate commerce and is
excepted from all or parts of the state driver qualification requirements, the
applicant shall self-certify that the applicant is excepted intrastate.
      (2)   Notwithstanding the expiration date on a person’s commercial
driver’s license or commercial driver’s license temporary instruction permit,
every commercial driver’s license or commercial driver’s license temporary
instruction permit holder shall provide the Registrar with the certification
required by this section on or after January 30, 2012, but prior to January 30,
2014.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(ORC 4506.10(A), (E))
§ 442.05  CRIMINAL OFFENSES.
   (a)   No person who holds a commercial driver’s license or commercial
driver’s license temporary instruction permit or who operates a motor vehicle
for which a commercial driver’s license or permit is required shall do any of
the following:
      (1)   Drive a commercial motor vehicle while having a measurable or
detectable amount of alcohol or of a controlled substance in the person's
blood, breath, or urine;
      (2)   Drive a commercial motor vehicle while having an alcohol
concentration of 0.04% or more by whole blood or breath;
      (3)   Drive a commercial motor vehicle while having an alcohol
concentration of .048% or more by blood serum or blood plasma;
      (4)   Drive a commercial motor vehicle while having an alcohol
concentration of .056% or more by urine;
      (5)   Drive a motor vehicle while under the influence of a controlled
substance;
      (6)   Drive a motor vehicle in violation of Ohio R.C. 4511.19 or a
municipal O.V.I. ordinance as defined in Ohio R.C. 4511.181;
      (7)   Use a vehicle in the commission of a felony;
      (8)   Refuse to submit to a test under Ohio R.C. 4506.17 or Ohio R.C.
4511.191, or any substantially similar municipal ordinance;
      (9)   Operate a commercial motor vehicle while the person’s commercial
driver’s license or permit or other commercial driving privileges are revoked,
suspended, cancelled or disqualified;
      (10)   Cause a fatality through the negligent operation of a commercial
motor vehicle, including but not limited to the offenses of aggravated
vehicular homicide, vehicular homicide and vehicular manslaughter;
      (11)   Fail to stop after an accident in violation of Ohio R.C. 4549.02
to 4549.03, or any substantially similar municipal ordinance;
      (12)   Drive a commercial motor vehicle in violation of any provision of
Ohio R.C. 4511.61 to 4511.63 or any federal or local law or ordinance
pertaining to railroad-highway grade crossings;
      (13)   Use a motor vehicle in the commission of a felony involving the
manufacture, distribution, or dispensing of a controlled substance as defined
in Ohio R.C. 3719.01 or the possession with intent to manufacture, distribute,
or dispense a controlled substance.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(ORC 4506.15)
Statutory reference:
   Alcohol or controlled substance testing, disqualification of drivers, see
Ohio R.C. 4506.17
   Disqualification of drivers for violations, see Ohio R.C. 4506.16
§ 442.06  APPLICATION OF 49 C.F.R. PART 383.
   (a)   The provisions of 49 C.F.R. Part 383, Subpart C (Notification
Requirements and Employer Responsibilities), as amended, shall apply to all
commercial drivers or persons who apply for employment as commercial drivers.
No person shall fail to make a report to the person's employer as required by
this section.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(ORC 4506.19)
§ 442.07  INFORMATION REQUIRED OF PROSPECTIVE DRIVERS BY EMPLOYERS;
UNAUTHORIZED DRIVING.
   (a)   Each employer shall require every applicant for employment as a driver
of a commercial vehicle to provide the applicant's employment history for the
10 years preceding the date the employment application is submitted to the
prospective employer. The following information shall be submitted:
      (1)   A list of the names and addresses of the applicant's previous
employers for which the applicant was the operator of a commercial motor
vehicle;
      (2)   The dates the applicant was employed by these employers;
      (3)   The reason for leaving each of these employers.
   (b)   No employer shall knowingly permit or authorize any driver employed by
the employer to drive a commercial motor vehicle during any period in which any
of the following apply:
      (1)   The driver's commercial driver's license is suspended, revoked, or
cancelled by any state or a foreign jurisdiction;
      (2)   The driver has lost the privilege to drive, or currently is
disqualified from driving, a commercial motor vehicle in any state or foreign
jurisdiction;
      (3)   The driver, the commercial motor vehicle the driver is driving, or
the motor carrier operation is subject to an out-of-service order in any state
or a foreign jurisdiction;
      (4)   The driver has more than one driver's license.
   (c)   No employer shall knowingly permit or authorize a driver to operate a
commercial motor vehicle in violation of Ohio R.C. 4506.15.
   (d)   No employer shall knowingly permit or authorize a driver to operate a
commercial motor vehicle if the driver does not hold a valid, current
commercial driver’s license or commercial driver’s license temporary
instruction permit bearing the proper class or endorsements for the vehicle. No
employer shall knowingly permit or authorize a driver to operate a commercial
motor vehicle in violation of the restrictions on the driver’s commercial
driver’s license or commercial driver’s license temporary instruction permit.
   (e)   Whoever violates subsection (a), (b) or (d) of this section is guilty
of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
   (f)   Whoever violates subsection (c) of this section is guilty of a felony
to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(ORC 4506.20)
§ 442.08  AUTHORITY OF PEACE OFFICERS RE DRUNK DRIVING.
   (a)   Within the jurisdictional limits of the appointing authority, any
peace officer shall stop and detain any person found violating Ohio R.C.
4506.15, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, without obtaining
a warrant. When there is reasonable ground to believe that a violation of Ohio
R.C. 4506.15, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, has been
committed and a test or tests of the person's whole blood, blood plasma or
blood serum, breath or urine is necessary, the peace officer shall take the
person to an appropriate place for testing. If a person refuses to submit to a
test after being warned as provided in Ohio R.C. 4506.17(C), or submits to a
test that discloses the presence of a controlled substance or an alcohol
concentration of 0.04% or more by whole blood or breath, an alcohol
concentration of .048% or more by blood serum or blood plasma, or an alcohol
concentration of .056% or more by urine, the peace officer shall require that
the person immediately surrender the person's commercial driver's license to
the peace officer.
   (b)   As used in this section, "jurisdictional limits" means the limits
within which a peace officer may arrest and detain a person without a warrant
under Ohio R.C. 2935.03, except that the Superintendent and the troopers of the
state Highway Patrol may stop and detain, without warrant, any person who, in
the presence of the Superintendent or any trooper, is engaged in a violation of
any of the provisions of this subchapter or Ohio R.C. Chapter 4506.
(ORC 4506.23)
§ 442.09  PERMITTING OR DRIVING WHILE FATIGUED OR ILL PROHIBITED.
   (a)   No person shall drive a commercial motor vehicle, as defined in Ohio
R.C. 4506.01, or a commercial car or commercial tractor, as defined in Ohio
R.C. 4501.01, while the person's ability or alertness is so impaired by
fatigue, illness, or other causes that it is unsafe for the person to drive
such vehicle. No driver shall use any drug which would adversely affect the
driver's ability or alertness.
   (b)   No owner, as defined in Ohio R.C. 4501.01, of a commercial motor
vehicle, commercial car or commercial tractor, or a person employing or
otherwise directing the driver of such vehicle, shall require or knowingly
permit a driver in any such condition described in subsection (a) of this
section to drive such vehicle upon any street or highway.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If the offender previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to one or more violations of this section or
Ohio R.C. 4511.79, or Ohio R.C. 4511.63, 4511.76, 4511.761, 4511.762, 4511.764,
or 4511.77 or a municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to any of
those sections, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree.
(ORC 4511.79)
§ 442.10  DRIVER'S CONSECUTIVE SERVICE AND OFF-DUTY HOURS. (Repealed)
Editor's note:
   Section
442.10 was repealed as part of the 1992 updating and revision of these Codified
Ordinances because substantially identical state law (ORC 4511.80) was repealed
by the General Assembly by Am. Sub. S.B. No. 382, effective December 31, 1990.
§ 442.99  PENALTY.
Editor's note:
   See §§
408.01 and
408.02 for general Traffic Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 444:  OFFENSES RELATING TO THEFT AND FRAUD
Section
444.01   Police may remove ignition key.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Criminal damaging or endangering - see GEN. OFF.
642.10
   Criminal mischief (tampering) - see GEN. OFF.
642.11
   Receiving stolen property - see GEN. OFF.
642.22
   See section histories for similar state law
   Theft - see GEN. OFF.
642.02,
642.03
   Unattended vehicles; duty to lock ignition, remove key, set brake, etc. -
see TRAF.
452.06
   Unauthorized use of a vehicle; vehicle trespass - see GEN. OFF.
642.04
§ 444.01  POLICE MAY REMOVE IGNITION KEY.
   A law enforcement officer may remove the ignition key left in the ignition
switch of an unlocked and unattended motor vehicle parked on a street or
highway. The officer removing the key shall place notification upon the vehicle
detailing his or her name and badge number, the place where the key may be
reclaimed, and the procedure for reclaiming the key. The key shall be returned
to the owner of the motor vehicle upon presentation of proof of ownership.
(ORC 4549.05)
CHAPTER 446:  LAKELAND COMMUNITY COLLEGE
Section
446.01   Parking regulations.
446.02   Traffic regulations.
446.03   Additional regulations.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Accidents - see TRAF.
436.11et seq.
   Bicycles and motorcycles - see TRAF.
Ch. 474
   Compliance with lawful order of police officer; fleeing - see TRAF.
404.01
   Emergency and public safety vehicles - see TRAF.
416.08,
432.18,
432.19,
432.25,
434.06
   Parking generally - see TRAF.
Ch. 452
   Reckless operation - see TRAF.
434.02
   Resisting an enforcing official - see TRAF.
404.02
   Speed - see TRAF.
434.03
   Traffic control devices - see TRAF.
Ch. 414
§ 446.01  PARKING REGULATIONS.
   (a)   Students shall park in designated student parking areas only.
   (b)   No vehicle shall be parked outside of a designated parking lot or
posted parking area.
   (c)   No vehicle shall be left anywhere on campus unattended and with the
engine running.
(Ord. 71-01-05, passed 10-11-1971)
§ 446.02  TRAFFIC REGULATIONS.
   (a)   Police officers. No person shall purposely or knowingly fail or refuse
to comply with any lawful order or direction of any officer with authority to
direct, control or regulate traffic and parking.
(Ord. 71-01-05, passed 10-11-1971)
   (b)   Emergency and public safety vehicles. The driver of a vehicle shall
yield the right of way to an emergency or public safety vehicle by moving to
the side of the road and remaining there until such emergency or public safety
vehicle has passed.
(Adopting Ordinance) 
   (c)   Traffic signs, signals and markings. The Safety-Service Department of
the Lakeland Community College shall place and maintain traffic control devices
in compliance with this Traffic Code and with state law as it deems necessary
for the safe regulation and orderly movement of traffic.
      (1)   No person shall fail or refuse to comply with any official traffic
control device, sign or signal.
      (2)   No person shall alter, deface, injure, knock down or remove any
such official traffic control device, sign or signal.
   (d)   Speed restrictions. No person shall drive a vehicle at a speed greater
than is reasonable and proper under the actual and potential hazards then
existing. No person shall operate a motor vehicle at a speed greater than that
which will allow him or her to bring such vehicle to a stop within the assured
clear distance ahead.
      (1)   On campus streets, a speed in excess of 30 miles per hour is prima-
facie unreasonable and is prohibited.
      (2)   In campus parking lots, a speed in excess of 15 miles per hour is
prima-facie unreasonable and is prohibited.
   (e)   Reckless operation. No person shall operate a motor vehicle in any
manner so as to endanger life or property.
   (f)   Accidents. The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting
in the injury or death of any person or damage to any property of another shall
immediately stop such vehicle at the scene of such accident and remain there
until he or she has complied with the following requirements: 
      (1)   He or she shall render such aid as is possible to any person
injured, including arranging for the transport of such injured person to a
hospital; 
      (2)   He or she shall give his or her name, address and the
identification number of his or her vehicle and, upon request, exhibit his or
her driver's license to an officer of the Safety-Service Department of the
College, the Police Division of the city and/or any other person involved in
the accident; and
      (3)   He or she shall immediately notify the Safety-Service Department of
the College and file an accident report within 24 hours with such Department,
which Department shall forward a copy of such report to the Police Division of
the city.
(Ord. 71-01-05, passed 10-11-1971)
§ 446.03  ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS.
   (a)   The parking and traffic regulations established in this chapter shall
apply to motorcycles, motor bikes and motor scooters in the same manner as they
apply to other motor vehicles.
   (b)   No such vehicle shall be operated on any sidewalk, walkway, lawn or
other area not open to all vehicles.
   (c)   Every operator and passenger on any such vehicle shall wear an
approved safety helmet while the vehicle is in motion.
(Ord. 71-01-05, passed 10-11-1971)
CHAPTER 448:  THE HOLDEN ARBORETUM
Section
448.01   Enforcement; application of chapter.
448.02   Traffic regulations.
448.03   Motorized vehicles; operation on paths; etc.; snowmobiles.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Accidents - see TRAF.
436.11et seq.
   Compliance with lawful order of police officer; fleeing - see GEN. OFF.
606.165
   Park and Recreation Commission - see ADM.
Ch. 274
   Reckless operation - see TRAF.
434.02
   Speed - see TRAF.
434.03
§ 448.01  ENFORCEMENT; APPLICATION OF CHAPTER.
   This chapter may be enforced by any police officer of the city or other
person authorized by the city, but only upon designated parking lots, posted
parking areas or traveled roadway open to the public within the Arboretum.
However, §
448.03(b) and (c) may be enforced on any property within the Arboretum.
(Ord. 90-O-81, passed 12-3-1990)
§ 448.02  TRAFFIC REGULATIONS.
   (a)   Compliance with police officers. No person shall purposely or
knowingly fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of any
officer with authority under this chapter to direct, control or regulate
traffic.
   (b)   Right-of-way of emergency and public safety vehicles. The driver of a
vehicle shall yield the right-of-way to an emergency or public safety vehicle
by moving to the side of the road and remaining there until such emergency or
public safety vehicle has passed.
   (c)   Traffic signs, signals and markings. The Arboretum shall place and
maintain such traffic control signs, signals and markings as it deems necessary
for the safe regulation and orderly movement of traffic. All traffic control
devices shall conform to standards established in the Ohio Manual of Uniform
Traffic Control Devices. All traffic control signs, signals and markings placed
by the Arboretum shall be approved by the Chief of Police.
      (1)   No person shall fail or refuse to comply with any such traffic
control sign, signal or marking.
      (2)   No person shall alter, deface, injure, knock down or remove any
such traffic control sign, signal or marking.
   (d)   Speed restrictions. No person shall drive a motor vehicle over any
road or drive within the Arboretum at a speed greater than the posted speed
limit, or at a greater speed than will permit him or her to bring it to a stop
within the assured clear distance ahead.
   (e)   Reckless operation. No person shall operate a motor vehicle in any
manner so as to endanger life or property.
   (f)   Accidents. The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting
in the injury or death of any person or damage to any property of another shall
immediately stop such vehicle at the scene of such accident and remain there
until he or she has complied with the following requirements:
      (1)   He or she shall render such aid as is possible to any person
injured, including arranging for the transport of such injured person to a
hospital, if necessary;
      (2)   A.   He or she shall, upon request, give his or her name, address
and the identification number of his or her vehicle, and exhibit his or her
driver's license to a member of the Arboretum security force, a member of the
Police Division of the city, and any other person involved in the accident.
         B.   Within 24 hours of such accident, the driver of any such vehicle
shall file an accident report with the Executive Director of the Arboretum. The
Executive Director of the Arboretum shall forward a copy of such report to the
Police Division of the city.
   (g)   Mufflers. Every motor vehicle with an internal combustion engine
shall, at all times, be equipped with a muffler in good working order and in
constant operation, and no person shall use a muffler cutout, bypass or similar
device upon a motor vehicle in the Arboretum.
(Ord. 90-O-81, passed 12-3-1990)
§ 448.03  MOTORIZED VEHICLES; OPERATION ON PATHS, ETC.; SNOWMOBILES.
   (a)   The traffic regulations established in this chapter shall apply to
motorcycles, motor bikes, motor scooters, and any like or similar motorized
vehicle, in the same manner as they apply to other motor vehicles.
   (b)   No motor vehicle shall be operated on any path, walkway, lawn or other
area not open to all vehicles.
   (c)   No snowmobiles may be operated on any property within the Arboretum,
except for snowmobiles owned by the Arboretum and which are being operated by
an Arboretum employee or other authorized Arboretum representative.
(Ord. 90-O-81, passed 12-3-1990)
TITLE EIGHT - PARKING
CHAPTER 452:  PARKING GENERALLY
Section
452.01   Prohibition against parking on streets or highways.
452.02   Police may remove illegally parked vehicle.
452.03   Prohibited standing or parking places.
452.04   Manner of parallel and angle parking; handicapped persons.
452.05   Willfully leaving vehicles on private or public property.
452.055   Parking prohibitions on private property; private tow-away zones.
452.06   Unattended vehicles; duty to lock ignition, remove key, set brake,
etc.
452.07   Opening doors on side available to traffic.
452.08   Selling, washing or repairing vehicle upon roadway.
452.09   Truck loading zones.
452.10   Bus stops and taxicab stands.
452.11   Parking in alleys and narrow streets; exceptions.
452.12   Registered owner prima facie liable for unlawful parking.
452.13   Overnight parking.
452.14   Waiver.
452.15   Authority of Director of Public Safety.
452.16   Snow emergency parking regulations.
452.99   Penalty.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Impounding; redemption - see TRAF.
404.05
   Lights on parked or stopped vehicles - see TRAF.
438.09
   Parking defined - see TRAF.
402.23
   Parking near stopped fire apparatus - see TRAF.
432.25
   Parking of bicycles; locks - see TRAF.
474.08
   Police may remove ignition key from unattended vehicle - see TRAF.
444.01
   See section histories for similar state law
   Stop defined - see TRAF.
402.41
   Stopping and standing defined - see TRAF.
402.43
   Storage of junk vehicles - see GEN. OFF.
660.07
§ 452.01  PROHIBITION AGAINST PARKING ON STREETS OR HIGHWAYS.
   (a)   No person shall stop, park, or leave standing any vehicle, whether
attended or unattended, upon the paved or main traveled part of any street or
highway if it is practicable to stop, park, or so leave such vehicle off the
paved or main traveled part of the street or highway. In every event a clear
and unobstructed portion of the paved surface or main traveled portion of the
street or highway opposite such standing vehicle shall be left for the free
passage of other vehicles, and a clear view of such stopped vehicle shall be
available from a distance of 200 feet in each direction upon such highway.
   (b)   This section does not apply to the driver of any vehicle which is
disabled while on a paved or improved or main traveled portion of he highway in
such a manner and to the extent that it is impossible to avoid stopping and
temporarily leaving the disabled vehicle in such position.
(Ord. 3-O-37, passed 7-7-2003)
§ 452.02  POLICE MAY REMOVE ILLEGALLY PARKED VEHICLE.
   (a)   Whenever any police officer finds a vehicle standing upon a highway in
violation of Ohio R.C. 4511.66 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, such officer may move such vehicle, or require the driver or other
person in charge of the vehicle to move the same, to a position off the paved
or improved or main traveled part of such highway.
   (b)   Whenever any police officer finds a vehicle unattended upon any
highway, bridge, or causeway, or in any tunnel, where such vehicles constitutes
an obstruction to traffic, such officer may provide for the removal of such
vehicle to the nearest garage or other place of safety.
(ORC 4511.67)
§ 452.03  PROHIBITED STANDING OR PARKING PLACES.
   No person shall stand or park a vehicle, except when necessary to avoid
conflict with other traffic or to comply with the provisions of this title, or
while obeying the directions of a police officer or a traffic-control device,
in any of the following places:
   (a)   On a sidewalk, except a bicycle;
   (b)   In front of a public or private driveway;
   (c)   Within an intersection;
   (d)   On a hydrant side of street;
   (e)   On a crosswalk;
   (f)   Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection;
   (g)   Within 30 feet of, and upon the approach to, any flashing beacon, stop
sign, or traffic-control device;
   (h)   Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within 30 feet of
points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless a
different length is indicated by a traffic-control device;
   (i)   Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing;
   (j)   Within 20 feet of a driveway entrance to any fire station and, on the
side of the street opposite the entrance to any fire station, within 75 feet of
the entrance when it is properly posted with signs;
   (k)   Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when such
standing or parking would obstruct traffic;
   (l)   Alongside any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a
street;
   (m)   Upon any bridge or elevated structure upon a highway, or within a
highway tunnel;
   (n)   At any place where signs prohibit stopping;
   (o)   Within one foot of another parked vehicle;
   (p)   On the roadway portion of a freeway, expressway, or thruway.
(Ord. 02-O-53, passed 10-7-2002)
§ 452.04  MANNER OF PARALLEL AND ANGLE PARKING; HANDICAPPED PERSONS.
   (a)   Every vehicle stopped or parked upon a roadway where there is an
adjacent curb shall be stopped or parked with the right-hand wheels of the
vehicle parallel with and not more than 12 inches from the right-hand curb,
unless it is impossible to approach so close to the curb; in such case the stop
shall be made as close to the curb as possible and only for the time necessary
to discharge and receive passengers or to load or unload merchandise. Local
authorities by ordinance may permit angle parking on any roadway under their
jurisdiction, except that angle parking shall not be permitted on a state route
within the municipality unless an unoccupied roadway width of not less than 25
feet is available for free-moving traffic.
   (b)   Local authorities by ordinance may permit parking of vehicles with the
left-hand wheels adjacent to and within 12 inches of the left-hand curb of a
one-way roadway.
   (c)   (1)   A.   Except as provided in division (c)(1)B. of this section, no
vehicle shall be stopped or parked on a road or highway with the vehicle facing
in a direction other than the direction of travel on that side of the road or
highway.
         B.   The operator of a motorcycle may back the motorcycle into an
angled parking space so that when the motorcycle is parked it is facing in a
direction other than the direction of travel on the side of the road or
highway.
      (2)   The operator of a motorcycle may back the motorcycle into a parking
space that is located on the side of, and parallel to, a road or highway. The
motorcycle may face any direction when so parked. Not more than two motorcycles
at a time shall be parked in a parking space as described in this division (c)
(2) of this section irrespective of whether or not the space is metered.
   (d)   Notwithstanding any statute or any rule, regulation, resolution, or
ordinance, air compressors, tractors, trucks, and other equipment, while being
used in the construction, reconstruction, installation, repair, or removal of
facilities near, on, over, or under a street or highway, may stop, stand, or
park where necessary in order to perform such work, provided a flagperson is on
duty or warning signs or lights are displayed as may be prescribed by the
Director of Transportation.
   (e)   Special parking locations and privileges for persons with disabilities
that limit or impair the ability to walk, also known as handicapped parking
spaces or disability parking spaces, shall be provided and designated by all
political subdivisions and by the state and all agencies and instrumentalities
thereof at all offices and facilities where parking is provided, whether owned,
rented, or leased, and at all publicly owned parking garages. The locations
shall be designated through the posting of an elevated sign, whether
permanently affixed or movable, imprinted with the international symbol of
access and shall be reasonably close to exits, entrances, elevators, and ramps.
All elevated signs posted in accordance with this subsection and Ohio R.C.
3781.111(C) shall be mounted on a fixed or movable post, and the distance from
the ground to the bottom edge of the sign shall measure not less than five
feet. If a new sign or a replacement sign designating a special parking
location is posted on or after October 14, 1999, there also shall be affixed
upon the surface of that sign or affixed next to the designating sign a notice
that states the fine applicable for the offense of parking a motor vehicle in
the special designated parking location if the motor vehicle is not legally
entitled to be parked in that location.
   (f)   (1)   A.   No person shall stop, stand, or park any motor vehicle at
special parking locations provided under subsection (e) of this section, or at
special clearly marked parking locations provided in or on privately owned
parking lots, parking garages, or other parking areas and designated in
accordance with that subsection, unless one of the following applies:
            1.   The motor vehicle is being operated by or for the transport of
a person with a disability that limits or impairs the ability to walk and is
displaying a valid removable windshield placard or special license plates; or
            2.   The motor vehicle is being operated by or for the transport of
a handicapped person and is displaying a parking card or special handicapped
license plates.
         B.   Any motor vehicle that is parked in a special marked parking
location in violation of subsection (f)(1)A.1. or (f)(1)A.2. of this section
may be towed or otherwise removed from the parking location by the law
enforcement agency of the municipality. A motor vehicle that is so towed or
removed shall not be released to its owner until the owner presents proof of
ownership of the motor vehicle and pays all towing and storage fees normally
imposed by the municipality for towing and storing motor vehicles. If the motor
vehicle is a leased vehicle, it shall not be released to the lessee until the
lessee presents proof that that person is the lessee of the motor vehicle and
pays all towing and storage fees normally imposed by the municipality for
towing and storing motor vehicles.
         C.   If a person is charged with a violation of subsection (f)(1)A.1.
or (f)(1)A.2. of this section, it is an affirmative defense to the charge that
the person suffered an injury not more than 72 hours prior to the time the
person was issued the ticket or citation and that, because of the injury, the
person meets at least one of the criteria contained in Ohio R.C. 4503.44(A)(1).
      (2)   No person shall stop, stand, or park any motor vehicle in an area
that is commonly known as an access aisle, which area is marked by diagonal
stripes and is located immediately adjacent to a special parking location
provided under subsection (e) of this section or at a special clearly marked
parking location provided in or on a privately owned parking lot, parking
garage, or other parking area and designated in accordance with that
subsection.
   (g)   When a motor vehicle is being operated by or for the transport of a
person with a disability that limits or impairs the ability to walk and is
displaying a removable windshield placard or a temporary removable windshield
placard or special license plates, or when a motor vehicle is being operated by
or for the transport of a handicapped person, and is displaying a parking card
or special handicapped license plates, the motor vehicle is permitted to park
for a period of two hours in excess of the legal parking period permitted by
local authorities, except where local ordinances or police rules provide
otherwise or where the vehicle is parked in such a manner as to be clearly a
traffic hazard.
   (h)   No owner of an office, facility, or parking garage where special
parking locations are required to be designated in accordance with subsection
(e) of this section shall fail to properly mark the special parking locations
in accordance with that subsection or fail to maintain the markings of the
special locations, including the erection and maintenance of the fixed or
movable signs.
   (i)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to require a person or
organization to apply for a removable windshield placard or special license
plates if the parking card or special license plates issued to the person or
organization under prior law have not expired or been surrendered or revoked.
   (j)   As used in this section:
      (1)   "Handicapped person" means any person who has lost the use of one
or both legs or one or both arms, who is blind, deaf, or so severely
handicapped as to be unable to move without the aid of crutches or a
wheelchair, or whose mobility is restricted by a permanent cardiovascular,
pulmonary, or other handicapping condition.
      (2)   "Person with a disability that limits or impairs the ability to
walk" has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 4503.44.
      (3)   "Special license plates" and "removable windshield placard" mean
any license plates or removable windshield placard or temporary removable
windshield placard issued under Ohio R.C. 4503.41 or 4503.44, and also mean any
substantially equivalent license plates or removable windshield placard or
temporary removable windshield placard issued by a state, district, country, or
sovereignty.
   (k)   Penalty.
      (1)   Whoever violates subsection (a) or (c) of this section is guilty of
a minor misdemeanor.
      (2)   A.   Whoever violates subsection (f)(1)A.1. or (f)(1)A.2. of this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished as provided in
subsection (k)(2)A. and B. of this section. Except as otherwise provided in
subsection (k)(2)A. of this section, an offender who violates subsection (f)
(1)A.1. or (f)(1)A.2. of this section shall be fined not less than two hundred
fifty dollars ($250.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). An
offender who violates subsection (f)(1)A.1. or (f)(1)A.2. of this section shall
be fined not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) if the offender, prior to
sentencing, proves either of the following to the satisfaction of the court:
            1.   At the time of the violation of subsection (f)(1)A.1. of this
section, the offender or the person for whose transport the motor vehicle was
being operated had been issued a removable windshield placard that then was
valid or special license plates that then were valid but the offender or the
person neglected to display the placard or license plates as described in
subsection (f)(1)A.1. of this section.
            2.   At the time of the violation of subsection (f)(1)A.2. of this
section, the offender or the person for whose transport the motor vehicle was
being operated had been issued a parking card that then was valid or special
handicapped license plates that then were valid but the offender or the person
neglected to display the card or license plates as described in subsection (f)
(1)A.2. of this section.
         B.   In no case shall an offender who violates subsection (f)(1)A.1.
or (f)(1)A.2. be sentenced to any term of imprisonment.
         C.   An arrest or conviction for a violation of subsection (f)(1)A.1.
or (f)(1)A.2. of this section does not constitute a criminal record and need
not be reported by the person so arrested or convicted in response to any
inquiries contained in any application for employment, license, or other right
or privilege, or made in connection with the person’s appearance as a witness.
         D.   The Clerk of the Court shall pay every fine collected under
subsections (k)(2) and (k)(3) of this section to the municipality. Except as
provided in subsection (k)(2) of this section, the municipality shall use the
fine monies it receives under subsections (k)(2) and (k)(3) of this section to
pay the expenses it incurs in complying with the signage and notice
requirements contained in subsection (e) of this section. The Municipality may
use up to 50% of each fine it receives under subsections (k)(2) and (k)(3) of
this section to pay the costs of educational, advocacy, support, and assistive
technology programs for persons with disabilities, and for public improvements
within the municipality that benefit or assist persons with disabilities, if
governmental agencies or nonprofit organizations offer the programs.
      (3)   Whoever violates subsection (f)(2) of this section shall be fined
not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) nor more than five hundred
dollars ($500.00). In no case shall an offender who violates subsection (f)(2)
of this section be sentenced to any term of imprisonment. An arrest or
conviction for a violation of subsection (f)(2) of this section does not
constitute a criminal record and need not be reported by the person so arrested
or convicted in response to any inquiries contained in any application for
employment, license, or other right or privilege, or made in connection with
the person’s appearance as a witness.
      (4)   Whoever violates subsection (h) of this section shall be punished
as follows:
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in subsection (k)(4) of this
section, the offender shall be issued a warning.
         B.   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of subsection (h) of this section or of a municipal
ordinance that is substantially equivalent to that subsection, the offender
shall not be issued a warning but shall be fined not more than twenty-five
dollars ($25.00) for each parking location that is not properly marked or whose
markings are not properly maintained.
(ORC 4511.69)
§ 452.05  WILLFULLY LEAVING VEHICLES ON PRIVATE OR PUBLIC PROPERTY.
   (a)   The County Sheriff or Chief of Police, within the Sheriff’s or Chief’s
respective territorial jurisdiction, or a state highway patrol trooper, upon
notification to the Sheriff or Chief of Police of such action and of the
location of the place of storage, may order into storage any motor vehicle,
including an abandoned junk motor vehicle as defined in R.C. § 4513.63, that:
      (1)   Has come into the possession of the Sheriff, Chief of Police, or
state highway patrol trooper as a result of the performance of the Sheriff’s,
Chief’s, or trooper’s duties; or
      (2)   Has been left on a public street or other property open to the
public for purposes of vehicular travel, or upon or within the right-of-way of
any road or highway, for 48 hours or longer without notification to the Sheriff
or Chief of Police of the reasons for leaving the motor vehicle in such place.
However, when such a motor vehicle constitutes an obstruction to traffic it may
be ordered into storage immediately unless either of the following applies:
         A.   The vehicle was involved in an accident and is subject to R.C. §
4513.66, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance;
         B.   The vehicle is a commercial motor vehicle. If the vehicle is a
commercial motor vehicle, the Sheriff, Chief of Police, or state highway patrol
trooper shall allow the owner or operator of the vehicle the opportunity to
arrange for the removal of the motor vehicle within a period of time specified
by the Sheriff, Chief of Police, or state highway patrol trooper. If the
Sheriff, Chief of Police, or state highway patrol trooper determines that the
vehicle cannot be removed within the specified period of time, the Sheriff,
Chief of Police, or state highway patrol trooper shall order the removal of the
vehicle.
      (3)   Subject to division (c) of this section, the Sheriff or Chief of
Police shall designate the place of storage of any motor vehicle so ordered
removed.
   (b)   If the Sheriff, Chief of Police, or a state highway patrol trooper
issues an order under division (a) of this section and arranges for the removal
of a motor vehicle by a towing service, the towing service shall deliver the
motor vehicle to the location designated by the Sheriff or Chief of Police not
more than two hours after the time it is removed.
   (c)   (1)   The Sheriff or Chief of Police shall cause a search to be made
of the records of the Bureau of Motor Vehicles to ascertain the identity of the
owner and any lienholder of a motor vehicle ordered into storage by the Sheriff
or Chief of Police, or by a state highway patrol trooper within five business
days of the removal of the vehicle. Upon obtaining such identity, the Sheriff
or Chief of Police shall send or cause to be sent to the owner or lienholder at
the owner’s or lienholder’s last known address by certified mail with return
receipt requested, notice that informs the owner or lienholder that the motor
vehicle will be declared a nuisance and disposed of if not claimed within ten
days of the date of mailing of the notice.
      (2)   A.   The owner or lienholder of the motor vehicle may reclaim the
motor vehicle upon payment of any expenses or charges incurred in its removal
and storage, and presentation of proof of ownership, which may be evidenced by
a certificate of title or memorandum certificate of title to the motor vehicle,
a certificate of registration for the motor vehicle, or a lease agreement. Upon
presentation of proof of ownership evidenced as provided above, the owner of
the motor vehicle also may retrieve any personal items from the vehicle without
retrieving the vehicle and without paying any fee. However, a towing service or
storage facility may charge an after-hours retrieval fee established by the
Public Utilities Commission in rules adopted under R.C. § 4921.25 if the owner
retrieves the personal items after hours, unless the towing service or storage
facility fails to provide the notice required under R.C. § 4513.69(B)(3), if
applicable. However, the owner shall not do either of the following:
            1.   Retrieve any personal item that has been determined by the
Sheriff, Chief of Police, or a state highway patrol trooper, as applicable, to
be necessary to a criminal investigation;
            2.   Retrieve any personal item from a vehicle if it would endanger
the safety of the owner, unless the owner agrees to sign a waiver of liability.
         B.   For purposes of division (c)(2) of this section, “personal items”
do not include any items that are attached to the vehicle.
      (3)   If the owner or lienholder of the motor vehicle reclaims it after a
search of the records of the Bureau of Motor Vehicles has been conducted and
after notice has been sent to the owner or lienholder as described in this
section, and the search was conducted by the place of storage, and the notice
was sent to the motor vehicle owner by the place of storage, the owner or
lienholder shall pay to the place of storage a processing fee as stated in the
Fee Schedule in §
236.07 of the City of Kirtland Codified Ordinances, in addition to any expenses
or charges incurred in the removal and storage of the vehicle.  (Ord. 17-O-20,
passed 7-3-2017)
   (d)   If the owner or lienholder makes no claim to the motor vehicle within
ten days of the date of mailing of the notice, and if the vehicle is to be
disposed of at public auction as provided in R.C. § 4513.62 or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the Sheriff or Chief of Police,
without charge to any party, shall file with the Clerk of Courts of the county
in which the place of storage is located an affidavit showing compliance with
the requirements of this section. Upon presentation of the affidavit, the
Clerk, without charge, shall issue a salvage certificate of title, free and
clear of all liens and encumbrances, to the Sheriff or Chief of Police. If the
vehicle is to be disposed of to a motor vehicle salvage dealer or other
facility as provided in R.C. § 4513.62 or any substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, the Sheriff or Chief of Police shall execute in triplicate
an affidavit, as prescribed by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles, describing the
motor vehicle and the manner in which it was disposed of, and that all
requirements of this section have been complied with. The Sheriff or Chief of
Police shall retain the original of the affidavit for the Sheriff’s or Chief’s
records, and shall furnish two copies to the motor vehicle salvage dealer or
other facility. Upon presentation of a copy of the affidavit by the motor
vehicle salvage dealer, the Clerk of Courts, within 30 days of the
presentation, shall issue a salvage certificate of title, free and clear of all
liens and encumbrances.
   (e)   Whenever a motor vehicle salvage dealer or other facility receives an
affidavit for the disposal of a motor vehicle as provided in this section, the
dealer or facility shall not be required to obtain an Ohio certificate of title
to the motor vehicle in the dealer’s or facility’s own name if the vehicle is
dismantled or destroyed and both copies of the affidavit are delivered to the
Clerk of Courts.
   (f)   No towing service or storage facility shall fail to comply with this
section.
(R.C. § 4513.61)
   (g)   (1)   A.   No person shall willfully leave an abandoned junk motor
vehicle, as defined in Ohio R.C. 4513.63, on private property for more than 72
hours without the permission of the person having the right to the possession
of the property, or on a public street or other property open to the public for
purposes of vehicular travel or parking, or upon or within the right-of-way of
any road or highway for 48 hours or longer without notification to the Police
Chief of the reason for leaving the motor vehicle in such place.
         B.   For purposes of this division (g)(1), the fact that a motor
vehicle has been so left without permission or notification is prima facie
evidence of abandonment.
         C.   Nothing contained in this section and Ohio R.C. 4513.60, 4513.61
and 4513.63 shall invalidate or prevent the enactment of further provisions of
municipal ordinances regulating or prohibiting the abandonment of motor
vehicles on streets, highways, public property, or private property within the
municipality.
      (2)   Whoever violates this division (g) is guilty of a minor misdemeanor
and shall also be assessed any costs incurred by the municipality in disposing
of such abandoned junk motor vehicle, less any money accruing to the
municipality from such disposal.
(R.C. § 4513.64)
§ 452.055  PARKING PROHIBITIONS ON PRIVATE PROPERTY; PRIVATE TOW-AWAY ZONES.
   (a)   (1)   The Sheriff or Chief of Police, upon complaint of any person
adversely affected, may order into storage any motor vehicle, other than an
abandoned junk motor vehicle as defined in R.C. § 4513.63, that has been left
on private residential or private agricultural property for at least four hours
without the permission of the person having the right to the possession of the
property. The Sheriff or Chief of Police, upon complaint of a repair garage or
place of storage, may order into storage any motor vehicle, other than an
abandoned junk motor vehicle, that has been left at the garage or place of
storage for a longer period than that agreed upon. When ordering a motor
vehicle into storage pursuant to this division, the Sheriff or Chief of Police
may arrange for the removal of the motor vehicle by a towing service and shall
designate a storage facility.
      (2)   A towing service towing a motor vehicle under division (a)(1) of
this section shall remove the motor vehicle in accordance with that division.
The towing service shall deliver the motor vehicle to the location designated
by the Sheriff or Chief of Police not more than two hours after the time it is
removed from the private property, unless the towing service is unable to
deliver the motor vehicle within two hours due to an uncontrollable force,
natural disaster, or other event that is not within the power of the towing
service.
      (3)   Subject to division (b) of this section, the owner of a motor
vehicle that has been removed pursuant to this division may recover the vehicle
only in accordance with division (d) of this section.
      (4)   As used in this section, “private residential property” means
private property on which is located one or more structures that are used as a
home, residence, or sleeping place by one or more persons, if no more than
three separate households are maintained in the structure or structures. The
phrase does not include any private property on which is located one or more
structures that are used as a home, residence, or sleeping place by two or more
persons, if more than three separate households are maintained in the structure
or structures.
   (b)   (1)   If the owner or operator of a motor vehicle that has been
ordered into storage pursuant to division (a)(1) of this section arrives after
the motor vehicle has been prepared for removal, but prior to its actual
removal from the property, the towing service shall give the owner or operator
oral or written notification at the time of such arrival that the vehicle owner
or operator may pay a fee of not more than one-half of the fee for the removal
of the motor vehicle established by the Public Utilities Commission in rules
adopted under R.C. § 4921.25, in order to obtain release of the motor vehicle.
However, if the vehicle is within a municipal corporation and the municipal
corporation has established a vehicle removal fee, the towing service shall
give the owner or operator oral or written notification that the owner or
operator may pay not more than one-half of that fee to obtain release of the
motor vehicle. That fee may be paid by use of a major credit card unless the
towing service uses a mobile credit card processor and mobile service is not
available at the time of the transaction.
      (2)   Upon payment of the applicable fee, the towing service shall give
the vehicle owner or operator a receipt showing both the full amount normally
assessed and the actual amount received and shall release the motor vehicle to
the owner or operator. Upon its release, the owner or operator immediately
shall move it so that it is not on the private residential or private
agricultural property without the permission of the person having the right to
possession of the property, or is not at the garage or place of storage without
the permission of the owner, whichever is applicable.
   (c)   (1)   The Sheriff and Chief of Police shall maintain a record of motor
vehicles that the Sheriff or Chief of Police orders into storage pursuant to
division (a)(1) of this section. The record shall include an entry for each
such motor vehicle that identifies the motor vehicle’s license number, make,
model, and color, the location from which it was removed, the date and time of
its removal, the telephone number of the person from whom it may be recovered,
and the address of the place to which it has been taken and from which it may
be recovered. The Sheriff or Chief of Police shall provide any information in
the record that pertains to a particular motor vehicle to any person who,
either in person or pursuant to a telephone call, identifies self as the owner
or operator of the motor vehicle and requests information pertaining to its
location.
      (2)   Any person who registers a complaint that is the basis of the
Sheriff’s or Police Chief’s order for the removal and storage of a motor
vehicle under division (a)(1) of this section shall provide the identity of the
law enforcement agency with which the complaint was registered to any person
who identifies self as the owner or operator of the motor vehicle and requests
information pertaining to its location.
   (d)   (1)   The owner or lienholder of a motor vehicle that is ordered into
storage pursuant to division (a)(1) of this section may reclaim it upon both of
the following:
         A.   Payment of all applicable fees established by the Public
Utilities Commission in rules adopted under R.C. § 4921.25 or, if the vehicle
was towed within a municipal corporation that has established fees for vehicle
removal and storage, payment of all applicable fees established by the
municipal corporation.
         B.   Presentation of proof of ownership, which may be evidenced by a
certificate of title to the motor vehicle, a certificate of registration for
the motor vehicle, or a lease agreement.
      (2)   When the owner of a vehicle towed under this section retrieves the
vehicle, the towing service or storage facility in possession of the vehicle
shall give the owner written notice that if the owner disputes that the motor
vehicle was lawfully towed, the owner may be able to file a civil action under
R.C. § 4513.611.
      (3)   Upon presentation of proof of ownership as required under division
(d)(1)B. of this section, the owner of a motor vehicle that is ordered into
storage under division (a)(1) of this section may retrieve any personal items
from the motor vehicle without retrieving the vehicle and without paying any
fee. However, a towing service or storage facility may charge an after-hours
retrieval fee established by the Public Utilities Commission in rules adopted
under R.C. § 4921.25 if the owner retrieves the personal items after hours,
unless the towing service or storage facility fails to provide the notice
required under R.C. § 4513.69(B)(3), if applicable. The owner of a motor
vehicle shall not do either of the following:
         A.   Retrieve any personal item that has been determined by the
Sheriff or Chief of Police, as applicable, to be necessary to a criminal
investigation;
         B.   Retrieve any personal item from a vehicle if it would endanger
the safety of the owner, unless the owner agrees to sign a waiver of liability.
      (4)   For purposes of division (d)(3) of this section, “personal items”
do not include any items that are attached to the motor vehicle.
      (5)   If a motor vehicle that is ordered into storage pursuant to
division (a)(1) of this section remains unclaimed by the owner for 30 days, the
procedures established by R.C. §§ 4513.61 and 4513.62 apply.
   (e)   (1)   No person shall remove, or cause the removal of, any motor
vehicle from any private residential or private agricultural property other
than in accordance with division (a)(1) of this section or R.C. §§ 4513.61 to
4513.65.
      (2)   No towing service or storage facility shall fail to comply with the
requirements of this section.
   (f)   This section does not apply to any private residential or private
agricultural property that is established as a private tow-away zone in
accordance with division (h) of this section or R.C. § 4513.601.
   (g)   Whoever violates division (e) of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.60)
   (h)   Private Tow-away Zones.
      (1)   The owner of a private property may establish a private tow-away
zone, but may do so only if all of the following conditions are satisfied:
         A.   The owner of the private property posts on the property a sign,
that is at least 18 inches by 24 inches in size, that is visible from all
entrances to the property, and that includes all of the following information:
            1.   A statement that the property is a tow-away zone;
            2.   A description of persons authorized to park on the property.
If the property is a residential property, the owner of the private property
may include on the sign a statement that only tenants and guests may park in
the private tow-away zone, subject to the terms of the property owner. If the
property is a commercial property, the owner of the private property may
include on the sign a statement that only customers may park in the private
tow-away zone. In all cases, if it is not apparent which persons may park in
the private tow-away zone, the owner of the private property shall include on
the sign the address of the property on which the private tow-away zone is
located or the name of the business that is located on the property designated
as a private tow-away zone.
            3.   If the private tow-away zone is not enforceable at all times,
the times during which the parking restrictions are enforced;
            4.   The telephone number and the address of the place from which a
towed vehicle may be recovered at any time during the day or night;
            5.   A statement that the failure to recover a towed vehicle may
result in the loss of title to the vehicle as provided in R.C. § 4505.101(B).
            6.   In order to comply with the requirements of division (h)(1)A.
of this section, the owner of a private property may modify an existing sign by
affixing to the existing sign stickers or an addendum in lieu of replacing the
sign.
         B.   A towing service ensures that a vehicle towed under this division
(h) is taken to a location from which it may be recovered that complies with
all of the following:
            1.   It is located within 25 linear miles of the location of the
private tow- away zone, unless it is not practicable to take the vehicle to a
place of storage within 25 linear miles.
            2.   It is well-lighted.
            3.   It is on or within a reasonable distance of a regularly
scheduled route of one or more modes of public transportation, if any public
transportation is available in the municipal corporation or township in which
the private tow-away zone is located.
      (2)   A.   If a vehicle is parked on private property that is established
as a private tow-away zone in accordance with division (h)(1) of this section,
without the consent of the owner of the private property or in violation of any
posted parking condition or regulation, the owner of the private property may
cause the removal of the vehicle by a towing service. The towing service shall
remove the vehicle in accordance with this division (h). The vehicle owner and
the operator of the vehicle are considered to have consented to the removal and
storage of the vehicle, to the payment of the applicable fees established by
the Public Utilities Commission in rules adopted under R.C. § 4921.25, and to
the right of a towing service to obtain title to the vehicle if it remains
unclaimed as provided in R.C. § 4505.101. The owner or lienholder of a vehicle
that has been removed under this division (h), subject to division (h)(3) of
this section, may recover the vehicle in accordance with division (h)(7) of
this section.
         B.   If a municipal corporation requires tow trucks and tow truck
operators to be licensed, no owner of a private property located within the
municipal corporation shall cause the removal and storage of any vehicle
pursuant to division (h)(2) of this section by an unlicensed tow truck or
unlicensed tow truck operator.
         C.   No towing service shall remove a vehicle from a private tow-away
zone except pursuant to a written contract for the removal of vehicles entered
into with the owner of the private property on which the private tow-away zone
is located.
      (3)   If the owner or operator of a vehicle that is being removed under
authority of division (h)(2) of this section arrives after the vehicle has been
prepared for removal, but prior to its actual removal from the property, the
towing service shall give the vehicle owner or operator oral or written
notification at the time of such arrival that the vehicle owner or operator may
pay a fee of not more than one-half of the fee for the removal of the vehicle
established by the Public Utilities Commission in rules adopted under R.C. §
4921.25 in order to obtain release of the vehicle. That fee may be paid by use
of a major credit card unless the towing service uses a mobile credit card
processor and mobile service is not available at the time of the transaction.
Upon payment of that fee, the towing service shall give the vehicle owner or
operator a receipt showing both the full amount normally assessed and the
actual amount received and shall release the vehicle to the owner or operator.
Upon its release, the owner or operator immediately shall move the vehicle so
that the vehicle is not parked on the private property established as a private
tow-away zone without the consent of the owner of the private property or in
violation of any posted parking condition or regulation.
      (4)   A.   Prior to towing a vehicle under division (h)(2) of this
section, a towing service shall make all reasonable efforts to take as many
photographs as necessary to evidence that the vehicle is clearly parked on
private property in violation of a private tow-away zone established under
division (h)(1) of this section. The towing service shall record the time and
date of the photographs taken under this division (h). The towing service shall
retain the photographs and the record of the time and date, in electronic or
printed form, for at least 30 days after the date on which the vehicle is
recovered by the owner or lienholder or at least two years after the date on
which the vehicle was towed, whichever is earlier.
         B.   A towing service shall deliver a vehicle towed under division (h)
(2) of this section to the location from which it may be recovered not more
than two hours after the time it was removed from the private tow-away zone,
unless the towing service is unable to deliver the motor vehicle within two
hours due to an uncontrollable force, natural disaster, or other event that is
not within the power of the towing service.
      (5)   A.   If an owner of a private property that is established as a
private tow-away zone in accordance with division (h)(1) of this section causes
the removal of a vehicle from that property by a towing service under division
(h)(2) of this section, the towing service, within two hours of removing the
vehicle, shall provide notice to the Sheriff or the Police Department
concerning all of the following:
            1.   The vehicle’s license number, make, model, and color;
            2.   The location from which the vehicle was removed;
            3.   The date and time the vehicle was removed;
            4.   The telephone number of the person from whom the vehicle may
be recovered;
            5.   The address of the place from which the vehicle may be
recovered.
         B.   The Sheriff and Chief of Police shall maintain a record of any
vehicle removed from private property in the Sheriff’s or Police Chief’s
jurisdiction that is established as a private tow-away zone of which the
Sheriff or Police Chief has received notice under this division (h). The record
shall include all information submitted by the towing service. The Sheriff or
Police Chief shall provide any information in the record that pertains to a
particular vehicle to a person who, either in person or pursuant to a telephone
call, identifies self as the owner, operator, or lienholder of the vehicle and
requests information pertaining to the vehicle.
      (6)   A.   When a vehicle is removed from private property in accordance
with this division (h), within three business days of the removal, the towing
service or storage facility from which the vehicle may be recovered shall cause
a search to be made of the records of the Bureau of Motor Vehicles to ascertain
the identity of the owner and any lienholder of the motor vehicle. The
Registrar of Motor Vehicles shall ensure that such information is provided in a
timely manner. Subject to division (h)(6)D. of this section, the towing service
or storage facility shall send notice to the vehicle owner and any known
lienholder as follows:
            1.   Within five business days after the Registrar of Motor
Vehicles provides the identity of the owner and any lienholder of the motor
vehicle, if the vehicle remains unclaimed, to the owner’s and lienholder’s last
known address by certified or express mail with return receipt requested or by
a commercial carrier service utilizing any form of delivery requiring a signed
receipt;
            2.   If the vehicle remains unclaimed 30 days after the first
notice is sent, in the manner required under division (h)(6)A.1. of this
section;
            3.   If the vehicle remains unclaimed 45 days after the first
notice is sent, in the manner required under division (h)(6)A.1. of this
section.
         B.   Sixty days after any notice sent pursuant to division (h)(6)A. of
this section is received, as evidenced by a receipt signed by any person, or
the towing service or storage facility has been notified that delivery was not
possible, the towing service or storage facility, if authorized under R.C. §
4505.101(B), may initiate the process for obtaining a certificate of title to
the motor vehicle as provided in that section.
         C.   A towing service or storage facility that does not receive a
signed receipt of notice, or a notification that delivery was not possible,
shall not obtain, and shall not attempt to obtain, a certificate of title to
the motor vehicle under R.C. § 4505.101(B).
         D.   With respect to a vehicle concerning which a towing service or
storage facility is not eligible to obtain title under R.C. § 4505.101, the
towing service or storage facility need only comply with the initial notice
required under division (h)(6)A.1. of this section.
      (7)   A.   The owner or lienholder of a vehicle that is removed under
division (h)(2) of this section may reclaim it upon both of the following:
            1.   Presentation of proof of ownership, which may be evidenced by
a certificate of title to the vehicle, a certificate of registration for the
motor vehicle, or a lease agreement;
            2.   Payment of the following fees:
               a.   All applicable fees established by the Public Utilities
Commission in rules adopted under R.C. § 4921.25, except that the lienholder of
a vehicle may retrieve the vehicle without paying any storage fee for the
period of time that the vehicle was in the possession of the towing service or
storage facility prior to the date the lienholder received the notice sent
under division (h)(6)A.1. of this section;
               b.   If notice has been sent to the owner and lienholder as
described in division (h)(6) of this section, a processing fee of twenty-five
dollars ($25.00).
         B.   A towing service or storage facility in possession of a vehicle
that is removed under authority of division (h)(2) of this section shall show
the vehicle owner, operator, or lienholder who contests the removal of the
vehicle all photographs taken under division (h)(4) of this section. Upon
request, the towing service or storage facility shall provide a copy of all
photographs in the medium in which the photographs are stored, whether paper,
electronic, or otherwise.
         C.   When the owner of a vehicle towed under this section retrieves
the vehicle, the towing service or storage facility in possession of the
vehicle shall give the owner written notice that if the owner disputes that the
motor vehicle was lawfully towed, the owner may be able to file a civil action
under R.C. § 4513.611.
         D.   Upon presentation of proof of ownership, which may be evidenced
by a certificate of title to the vehicle, a certificate of registration for the
motor vehicle, or a lease agreement, the owner of a vehicle that is removed
under authority of division (h)(2) of this section may retrieve any personal
items from the vehicle without retrieving the vehicle and without paying any
fee. The owner of the vehicle shall not retrieve any personal items from a
vehicle if it would endanger the safety of the owner, unless the owner agrees
to sign a waiver of liability. For purposes of division (h)(7)D. of this
section, “personal items” do not include any items that are attached to the
vehicle.
      (8)   No person shall remove, or cause the removal of, any vehicle from
private property that is established as a private tow-away zone under this
division (h) or store such a vehicle other than in accordance with this
division (h), or otherwise fail to comply with any applicable requirement of
this division (h).
      (9)   This section does not affect or limit the operation of divisions
(a) through (g) of this section, R.C. § 4513.60 or R.C. §§ 4513.61 to 4613.65
as they relate to property other than private property that is established as a
private tow-away zone under division (h)(1) of this section.
      (10)   Whoever violates division (h)(8) of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.
      (11)   As used in this section, “owner of a private property” or “owner
of the private property” includes, with respect to a private property, any of
the following:
         A.   Any person who holds title to the property;
         B.   Any person who is a lessee or sublessee with respect to a lease
or sublease agreement for the property;
         C.   A person who is authorized to manage the property;
         D.   A duly authorized agent of any person listed in divisions (h)
(11)A. to (h)(11)C. of this section.
(R.C. § 4513.601)
   (i)   If an owner of private property posts on the property in a conspicuous
manner a prohibition against parking on the property or conditions and
regulations under which parking is permitted, no person shall do either of the
following:
      (1)   Park a vehicle on the property without the owner’s consent;
      (2)   Park a vehicle on the property in violation of any condition or
regulation posted by the owner.
   (j)   Whoever violates subsection (a) of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
(Ord. 83-O-32, passed 11-18-1983)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see O.R.C. 4511.681
§ 452.06  UNATTENDED VEHICLES; DUTY TO LOCK IGNITION, REMOVE KEY, SET BRAKE,
ETC.
   (a)   (1)   No person driving or in charge of a motor vehicle shall permit
it to stand unattended without first stopping the engine, locking the ignition,
removing the key from the ignition, effectively setting the parking brake, and,
when the motor vehicle is standing upon any grade, turning the front wheels to
the curb or side of the highway.
      (2)   The requirements of this section relating to the stopping of the
engine, locking of the ignition, and removing the key from the ignition of a
motor vehicle do not apply to any of the following:
         A.   A motor vehicle that is parked on residential property;
         B.   A motor vehicle that is locked, regardless of where it is parked;
         C.   An emergency vehicle;
         D.   A public safety vehicle.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(ORC 4511.661)
§ 452.07  OPENING DOORS ON SIDE AVAILABLE TO TRAFFIC.
   (a)   No person shall open the door of a vehicle on the side available to
moving traffic unless and until it is reasonably safe to do so, and can be done
without interfering with the movement of other traffic, nor shall any person
leave a door open on the side of a vehicle available to moving traffic for a
period of time longer than necessary to load or unload passengers.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(ORC 4511.70)
§ 452.08  SELLING, WASHING OR REPAIRING VEHICLE UPON ROADWAY.
   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle upon any roadway for the
principal purpose of:
   (a)   Displaying such vehicle for sale; or
   (b)   Washing, greasing or repairing such vehicle except repairs
necessitated by an emergency.
§ 452.09  TRUCK LOADING ZONES.
   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or length of
time, other than for the expeditious unloading and delivery or pickup and
loading of materials, in any place marked as a truck loading zone during hours
when the provisions applicable to such zones are in effect. In no case shall
the stop for loading and unloading of materials exceed 30 minutes.
§ 452.10  BUS STOPS AND TAXICAB STANDS.
   (a)   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle other than a bus in a
bus stop, or other than a taxicab in a taxicab stand, when any such stop or
stand has been officially designated and appropriately posted, except that the
driver of a passenger vehicle may temporarily stop therein for the purpose of,
and while actually engaged in, loading or unloading passengers when such
stopping does not interfere with any bus or taxicab waiting to enter or about
to enter such zone, and then only for a period not to exceed three minutes, if
such stopping is not prohibited therein by posted signs.
   (b)   No operator of a bus shall stop, stand or park such vehicle upon any
street or other public way at any place for the purpose of loading or unloading
passengers or their baggage other than at a bus stop so designated and posted
as such, except in case of an emergency.
   (c)   No operator of a bus shall fail to enter a bus stop on a street or
other public way in such a manner that the bus when stopped to load or unload
passengers or baggage is in a position with the right front wheel of such
vehicle not further than 18 inches from the curb and the bus approximately
parallel to the curb so as not to unduly impede the movement of other vehicular
traffic.
   (d)   No operator of a taxicab shall stand or park such vehicle upon any
street or other public way at any place other than in a taxicab stand so
designated and posted as such. This provision shall not prevent the operator of
a taxicab from temporarily stopping in accordance with other stopping or
parking provisions at any place for the purpose of, and while actually engaged
in, the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers.
§ 452.11  PARKING IN ALLEYS AND NARROW STREETS; EXCEPTIONS.
   No person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle upon a street, in such a
manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than twelve feet of
the width of the paved surface or main traveled portion of the roadway,
opposite the stopped vehicle, for the free movement of vehicular traffic,
except that a driver may stop temporarily during the actual loading or
unloading of passengers or cargo or when directed to by a police officer or
traffic control signal.
(Ord. 03-O-37, passed 7-7-2003)
§ 452.12  REGISTERED OWNER PRIMA FACIE LIABLE FOR UNLAWFUL PARKING.
   In any hearing on a charge of illegally parking a motor vehicle, testimony
that a vehicle bearing a certain license plate was found unlawfully parked as
prohibited by the provisions of this Traffic Code, and further testimony that
the record of the Ohio Registrar of Motor Vehicles shows that the license plate
was issued to the defendant, shall be prima facie evidence that the vehicle
which was unlawfully parked, was so parked by the defendant. A certified
registration copy, showing such fact, from the Registrar shall be proof of such
ownership.
§ 452.13  OVERNIGHT PARKING.
   No operator or owner of a vehicle shall park or permit the parking or
remaining of such vehicle on any alley, street or highway in the city, from 1:
00 a.m. to 8:00 a.m., except that a driver may stop temporarily during the
actual loading or unloading of passengers or cargo or when directed to by a
police officer or traffic control signal.
(Ord. 03-O-37, passed 7-7-2003)
§ 452.14  WAIVER.
   Any person charged with a violation of any provision of this chapter for
which payment of a prescribed fine may be made, may pay such sum in the manner
prescribed on the issued traffic ticket. Such payment shall be deemed a plea of
guilty, waiver of court appearance and acknowledgment of conviction of the
alleged offense and may be accepted in full satisfaction of the prescribed
penalty for such alleged violation. Payment of the prescribed fine need not be
accepted when laws prescribe that a certain number of such offenses shall
require court appearance.
§ 452.15  AUTHORITY OF DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC SAFETY.
   The requirements and regulations contained in
Chapter 452 shall be subject to any regulation or requirement established by
the Director of Public Safety pursuant to
Chapter 406 of the Kirtland Municipal Code.
(Ord. 03-O-37, passed 7-7-2003)
§ 452.16  SNOW EMERGENCY PARKING REGULATIONS.
   (a)    Whenever, during any period of 24 hours or less, snow falls in the
city, or in any section or sections thereof, to a depth of two inches or more,
an emergency is declared to exist in that such a heavy snowstorm constitutes a
serious public hazard, impairing transportation, the movement of food and fuel
supplies, medical care, fire, health and police protection and other vital
services to the city. Such emergency shall continue until an announcement is
made by the Service Director or his or her designee that snow plowing
operations have been completed, which announcement shall be made in the same
manner as outlined in subsection (b) hereof.
   (b)   Whenever such an emergency exists, the Service Director or his or her
designee shall request the cooperation of a newspaper or newspapers of general
circulation in the city and radio and television stations which are located in
Cuyahoga and Lake County and whose transmission may be heard throughout the
city, to announce the emergency and the time that emergency parking regulations
will become effective. Such time shall be no sooner than one hour after the
first announcement. Such announcement by two such radio or television stations,
or any combination thereof, or in a daily newspaper of general circulation in
the city, shall constitute notice to the general public of the existence of the
emergency. However, the owners and operators of motor vehicles shall have full
responsibility to determine existing weather conditions and to comply with the
emergency parking regulations.
   (c)   During the period of the emergency, the Service Director or his or her
designee may prohibit the parking of any vehicle or vehicles upon any and all
of the city streets. During the emergency, it shall be unlawful for any person
to park, cause or permit to be parked, permit to remain parked or abandon or
leave unattended any vehicle of any kind or description, upon any city street;
provided, however, that, vehicles may be parked for a period not longer than
three minutes for actual loading or unloading of passengers, or 30 minutes for
actual loading or unloading of property; and provided, further, that, no other
law or ordinance restricting parking as to place or time is violated thereby.
   (d)   The requirements and regulations contained herein shall be subject to
any regulation or requirement established by the Director of Public Safety
pursuant to
Chapter 406 of the Kirtland Municipal Code.
(Ord. 03-O-47, passed 10-20-2003)
§ 452.99  PENALTY.
   (a)   Any person who is cited for a violation of this chapter for parking or
standing an unattended motor vehicle, in addition to the impounding provisions
and charges provided by §
404.05:
      (1)   Shall be fined fifteen dollars ($15.00) if such fine is paid within
72 hours after such violation;
      (2)   Shall be fined thirty dollars ($30.00) if such fine is paid after
72 hours and before 168 hours after such violation;
      (3)   Shall be fined sixty dollars ($60.00) if such fine is paid after
168 hours after such violation.
   (b)   Any person who is cited for a violation of §
452.16, shall be subject to the impounding provisions and charges provided by §
404.05. In addition, any violation of §
452.16 constitutes a minor misdemeanor for the first offense. Any subsequent
offense or offenses within 12 months of commission of the immediately preceding
offense, constitutes and is punishable as a fourth degree misdemeanor.
(Ord. 03-O-47, passed 10-20-2003)
   (c)   Any person who is cited for a violation of §
452.04(e) of this chapter for parking or standing an unattended motor vehicle,
in addition to the impounding provisions and charges provided by §
404.05:
      (1)   Shall be fined twenty-five dollars ($25.00) if such fine is paid
within seventy-two hours after such violation;
      (2)   Shall be fined fifty dollars ($50.00) if such fine is paid after
seventy-two hours and before 168 hours after such violation;
      (3)   Shall be fined one hundred dollars ($100.00) if such fine is paid
after 168 hours after such violation.
(Ord. 01-O-22, passed 6-18-2001)
CHAPTER 454:  FIRE LANES
Section
454.01   Authority to establish lanes.
454.02   Width and marking of lanes.
454.03   Obstruction by vehicle, fence or barricade.
454.04   Removal and impounding of obstructing vehicles.
454.05   Notice to remove obstruction; removal by city.
454.06   Notice of lane designation.
454.07   Enforcement.
454.99   Penalty.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Fire Prevention Code - see F.P.
Ch. 1610
   Parking generally - see TRAF.
Ch. 452
§ 454.01  AUTHORITY TO ESTABLISH LANES.
   The Chief of the Fire Division or the Chief of the Police Division is hereby
authorized to establish fire lanes on either public or private property within
the city upon finding that the following conditions exist:
   (a)   A fire lane is necessary for safeguarding life and property from the
hazards of fire and explosion and for the use and occupancy of buildings,
structures and adjacent property.
   (b)   The fire lane is incident to a retail, commercial or manufacturing use
or other use where it can reasonably be expected that the public will assemble
in sufficient numbers so that the presence of the public and their motor
vehicles, if not controlled, will interfere with the operation of fire and
rescue equipment and personnel and with the egress of occupants in case of fire
or other emergency.
(Ord. 91-O-27, passed 6-17-1991)
§ 454.02  WIDTH AND MARKING OF LANES.
   Fire lanes shall be of such width as is reasonably determined by the Fire
Chief to be necessary to permit access and operation of fire-fighting, rescue,
and public safety equipment and personnel and the egress of occupants. Fire
lanes shall be suitably marked by appropriate reflectorized signs which may be
supplemented by markings on the ground. The markings and signs shall be placed
and maintained by the property owner in accordance with color and design
standards as prescribed by the Chief of the Fire Division.
(Ord. 91-O-27, passed 6-17-1991)
§ 454.03  OBSTRUCTION BY VEHICLE, FENCE OR BARRICADE.
   No person shall obstruct a fire lane by parking, stopping or standing a
motor vehicle, whether such vehicle is attended or unattended, by constructing
a fence or other barricade or in any manner whatsoever. A barricade or fence
which is readily removable or through which egress may be gained by fire-
fighting and rescue equipment and personnel without delay shall not be
prohibited by this section. Any such barricade or fence shall not be locked in
any manner.
(Ord. 91-O-27, passed 6-17-1991)
§ 454.04  REMOVAL AND IMPOUNDING OF OBSTRUCTING VEHICLES.
   Attended motor vehicles found standing or parked in a fire lane shall be
immediately moved upon direction of any member of the Public Safety Department.
Any unattended motor vehicle found standing or parked in a fire lane may be
impounded in the manner set forth in §
404.05.
(Ord. 91-O-27, passed 6-17-1991)
§ 454.05  NOTICE TO REMOVE OBSTRUCTION; REMOVAL BY CITY.
   Obstructions, other than motor vehicles, found in fire lanes shall be
removed by the owner, occupant, or other person in charge of the premises
within seven days after written notice to do so. Upon failure to comply with
such notice, the city may cause the obstruction to be removed and the owner,
occupant, or other person in charge of the premises shall pay the cost of such
removal.
(Ord. 91-O-27, passed 6-17-1991)
§ 454.06  NOTICE OF LANE DESIGNATION.
   Whenever the Fire Chief or Police Chief designates a fire lane, written
notice thereof shall be given to the owner, occupant or other person in charge
of the premises.
(Ord. 91-O-27, passed 6-17-1991)
§ 454.07  ENFORCEMENT.
   The Chief of the Fire Division or his or her designees may, in addition to
the Police Division, enforce this chapter and §
452.03(d), (j) and (n).
(Ord. 91-O-27, passed 6-17-1991)
§ 454.99  PENALTY.
   (a)   Any person who is cited for a violation of this chapter for parking or
standing an unattended motor vehicle, in addition to the impounding provisions
and charges provided by §
404.05:
      (1)   Shall be fined twenty-five dollars ($25.00) if such fine is paid
within 72 hours after such violation.
      (2)   Shall be fined fifty dollars ($50.00) if such fine is paid after 72
hours and before 168 hours after such violation.
      (3)   Shall be fined one hundred dollars ($100.00) if such fine is paid
after 168 hours after such violation.
   (b)   Except as provided in subsection (a) hereof, any person who violates
any of the provisions of this chapter, or fails to comply with any order made
hereunder, shall, severally, for each and every such violation or non-
compliance respectively, be guilty of a minor misdemeanor and shall be subject
to the penalty set forth in §
408.01. Each fourteen days that a prohibited condition is maintained shall
constitute a separate offense. The imposition of a fine or penalty shall not
excuse the violation or permit it to continue and such violation shall be
remedied.
(Ord. 91-O-27, passed 6-17-1991; Am. Ord. 01-O-23, passed 6-18-2001)
TITLE TEN - BICYCLES, MOTORCYCLES AND SNOWMOBILES
CHAPTER 474:  BICYCLES AND MOTORCYCLES GENERALLY
Section
474.01   Code application to bicycles.
474.02   Riding upon seats; carrying packages; motorcycle handle bars; helmets
and glasses.
474.03   Attaching bicycles, motorcycles to other vehicles.
474.04   Riding on right side of roadway; riding abreast.
474.05   Lights, signal devices, brakes on bicycles.
474.06   Riding bicycles upon sidewalks.
474.07   Safe riding regulations for bicycles.
474.08   Parking; locks.
474.09   Parent's responsibility.
474.10   Suspension of riding privileges; impounding of bicycles.
474.11   Operation of motorized bicycles.
474.99   Penalty.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Bicycle defined - see TRAF.
402.05
   Bicycle regulations to be consistent with state law - see Ohio R.C. 4511.07
(A)(8)
   Bicycles prohibited on freeways - see TRAF.
412.05
   Motorcycle brakes - see TRAF.
438.19
   Motorcycle defined - see TRAF.
402.21
   Motorcycle headlight - see TRAF.
438.03
   Motorcycle operator's license required - see TRAF.
436.01
   Off-highway motorcycles - see TRAF.
Ch. 476
   Operation of vehicles on bicycle paths - see TRAF.
432.39
   See section histories for similar state law
§ 474.01  CODE APPLICATION TO BICYCLES.
   (a)   The provisions of this Traffic Code that are applicable to bicycles
apply whenever a bicycle is operated upon any highway or upon any path set
aside for the exclusive use of bicycles.
   (b)   Except as provided in subsection (d) of this section, a bicycle
operator who violates any provisions of this Traffic Code described in
subsection (a) of this section that is applicable to bicycles may be issued a
ticket, citation, or summons by a law enforcement officer for the violation in
the same manner as the operator of a motor vehicle would be cited for the same
violation. A person who commits any such violation while operating a bicycle
shall not have any points assessed against the person's driver's license,
commercial driver's license, temporary instruction permit, or probationary
license under Ohio R.C. 4510.036.
   (c)   Except as provided in subsection (d) of this section, in the case of a
violation of any provision of this Traffic Code described in subsection (a) of
this section by a bicycle operator or by a motor vehicle operator when the
trier of fact finds that the violation by the motor vehicle operator endangered
the lives of bicycle riders at the time of the violation, the court,
notwithstanding any provision of the Ohio Revised Code to the contrary, may
require the bicycle operator or motor vehicle operator to take and successfully
complete a bicycling skills course approved by the court in addition to or in
lieu of any penalty otherwise prescribed by this Traffic Code or the Ohio
Revised Code for that violation.
   (d)   Divisions (b) and (c) of this section do not apply to violations of
Ohio R.C. 4511.19, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
(ORC 4511.52)
   (e)   Every person operating a bicycle shall obey the instructions of
official traffic control devices and signals applicable to vehicles, unless
otherwise directed by a police officer.
§ 474.02  RIDING UPON SEATS; CARRYING PACKAGES; MOTORCYCLE HANDLE BARS; HELMETS
AND GLASSES.
   (a)   For purposes of this section, "snowmobile" has the same meaning as
given that term in Ohio R.C. 4519.01.
   (b)   (1)   No person operating a bicycle shall ride other than upon or
astride the permanent and regular seat attached thereto or carry any other
person upon such bicycle other than upon a firmly attached and regular seat
thereon, and no person shall ride upon a bicycle other than upon such a firmly
attached and regular seat.
      (2)   No person operating a motorcycle shall ride other than upon or
astride the permanent and regular seat or saddle attached thereto, or carry any
other person upon such motorcycle other than upon a firmly attached and regular
seat or saddle thereon, and no person shall ride upon a motorcycle other than
upon such a firmly attached and regular seat or saddle.
      (3)   No person shall ride upon a motorcycle that is equipped with a
saddle other than while sitting astride the saddle, facing forward, with one
leg on each side of the motorcycle.
      (4)   No person shall ride upon a motorcycle that is equipped with a seat
other than while sitting upon the seat.
      (5)   No person operating a bicycle shall carry any package, bundle, or
article that prevents the driver from keeping at least one hand upon the
handlebars.
      (6)   No bicycle or motorcycle shall be used to carry more persons at one
time than the number for which it is designed and equipped. No motorcycle shall
be operated on a highway when the handlebars rise higher than the shoulders of
the operator when the operator is seated in the operator’s seat or saddle.
   (c)   (1)   Except as provided in subsection (c)(3) of this section, no
person shall operate or be a passenger on a snowmobile or motorcycle without
using safety glasses or other protective eye device. Except as provided in
subsection (c)(3) of this section, no person who is under the age of 18 years,
or who holds a motorcycle operator’s endorsement or license bearing a “novice”
designation that is currently in effect as provided in Ohio R.C. 4507.13, shall
operate a motorcycle on a highway, or be a passenger on a motorcycle, unless
wearing a protective helmet on the person’s head, and no other person shall be
a passenger on a motorcycle operated by such a person unless similarly wearing
a protective helmet. The helmet, safety glasses, or other protective eye device
shall conform with rules adopted by the Ohio Director of Public Safety. The
provisions of this paragraph or a violation thereof shall not be used in the
trial of any civil action.
      (2)   A.   Except as provided in subsection (c)(3) of this section, no
person shall operate a motorcycle with a valid temporary instruction permit and
temporary instruction permit identification card issued by the Registrar of
Motor Vehicles pursuant to Ohio R.C. 4507.05 unless the person, at the time of
such operation, is wearing on the person’s head a protective helmet that
conforms with rules adopted by the Ohio Director of Public Safety.
         B.   No person shall operate a motorcycle with a valid temporary
instruction permit and temporary instruction permit identification card issued
by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles pursuant to Ohio R.C. 4507.05 in any of the
following circumstances:
            1.   At any time when lighted lights are required by Ohio R.C.
4513.03(A)(1);
            2.   While carrying a passenger;
            3.   On any limited access highway or heavily congested roadway.
      (3)   Subsections (c)(1) and (c)(2)A. of this section do not apply to a
person who operates or is a passenger in an autocycle or cab-enclosed
motorcycle when the occupant compartment top is in place enclosing the
occupants.
   (d)   Nothing in this section shall be construed as prohibiting the carrying
of a child in a seat or trailer that is designed for carrying children and is
firmly attached to the bicycle.
   (e)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (b) or (c)(1) or (c)(2) of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic
offense, whoever violates division (b) or (c)(1) or (c)(2) of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates division (b) or (c)(1) or
(c)(2) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(ORC 4511.53)
§ 474.03  ATTACHING BICYCLES, MOTORCYCLES TO OTHER VEHICLES.
   (a)   (1)   No person riding upon any bicycle, coaster, roller skates, sled,
or toy vehicle shall attach the same or himself or herself to any vehicle upon
a roadway.
      (2)   No operator shall knowingly permit any person riding upon any
bicycle, coaster, roller skates, sled, or toy vehicle to attach the same or
himself or herself to any vehicle while it is moving upon a roadway.
      (3)   This section does not apply to towing a disabled vehicle.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(ORC 4511.54)
§ 474.04  RIDING ON RIGHT SIDE OF ROADWAY; RIDING ABREAST.
   (a)   Every person operating a bicycle upon a roadway shall ride as near to
the right side of the roadway as practicable obeying all traffic rules
applicable to vehicles and exercising due care when passing a standing vehicle
or one proceeding in the same direction.
   (b)   Persons riding bicycles or motorcycles upon a roadway shall ride not
more than two abreast in a single lane, except on paths or parts of roadways
set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles or motorcycles.
   (c)   This section does not require a person operating a bicycle to ride at
the edge of the roadway when it is unreasonable or unsafe to do so. Conditions
that may require riding away from the edge of the roadway include when
necessary to avoid fixed or moving objects, parked or moving vehicles, surface
hazards, or if it otherwise is unsafe or impracticable to do so, including if
the lane is too narrow for the bicycle and an overtaking vehicle to travel
safely side by side within the lane.
   (d)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(ORC 4511.55)
§ 474.05  LIGHTS, SIGNAL DEVICES, BRAKES ON BICYCLES.
   (a)   Every bicycle when in use at the times specified in Ohio R.C. 4513.03
or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance shall be equipped with the
following:
      (1)   A lamp mounted on the front of either the bicycle or the operator
that shall emit a white light visible from a distance of at least 500 feet to
the front and 300 feet to the sides. A generator-powered lamp that emits light
only when the bicycle is moving may be used to meet this requirement.
      (2)   A red reflector on the rear that shall be visible from all
distances from 100 feet to 600 feet to the rear when directly in front of
lawful lower beams of head lamps on a motor vehicle.
      (3)   A lamp emitting either flashing or steady red light visible from a
distance of 500 feet to the rear shall be used in addition to the red
reflector. If the red lamp performs as a reflector in that it is visible as
specified in subsection (a)(2) of this section, the red lamp may serve as the
reflector and a separate reflector is not required.
   (b)   Additional lamps and reflectors may be used in addition to those
required under subsection (a) of this section, except that red lamps and red
reflectors shall not be used on the front of the bicycle and white lamps and
white reflectors shall not be used on the rear of the bicycle.
   (c)   A bicycle may be equipped with a device capable of giving an audible
signal, except that a bicycle shall not be equipped with nor shall any person
use upon a bicycle any siren or whistle.
   (d)   Every bicycle shall be equipped with an adequate brake when used on a
street or highway.
   (e)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(ORC 4511.56)
§ 474.06  RIDING BICYCLES UPON SIDEWALKS.
   A person operating a bicycle shall ride upon the sidewalk rather than the
roadway when sidewalks are available, except that no person shall ride a
bicycle upon a sidewalk upon or along which signs have been erected by
authority of Council or other duly designated local authority prohibiting such
bicycle riding, or within a business district. At no time shall a person under
the age of 11 years operate a bicycle on a street.
§ 474.07  SAFE RIDING REGULATIONS FOR BICYCLES.
   (a)   Whenever a designated usable path for bicycles has been provided
adjacent to a street, bicycle riders shall use such path and shall not use the
street.
   (b)   Whenever a person is riding a bicycle upon a sidewalk or street, such
person shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian and shall give an audible
signal before attempting to overtake and pass a pedestrian or another bicycle.
This audible signal must be given only by bell or other warning device capable
of giving an audible signal and shall be given at such a distance and in such a
manner as not to startle the person being overtaken and passed.
   (c)   No person shall ride a bicycle across or through any intersection
involving a through street. Such intersections are to be crossed by walking the
bicycle across or through the intersection.
   (d)   Whenever a person is riding a bicycle upon a sidewalk, the person,
before overtaking and passing a blind person carrying a white or metallic cane,
shall dismount and overtake or pass on foot.
   (e)   When a bicycle is operated on the street, the operator shall give hand
signals before turning, changing lanes or stopping. Such signals shall conform
with Ohio R.C. 4511.40, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (f)   Every rider of a bicycle shall exercise due care to avoid colliding
with any pedestrian or any vehicle upon any roadway, sidewalk or bicycle path,
or endangering the life, limb or property of any person while in the lawful use
of the streets, sidewalks or any other private or public property.
   (g)   No person shall operate a bicycle at a speed greater than is
reasonable and proper under the conditions then existing.
   (h)   The operator of a bicycle emerging from or turning into an alley,
driveway or building shall, upon approaching a sidewalk or the sidewalk area
extending across any alley, driveway or building, yield the right-of-way to all
pedestrians approaching on such sidewalk area. Upon entering the street, such
operator shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on such
street.
   (i)   No person shall engage in trick riding or operate a bicycle without
both hands upon the handle grips except when necessary to give the hand signals
required herein.
§ 474.08  PARKING; LOCKS.
   (a)   No person shall park a bicycle upon a sidewalk in such a manner as to
interfere with pedestrian traffic or damage the property of another.
   (b)   No person shall park a bicycle upon a roadway in such a manner as to
interfere with vehicular traffic.
   (c)   No bicycle shall remain unlocked when parked upon any public way or
place.
§ 474.09  PARENT'S RESPONSIBILITY.
   No parent of any child or guardian of any ward shall authorize or knowingly
permit any such child or ward to violate any of the provisions of this chapter.
§ 474.10  SUSPENSION OF RIDING PRIVILEGES; IMPOUNDING OF BICYCLES.
   In addition to the penalties provided in §§
408.01 and
408.02, a court may prohibit any person who violates or fails to comply with
any of the provisions of this chapter relating to bicycles from riding a
bicycle for a period not to exceed three months. In addition, any person
violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter
relating to bicycles may be punished by having his or her bicycle impounded for
a period not exceeding 30 days.
§ 474.11  OPERATION OF MOTORIZED BICYCLES.
   (a)   No person shall operate a motorized bicycle upon a highway or any
public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel
or parking, unless all of the following conditions are met:
      (1)   The person is 14 or 15 years of age and holds a valid probationary
motorized bicycle license issued after the person has passed the test provided
for in this section, or the person is 16 years of age or older and holds either
a valid commercial driver's license issued under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4506 or a
driver's license issued under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4507 or a valid motorized
bicycle license issued after the person has passed the test provided for in
this section, except that if a person is 16 years of age, has a valid
probationary motorized bicycle license and desires a motorized bicycle license,
the person is not required to comply with the testing requirements provided for
in this section.
      (2)   The motorized bicycle is equipped in accordance with the rules
adopted under subsection (b) of this section and is in proper working order.
      (3)   The person, if under 18 years of age, is wearing a protective
helmet on the person's head with the chin strap properly fastened and the
motorized bicycle is equipped with a rearview mirror.
      (4)   The person operates the motorized bicycle when practicable within
three feet of the right edge of the roadway obeying all traffic rules
applicable to vehicles.
   (b)   The Director of Public Safety, subject to Ohio R.C. Chapter 119, shall
adopt and promulgate rules concerning protective helmets, the equipment of
motorized bicycles, and the testing and qualifications of persons who do not
hold a valid driver's or commercial driver's license. The test shall be as near
as practicable to the examination required for a motorcycle operator's
endorsement under Ohio R.C. 4507.11. The test shall also require the operator
to give an actual demonstration of the operator's ability to operate and
control a motorized bicycle by driving one under the supervision of an
examining officer.
   (c)   Every motorized bicycle license expires on the birthday of the
applicant in the fourth year after the date it is issued, but in no event shall
any motorized bicycle license be issued for a period longer than four years.
   (d)   No person operating a motorized bicycle shall carry another person
upon the motorized bicycle.
   (e)   The protective helmet and rearview mirror required by subsection (a)
(3) of this section shall, on and after January 1, 1985, conform with rules
adopted by the Director under subsection (b) of this section.
   (f)   Each probationary motorized bicycle license or motorized bicycle
license shall be laminated with a transparent plastic material.
   (g)   Whoever violates subsection (a), (d), or (e) of this section is guilty
of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4511.521)
Statutory reference:
   Suspension of probationary motorized bicycle license by the State, see Ohio
R.C. 4510.34
§ 474.99  PENALTY.
Editor's note:
   See §§
408.01 and
408.02 for general Traffic Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 476:  SNOWMOBILES, OFF-HIGHWAY MOTORCYCLES AND ALL-PURPOSE VEHICLES
Section
476.01   Definitions.
476.02   Equipment.
476.03   Code application; prohibited operation.
476.04   Permitted operation.
476.05   Licensing requirements of operator.
476.06   Accident reports.
476.07   Local control within police power.
476.08   Registration of vehicles.
476.09   Operation of off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle without
certificate of title; failure to surrender.
476.99   Penalty.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Bicycles and motorcycles generally - see TRAF.
Ch. 474
   Operation in the Holden Arboretum - see TRAF.
448.03
   Operation on bicycle paths - see TRAF.
432.39
   Power of court to impound registration certificates for certain violations -
see Ohio R.C. 4519.47
   Required usage of helmets and safety glasses - see TRAF.
474.02
   See section histories for similar state law
   Street or highway defined - see TRAF.
402.44
§ 476.01  DEFINITIONS.
   (a)   "All Purpose Vehicle." Any self-propelled vehicle designed primarily
for cross-country travel on land and water, or on more than one type of
terrain, and steered by wheels or caterpillar treads, or any combination
thereof, including vehicles that operate on a cushion of air, vehicles commonly
known as all-terrain vehicles, all season vehicles, mini-bikes, trail bikes,
three-wheelers, and four wheelers, but excluding any self propelled vehicle not
principally used for purposes of personal transportation, any vehicle
principally used in playing golf, any motor vehicle or aircraft required to be
registered under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4503 or Ohio R.C. Chapter 4561 and any
vehicle excepted from definition as a motor vehicle by Ohio R.C. 4501.01(B).
   (b)   "Dealer." Any person or firm engaged in the business of manufacturing
or selling snowmobiles, off-highway motorcycles, or all-purpose vehicles at
wholesale or retail, or who rents, leases or otherwise furnishes snowmobiles,
off-highway motorcycles, or all-purpose vehicles for hire.
   (c)   "Electronic" and "electronic record." Have the same meanings as in
Ohio R.C. 4501.01.
   (d)   "Electronic dealer." A dealer whom the Registrar of Motor Vehicles
designates under Ohio R.C. 4519.511.
   (e)   "Interstate Highway." Any part of the interstate system of highways as
defined in subsection (e), 90 Stat. 431 (1976), 23 U.S.C. § 103, as amended.
   (f)   "Limited access highway" or "freeway." Have the same meanings as in
Ohio R.C. 5511.02.
   (g)   "Noise." means any sound which annoys or disturbs humans or causes or
tends to cause adverse psychological or physiological effect on humans.
   (h)   "Loud, Unnecessary, Excessive or Unusual Noise." means any sound which
(a) endangers or injures the safety or health of humans or animals; (b) annoys
or disturbs a reasonable person of normal sensitivities; or (c) endangers or
injures personal or real property.
   (i)   "Off-highway motorcycle." Every motorcycle, as defined in Ohio R.C.
4511.01, that is used or operated on land other than a street or highway.
   (j)   "Operator." Any person who operates or is in actual physical control
of a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle, or other right
to possession thereof
   (k)    "Owner." Any person or firm, other than a lienholder or dealer,
having title to a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle,
or other right to possession thereof
   (l)   "Snowmobile." Any self-propelled vehicle designed primarily for use on
snow or ice, and steered by skis, runners or caterpillar treads.
   (m)    "Street or Highway." Have the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 4511.01.
(Ord. 02-O-52, passed 11-4-2002; Am. Ord. 04-O-55, passed 3-7-2005)
§ 476.02  EQUIPMENT.
   (a)   In addition to any rules or regulations promulgated by the Ohio
Director of Public Safety pursuant to Ohio R.C. 4519.20 and Ohio R.C. Chapter
119, equipment of snowmobiles, off-highway motorcycles, and all-purpose
vehicles shall include but not necessarily be limited to requirements for the
following items of equipment:
      (1)   At least one headlight having a minimum candlepower of sufficient
intensity to reveal persons and objects at a distance of at least 100 feet
ahead under normal atmospheric conditions during hours of darkness;
      (2)   At least one red tail light having a minimum candlepower of
sufficient intensity to be plainly visible from a distance of 500 feet to the
rear under normal atmospheric conditions during hours of darkness;
      (3)   Every snowmobile, while traveling on packed snow, shall be capable
of carrying a driver who weighs 175 pounds or more, and, while carrying such
driver, be capable of stopping in no more than 40 feet from an initial steady
speed of 20 miles per hour, or locking its traction belt; and
      (4)   A muffler system capable of precluding the emission of excessive
smoke or exhaust fumes, and of limiting the engine noise of vehicles. On
snowmobiles manufactured after January 1, 1973, such requirement shall include
sound dampening equipment such that noise does not exceed 82 decibels on the
"A" scale at 50 feet as measured according to SAE J192 (September 1970).
   (b)   No person shall operate any snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or
all-purpose vehicle in violation of this section, except that equipment
specified in subsection (a)(1) and (a)(2) of this section shall not be required
on snowmobiles, off-highway motorcycles, or all-purpose vehicles operated
during the daylight hours.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates
subsection (b) of this section shall be fined not more than fifty dollars
($50.00). If the offender within the preceding year previously has committed a
violation of subsection (b) of this section or of Ohio R.C. 4519.20(B), whoever
violates subsection (b) of this section shall be fined not less than fifteen
dollars ($15.00) nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00), imprisoned not
more than three days, or both.
(ORC 4519.20)
§ 476.03  CODE APPLICATION; PROHIBITED OPERATION.
   (a)   The applicable provisions of this Traffic Code, regulating the
operation of vehicles, shall where appropriate be applied to the operation of
snowmobiles, off-highway motorcycles and all-purpose vehicles as defined
herein. Snowmobiles, off-highway motorcycles, or all-purpose vehicles shall
also be subject to the additional regulations set forth in subparagraphs (1)
through and including (20) set forth below.
      (1)   No snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle shall
be operated on any limited access highway or freeway or the right-of-way
thereof, except for emergency travel only during such time and in such manner
as the Ohio Director of Public Safety shall designate;
      (2)   No snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle shall
be operated on any private property, or in any nursery or planting area,
without the written or oral permission of the owner, or other person having the
right to possession of the property, except where otherwise allowed by law.
Written permission may be given by a posted notice which specifies the kind of
vehicles allowed, such as "Recreational Vehicles Allowed", "Trail Bikes
Allowed", "All-terrain Vehicles Allowed", or words substantially similar. The
failure of an owner to post signs prohibiting such use does not imply consent
for recreational vehicle use.
      (3)   No snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle shall
be operated on any land or waters controlled by the state, except at those
locations where a sign has been posted permitting such operation;
      (4)   No snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle shall
be operated on the tracks or right-of-way of any operating railroad;
      (5)   No snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle shall
be operated while transporting any firearm, bow or other implement for hunting
that is not unloaded and securely encased;
      (6)   No snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle shall
be operated for the purpose of chasing, pursuing, capturing or killing any
animal or wild fowl;
      (7)   No snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle shall
be operated during the time from sunset to sunrise, unless displaying lighted
lights as required by Ohio R.C. 4519.20 or a substantially similar municipal
ordinance. However, in no event shall a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or
all-purpose vehicle be operated between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.;
      (8)   No snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle shall
be operated on any street, highway, public or private property in willful or
wanton disregard for the safety of persons or property in violation of §
434.02 of the Codified Ordinances of the City of Kirtland;
      (9)   No person shall operate a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle or an
all-purpose vehicle on any street, highway or property without, at all times,
being in reasonable control of the vehicle;
      (10)   No snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle
shall be operated in excess of 25 miles per hour on publicly owned land;
      (11)   No snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle
shall be operated in such a way that the exhaust of the motor makes an
excessive or unusual noise;
      (12)   No snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle
shall be operated without a functioning muffler or with a muffler which fails
to meet the standards set by §
476.02(a)(4) of this ordinance or other applicable law;
      (13)   No snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle
shall be operated while under the influence of intoxicating liquor, fermented
malt beverages or controlled substances or drugs in violation of §
434.01 of the codified Ordinances of the City of Kirtland;
      (14)   No person shall post, alter, mutilate, or remove any notice or
sign relating to snowmobiles, off-highway motorcycles, or all-purpose vehicles
on property in which he has no legal interest;
      (15)   No person shall enter or leave the lands of another with a
snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle, or pass from one
portion of those lands to another, through a closed gate, without returning the
gate to its original position. No person shall enter or leave the lands of
another with a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, all-purpose vehicle by
cutting a wire or tearing down or destroying a fence;
      (16)   No snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle
shall be operated on any public property, including public school grounds, park
property, playgrounds and recreational areas, except on specifically designated
trails or in areas specifically designated for use of such vehicles;
      (17)   No snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle
shall be operated in a manner so as to create loud, unnecessary or unusual
noise so as to disturb or interfere with the peace and quiet of other persons;
      (18)   No snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle
shall be operated upon any sidewalk or pedestrian way in the city;
      (19)   No snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle
shall be operated, for a recreational purpose, unless duly registered with the
state of Ohio pursuant to Ohio R.C. Chapter 4519 and displaying the valid Ohio
registration sticker, in a plainly visible location thereon;
      (20)   No more than two of any of the aforedescribed vehicles, that are
not owned by and registered to the resident property owner of the premises upon
which they are being operated, shall be operated at the same time, on the same
premises, unless the operator or operators thereof first obtain written
permission therefor from an owner or tenant in possession of each premises
contiguous thereto.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided by the Codified Ordinances of the City of
Kirtland for the violation of §
434.01 or §
434.02 of the Codified Ordinances of the City of Kirtland, whoever violates any
subparagraph of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor upon conviction
for a first offense. If the offender is convicted of a violation of this
section twice within any 12-month period the violation for such second offense
within such 12-month period shall be a fourth degree misdemeanor. If the
offender is convicted of three or more violations of this section within any
12-month period the violation for such third or subsequent offense within such
12-month period shall be a third degree misdemeanor.
(Ord. 02-O-52, passed 11-4-2002; Am. Ord. 04-O-55, passed 3-7-2005)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see O.R.C. 4519.40
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor upon
conviction for a first offense. If the offender is convicted of a violation of
this section twice within any 12-month period the violation for such second
offense within such twelve month period shall be a fourth degree misdemeanor.
If the offender is convicted of three or more violations of this section within
any 12-month period the violation for such third or subsequent offense within
such twelve month period shall be a third degree misdemeanor.
(Ord. 02-O-52, passed 11-4-2002)
§ 476.04  PERMITTED OPERATION.
   Snowmobiles, off-highway motorcycles, and all-purpose vehicles may be
operated as follows:
   (a)   To make a crossing of a highway, other than a highway as designated in
Ohio R.C. 4519.40(A)(1) or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance,
whenever the crossing can be made in safety and will not interfere with the
movement of vehicular traffic approaching from any direction on the highway,
and provided that the operator yields the right-of-way to any approaching
traffic that presents an immediate hazard;
   (b)   On highways in the county or township road systems whenever the local
authority having jurisdiction over such highways so permits;
   (c)   Off and alongside street or highway for limited distances from the
point of unloading from a conveyance to the point at which the snowmobile, off-
highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle is intended and authorized to be
operated;
   (d)   On the berm or shoulder of a highway, other than a highway as
designated in Ohio R.C. 4519.40(A)(1) or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, when the terrain permits such operation to be undertaken safely and
without the necessity of entering any traffic lane;
   (e)   On the berm or shoulder or a county or township road, while traveling
from one area of operation of the snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all-
purpose vehicle to another such area.
   (f)   For snowmobiles without metal studded tracks and all-purpose vehicles,
on state highways located on an island in Lake Erie, including limited access
highways and freeways, between the first day of November and the thirtieth day
of April, provided that all of the following conditions apply:
      (1)   The operator has a valid driver’s license as required under R.C. §
4519.44.
      (2)   The snowmobile or all-purpose vehicle is in compliance with rules
governing safety equipment adopted under R.C. § 4519.20.
      (3)   The owner of the snowmobile or all-purpose vehicle maintains proof
of financial responsibility for both on-road and off-road use of the snowmobile
or all-purpose vehicle.
      (4)   The operator obeys all traffic rules and regulations.
(ORC 4519.41)
§ 476.05  LICENSING REQUIREMENTS OF OPERATOR.
   (a)   No person who does not hold a valid, current motor vehicle driver’s or
commercial driver’s license, motorcycle operator’s endorsement or probationary
license, issued under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4506 or Ohio R.C. Chapter 4507 or a
valid, current driver's license issued by another jurisdiction, shall operate a
snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle on any street or
highway in this municipality, on any portion of the right-of-way thereof, or on
any public land or waters.
   (b)   No person who is less than 16 years of age shall operate a snowmobile,
off-highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle on any land or waters other than
private property or waters owned by or leased to the person’s parent or
guardian, unless accompanied by another person who is 18 years of age or older,
and who holds a license as provided in subsection (a) of this section, except
that the Ohio Department of Natural Resources may permit such operation on
state controlled land under its jurisdiction when such person is less than 16
years of age and is accompanied by a parent or guardian who is a licensed
driver 18 years of age or older.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not less than fifty
dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), or imprisoned
not less than 3 nor more than 30 days, or both.
(ORC 4519.44)
§ 476.06  ACCIDENT REPORTS.
   (a)   The operator of a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all-purpose
vehicle involved in any accident resulting in bodily injury to or death of any
person or damage to the property of any person in excess of one hundred dollars
($100.00) shall report the accident within 48 hours to the Chief of Police, and
within 30 days shall forward a written report of the accident to the Ohio
Registrar of Motor Vehicles on a form prescribed by the Registrar. If the
operator is physically incapable of making the reports and there is another
participant in the accident not so incapacitated, the participant shall make
the reports. In the event there is no other participant, and the operator is
other than the owner, the owner, within the prescribed periods of time, shall
make the reports.
   (b)   Any law enforcement officer or other person authorized by Ohio R.C.
4519.42 and 4519.43 who investigates or receives information of an accident
involving a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle shall
forward to the Registrar a written report of the accident within 48 hours.
(ORC 4519.46)
§ 476.07  LOCAL CONTROL WITHIN POLICE POWER.
   Nothing contained in this chapter shall prevent the municipality from
regulating the operation of snowmobiles, off-highway motorcycle, and all-
purpose vehicles on streets and highways and other public property under
municipal jurisdiction, and within the reasonable exercise of the police power,
except that no registration or licensing of any snowmobile, off-highway
motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle required to be registered or titled under
Ohio R.C. Chapter 4519 shall be required.
(ORC 4519.48)
§ 476.08  REGISTRATION OF VEHICLES.
   (a)   (1)   Except as provided in division (b), (c) and (d) of this section,
no person shall operate any snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose
vehicle within this municipality unless the snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle
or all-purpose vehicle is registered and numbered in accordance with R.C. §§
4519.03 and 4519.04.
      (2)   Except as provided in R.C. § 4511.215 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, no registration is required for a mini-truck that is
operated within this state. A mini-truck may be operated only in accordance
with R.C. § 4511.215 and R.C. § 4519.401, or any substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance.
   (b)   (1)   No registration is required for a snowmobile or off-highway
motorcycle that is operated exclusively upon lands owned by the owner of the
snowmobile or off-highway motorcycle, or on lands to which the owner of the
snowmobile or off-highway motorcycle has a contractual right.
      (2)   No registration is required for an all-purpose vehicle that is used
primarily for agricultural purposes when the owner qualifies for the current
agricultural use valuation tax credit, unless it is to be used on any public
land, trail, or right-of-way.
      (3)   Any all-purpose vehicle exempted from registration under subsection
(b)(2) of this section and operated for agricultural purposes may use public
roads and rights-of-way when traveling from one farm field to another, when
such use does not violate Ohio R.C. 4519.41.
      (4)   No registration is required for a snowmobile or all-purpose vehicle
that is operated on a state highway as authorized by R.C. § 4519.41(F).
   (c)   No registration is required for a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle,
or all-purpose vehicle owned and used in this State by a resident of another
state whenever that state has in effect a registration law similar to Ohio R.C.
Chapter 4519 and the snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle
is properly registered under that state's law. Any snowmobile, off-highway
motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle owned and used in this State by a resident
of a state not having a registration law similar to Ohio R.C. Chapter 4519
shall comply with Ohio R.C. 4519.09.
   (d)   No registration is required for a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle,
or all-purpose vehicle owned and used in this municipality by the United
States, another state or a political subdivision thereof, but the snowmobile,
off-highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle shall display the name of the
owner thereon.
   (e)   The owner or operator of any all-purpose vehicle operated or used upon
the waters in this municipality shall comply with Ohio R.C. Chapter 1547 and
Ohio R.C. Chapter 1548 relative to the operation of watercraft.
   (f)   Whoever violates subsection (a) of this section shall be fined not
less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00).
(ORC 4519.02)
Statutory reference:
   Destruction or disposal of vehicle; transfer of ownership; change of
address; loss of certificate, see Ohio R.C. 4519.05
   Registration of emergency vehicles, see Ohio R.C. 4519.08
   Registration procedure, see Ohio R.C. 4519.03
   Temporary license placards and fees, see Ohio R.C. 4519.10
   Temporary operating permit for certain nonresidents, see Ohio R.C. 4519.09
§ 476.09  OPERATION OF OFF-HIGHWAY MOTORCYCLE OR ALL-PURPOSE VEHICLE WITHOUT
CERTIFICATE OF TITLE; FAILURE TO SURRENDER.
   (a)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Operate in this state an off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose
vehicle without having a certificate of title for the off-highway motorcycle or
all-purpose vehicle if such a certificate is required by Ohio R.C. Chapter 4519
to be issued for the off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle, or, if a
physical certificate of title has not been issued for it, operate an off-
highway motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle knowing that the ownership
information related to the motorcycle or vehicle has not been entered into the
automated title processing system by a Clerk of a Court of Common Pleas.
      (2)   Operate in this municipality an off-highway motorcycle or all-
purpose vehicle if a certificate of title to the off-highway motorcycle or all-
purpose vehicle has been issued and then has been canceled.
      (3)   Fail to surrender any certificate of title upon cancellation of it
by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles and notice of the cancellation as prescribed
in Ohio R.C. Chapter 4519.
      (4)   Fail to surrender the certificate of title to a Clerk of a Court of
Common Pleas as provided in Ohio R.C. Chapter 4519, in case of the destruction
or dismantling of, or change in, the off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose
vehicle described in the certificate of title.
      (5)   Violate any provision of Ohio R.C. 4519.51 to 4519.70 for which no
penalty is otherwise provided or any lawful rules adopted pursuant to those
sections.
      (6)   Operate in this state an off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose
vehicle knowing that the certificate of title to or ownership of the motorcycle
or vehicle as otherwise reflected in the automated title processing system has
been canceled.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not more than two hundred
dollars ($200.00), or imprisoned not more than 90 days, or both.
(ORC 4519.66)
§ 476.99  PENALTY.
Editor's note:
   See §§
408.01 and
408.02 for general Traffic Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
PART SIX - GENERAL OFFENSES CODE
   Chapter
         
606.   General Provisions, Administration and Enforcement.
         
612.   Alcoholic Beverages.
         
618.   Animals.
         
624.   Drugs.
         
630.   Gambling.
         
636.   Offenses Relating to Persons.
         
642.   Offenses Relating to Property.
         
648.   Peace Disturbances.
         
660.   Safety, Sanitation and Health.
         
666.   Sex Related Offenses.
         
672.   Weapons and Explosives.
         
698.   Penalties and Sentencing.
CHAPTER 606:  GENERAL PROVISIONS, ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
Section
606.01   Definitions.
606.02   Culpable mental states.
606.03   Classification of offenses.
606.04   Offenses defined.
606.05   Rules of construction.
606.055   Criminal law jurisdiction.
606.06   Limitation on criminal prosecutions.
606.07   Requirements for criminal liability; voluntary intoxication.
606.08   Organizational criminal liability.
606.09   Personal accountability for organizational conduct.
606.10   Falsification.
606.105   False report of child abuse or neglect.
606.11   Compounding a crime.
606.12   Failure to report a crime or death.
606.13   Failure to aid a law enforcement officer.
606.14   Obstructing official business.
606.15   Obstructing justice.
606.16   Resisting arrest.
606.165   Compliance with lawful order of police officer; fleeing.
606.17   Having an unlawful interest in a public contract.
606.175   Conflicts of interest.
606.18   Soliciting or receiving improper compensation.
606.19   Dereliction of duty.
606.20   Interfering with civil rights.
606.21   Attempts.
606.22   Complicity.
606.23   Detention of shoplifters and those committing motion picture piracy;
protection of institutional property.
606.24   Disposition of unclaimed or forfeited property held by Police
Division.
606.25   Impersonating an officer.
606.26   Display of law enforcement agency emblem.
606.27   Recovery of costs of confinement.
606.28   Using sham legal process.
606.29   Failure to disclose personal information.
606.30   Misuse of 9-1-1 system.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Arrest without warrant for misdemeanor - see Ohio R.C. 2935.03
   Arrest without warrant for misdemeanor - see Ohio R.C. 2935.03
   Burden and degree of proof - see Ohio R.C. 2901.05
   Cordoning off riot areas; prohibiting sales of firearms and explosives - see
Ohio R.C. 3761.16
   Criteria for probation; conditions of probation - see Ohio R.C. 2951.02
   Criteria for probation; conditions of probation - see Ohio R.C. 2951.02
   Declaratory judgment in sex related offenses - see GEN. OFF.
666.15
   Declaratory judgment in sex related offenses - see GEN. OFF.
666.15
   Definition of "imprisoned" - see Ohio R.C. 1.05
   Degree of offense; charge and verdict; prior conviction - see Ohio R.C.
2945.75
   Degree of offense; charge and verdict; prior conviction - see Ohio R.C.
2945.75
   Discharge for delay in trial - see Ohio R.C. 2945.73
   Discharge for delay in trial - see Ohio R.C. 2945.73
   Disposition of unclaimed, abandoned and junk motor vehicles - see Ohio R.C.
737.32, 4513.61 et seq.
   Extension of time for hearing or trial - see Ohio R.C. 2945.72
   Extension of time for hearing or trial - see Ohio R.C. 2945.72
   Injunction and abatement of nuisance in sex related offenses - see GEN. OFF.
666.16
   Injunction and abatement of nuisance in sex related offenses - see GEN. OFF.
666.16
   Justifiable use of force to suppress riot - see GEN. OFF.
648.03
   Justifiable use of force to suppress riot - see GEN. OFF.
648.03
   License or permit to possess dangerous ordnance - see GEN. OFF.
672.05
   Making false alarms - see GEN OFF.
648.08
   Making false alarms - see GEN. OFF.
648.08
   Misconduct at an emergency - see GEN. OFF.
648.06
   Misconduct at an emergency - see GEN. OFF.
648.06
   Payment of costs and expenses on change of venue - see Ohio R.C. 2931.31
   Penalties and sentencing - see GEN. OFF.
Ch. 698
   Penalties and sentencing - see GEN. OFF.
Ch. 698
   Procedure on affidavit or complaint; withdrawal of unexecuted warrants - see
Ohio R.C 2935.10
   Procedure on affidavit or complaint; withdrawal of unexecuted warrants - see
Ohio R.C. 2935.10
   Procedure on change of venue - see Ohio R.C. 2931.29
   Rabies quarantine - see GEN. OFF.
618.11
   Rabies quarantine - see GEN. OFF.
618.11
   Registration of dogs - see GEN. OFF.
618.08
   Registration of dogs - see GEN. OFF.
618.08
   Registration of sex offenders in cities and counties - see Ohio R.C. 2950.01
et seq.
   Registration of sex offenders in cities and counties - see Ohio R.C. 2950.01
et seq.
   Reports of vehicle accidents - see TRAF.
436.11et seq.,
476.06
   Right of trial by jury - see Ohio R.C. 2945.17
   Right of trial by jury - see Ohio R.C. 2945.17
   Rules of evidence in sex related offenses - see GEN. OFF.
666.10
   Rules of evidence in sex related offenses - see GEN. OFF.
666.10
   Satisfaction of fine; credit for time served - see Ohio R.C. 2947.14
   Satisfaction of fine; credit for time served - see Ohio R.C. 2947.14
   See section histories for similar state law
   Statute of limitations for income tax violations - see Ohio R.C. 718.06
   Time within which hearing or trial must be held - see Ohio R.C. 2945.71
   Time within which hearing or trial must be held - see Ohio R.C. 2945.71
   Transfer of prisoner on change of venue - see Ohio R.C. 2931.30
   Treatment of drug dependent persons in lieu of conviction - see Ohio R.C.
2951.041
   Treatment of drug dependent persons in lieu of conviction - see Ohio R.C.
2951.041
   Venue - see Ohio R.C. 2901.12, 2931.29 et seq.
§ 606.01  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   (a)   "Campaign committee", "contribution", "legislative campaign fund",
"political action committee", "political contributing entity", and "political
party."  Have the same meanings as in Ohio R.C. 3517.01.
   (b)   "Contraband."  Any property that is illegal for a person to acquire or
possess under a statute, ordinance, or rule, or that a trier of fact lawfully
determines to be illegal to possess by reason of the property's involvement in
an offense. "Contraband" includes, but is not limited to, all of the following:
      (1)   Any controlled substance, as defined in Ohio R.C. 3719.01, or any
device or paraphernalia related thereto;
      (2)   Any unlawful gambling device or paraphernalia;
      (3)   Any dangerous ordnance or obscene material.
   (c)   "Deadly force."  Any force that carries a substantial risk that it
will proximately result in the death of any person.
   (d)   "Detention."  Arrest; confinement in any vehicle subsequent to an
arrest; confinement in any public or private facility for custody of persons
charged with or convicted of crime in this state or another state or under the
laws of the United States or alleged or found to be a delinquent child or
unruly child in this state or another state or under the laws of the United
States; hospitalization, institutionalization, or confinement in any public or
private facility that is ordered pursuant to or under the authority of Ohio
R.C. 2945.37, 2945.371, 2945.38, 2945.39, 2945.40, 2945.401 or 2945.402;
confinement in any vehicle for transportation to or from any facility of any of
those natures; detention for extradition or deportation; except as provided in
this subsection, supervision by any employee of any facility of any of those
natures that is incidental to hospitalization, institutionalization, or
confinement in the facility but that occurs outside the facility; supervision
by an employee of the Department of Rehabilitation and Correction of a person
on any type of release from a state correctional institution; or confinement in
any vehicle, airplane, or place while being returned from outside of this state
into this state by a private person or entity pursuant to a contract entered
into under Ohio R.C. 311.29(E) or Ohio R.C. 5149.03(B). For a person confined
in a county jail who participates in a county jail industry program pursuant to
Ohio R.C. 5147.30, "detention" includes time spent at an assigned work site and
going to and from the work site.
   (e)   "Detention facility."  Any public or private place used for the
confinement of a person charged with or convicted of any crime in this state or
another state or under the laws of the United States or alleged or found to be
a delinquent child or an unruly child in this state or another state or under
the laws of the United States.
   (f)   "Force."  Any violence, compulsion, or constraint physically exerted
by any means upon or against a person or thing.
   (g)   "Law enforcement officer."  Any of the following:
      (1)   A sheriff, deputy sheriff, constable, police officer of a township
or joint police district, marshal, deputy marshal, municipal police officer,
member of a police force employed by a metropolitan housing authority under
Ohio R.C. 3735.31(D) or state highway patrol trooper.
      (2)   An officer, agent, or employee of the state or any of its agencies,
instrumentalities, or political subsubsections, upon whom, by statute, a duty
to conserve the peace or to enforce all or certain laws is imposed and the
authority to arrest violators is conferred, within the limits of such statutory
duty and authority.
      (3)   The Mayor, in a capacity as chief conservator of the peace within
the municipality.
      (4)   A member of an auxiliary police force organized by the county,
township, or municipal law enforcement authorities, within the scope of the
member's appointment or commission.
      (5)   A person lawfully called pursuant to Ohio R.C. 311.07 to aid a
sheriff in keeping the peace, for the purposes and during the time when the
person is called.
      (6)   A person appointed by a Mayor pursuant to Ohio R.C. 737.01 as a
special patrolling officer during a riot or emergency, for the purposes and
during the time when the person is appointed.
      (7)   A member of the organized militia of this state or the armed forces
of the United States, lawfully called to duty to aid civil authorities in
keeping the peace or protect against domestic violence.
      (8)   A prosecuting attorney, assistant prosecuting attorney, secret
service officer, or municipal prosecutor.
      (9)   A veterans' home police officer appointed under Ohio R.C. 5907.02.
      (10)   A member of a police force employed by a regional transit
authority under Ohio R.C. 306.35(Y).
      (11)   A special police officer employed by a port authority under Ohio
R.C. 4582.04 or 4582.28.
      (12)   The House of Representatives Sergeant at Arms if the House of
Representatives Sergeant at Arms has arrest authority pursuant to Ohio R.C.
101.311(E)(1) and an Assistant House of Representatives Sergeant at Arms.
      (13)   The Senate Sergeant at Arms and an Assistant Senate Sergeant at
Arms.
      (14)   A special police officer employed by a municipal corporation at a
municipal airport, or other municipal air navigation facility, that has
scheduled operations, as defined in 14 C.F.R. 119.3, as amended, and that is
required to be under a security program and is governed by aviation security
rules of the Transportation Security Administration of the United States
Department of Transportation as provided in 49 C.F.R. Parts 1542 and 1544, as
amended.
   (h)   "Not guilty by reason of insanity."  A person is "not guilty by reason
of insanity" relative to a charge of an offense only if the person proves, in
the manner specified in Ohio R.C. 2901.05, that at the time of the commission
of the offense, he or she did not know, as a result of a severe mental disease
or defect, the wrongfulness of his or her acts.
   (i)   "Offense of violence."
      (1)   A violation of Ohio R.C. 2903.01, 2903.02, 2903.03, 2903.04,
2903.11, 2903.12, 2903.13, 2903.15, 2903.21, 2903.211, 2903.22, 2905.01,
2905.02, 2905.11, 2905.32, 2907.02, 2907.03, 2907.05, 2909.02, 2909.03,
2909.24, 2911.01, 2911.02, 2911.11, 2917.01, 2917.02, 2917.03, 2917.31,
2919.25, 2921.03, 2921.04, 2921.34, or 2923.161, of subsection (A)(1) of R.C. §
2903.34, of subsection (A)(1), (2) or (3) of Ohio R.C. 2911.12, or of
subsection (B)(1), (2), (3) or (4) of Ohio R.C. 2919.22, or felonious sexual
penetration in violation of former Ohio R.C. 2907.12;
      (2)   A violation of an existing or former municipal ordinance or law of
this or any other state or of the United States, substantially equivalent to
any section, subsection or offense listed in subsection (1) of this definition;
      (3)   An offense, other than a traffic offense, under an existing or
former municipal ordinance or law of this or any other state or of the United
States, committed purposely or knowingly, and involving physical harm to
persons or a risk of serious physical harm to persons;
      (4)   A conspiracy or attempt to commit, or complicity in committing, any
offense under subsection (1), (2), or (3) of this definition.
   (j)   "Official proceeding."  Any proceeding before a legislative, judicial,
administrative, or other governmental agency or official authorized to take
evidence under oath, and includes any proceeding before a referee, hearing
examiner, commissioner, notary, or other person taking testimony or a
deposition in connection with an official proceeding.
   (k)   "Party official."  Any person who holds an elective or appointive post
in a political party in the United States or this state, by virtue of which he
or she directs, conducts, or participates in directing or conducting party
affairs at any level of responsibility.
   (l)   "Person."
      (1)   A.   Subject to subsection (2) of this definition, as used in any
section contained in this General Offenses Code that sets forth a criminal
offense, "person" includes all of the following:
            1.   An individual, corporation, business trust, estate, trust,
partnership and association.
            2.   An unborn human who is viable.
         B.   As used in any section contained in this General Offenses Code
that does not set forth a criminal offense, "person" includes an individual,
corporation, business trust, estate, partnership and association.
         C.   As used in subsection (1)A.2. of this definition, "unborn human"
means an individual organism of the species Homo sapiens from fertilization
until live birth. "Viable" means the stage of development of a human fetus at
which there is a realistic probability of maintaining and nourishing of a life
outside the womb with or without temporary artificial life-sustaining support.
      (2)   Notwithstanding subsection (1)A. of this definition, in no case
shall the portion of the definition of the term "person" that is set forth in
subsection (1)A.2. of this definition be applied or construed in any section
contained in this General Offenses Code that sets forth a criminal offense in
any of the following manners:
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in subsection (2)A. of this
definition, in a manner so that the offense prohibits or is construed as
prohibiting any pregnant woman or her physician from performing an abortion
with the consent of the pregnant woman, with the consent of the pregnant woman
implied by law in a medical emergency, or with the approval of one otherwise
authorized by law to consent to medical treatment on behalf of the pregnant
woman. An abortion that violates the conditions described in the immediately
preceding sentence may be punished as a violation of Ohio R.C. 2903.01,
2903.02, 2903.03, 2903.04, 2903.05, 2903.06, 2903.08, 2903.11, 2903.12,
2903.13, 2903.14, 2903.21 or 2903.22, or any substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, as applicable. An abortion that does not violate the conditions
described in the second immediately preceding sentence but that does violate
Ohio R.C. 2919.12, 2919.13(B), 2919.151, 2919.17 or 2919.18, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, may be punished as a violation of
such section, as applicable. Consent is sufficient under this subsection if it
is of the type otherwise adequate to permit medical treatment to the pregnant
woman, even if it does not comply with Ohio R.C. 2919.12.
         B.   In a manner so that the offense is applied or is construed as
applying to a woman based on an act or omission of the woman that occurs while
she is or was pregnant and that results in any of the following:
            1.   Her delivery of a stillborn baby;
            2.   Her causing, in any other manner, the death in utero of a
viable, unborn human that she is carrying;
            3.   Her causing the death of her child who is born alive but who
dies from one or more injuries that are sustained while the child is a viable,
unborn human;
            4.   Her causing her child who is born alive to sustain one or more
injuries while the child is a viable, unborn human;
            5.   Her causing, threatening to cause, or attempting to cause, in
any other manner, an injury, illness, or other psychological illness or
condition, regardless of its duration or gravity, to a viable, unborn human
that she is carrying.
   (m)   "Physical harm to persons."  Any injury, illness, or other
physiological impairment, regardless of its gravity or duration.
   (n)   "Physical harm to property."  Any tangible or intangible damage to
property that, in any degree, results in loss to its value or interferes with
its use or enjoyment. "Physical harm to property" does not include wear and
tear occasioned by normal use.
   (o)   "Privilege."  An immunity, license, or right conferred by law, or
bestowed by express or implied grant, or arising out of status, position,
office, or relationship, or growing out of necessity.
   (p)   "Property."
      (1)   Any property, real or personal, tangible or intangible, and any
interest or license in that property. "Property" includes, but is not limited
to, cable television service, other telecommunications service,
telecommunications devices, information service, computers, data, computer
software, financial instruments associated with computers, other documents
associated with computers, or copies of the documents, whether in machine or
human-readable form, trade secrets, trademarks, copyrights, patents, and
property protected by a trademark, copyright or patent. "Financial instruments
associated with computers" include, but are not limited to, checks, drafts,
warrants, money orders, notes of indebtedness, certificates of deposit, letters
of credit, bills of credit or debit cards, financial transaction authorization
mechanisms, marketable securities, or any computer system representations of
any of them.
      (2)   As used in this definition, "trade secret" has the same meaning as
in Ohio R.C. 1333.61, and "telecommunications service" and "information
service" have the same meanings as in Ohio R.C. 2913.01.
      (3)   As used in this definition and in the definition of "contraband" in
this section, "cable television service", "computer", "computer network",
"computer software", "computer system", "data", and "telecommunications device"
have the same meanings as in Ohio R.C. 2913.01.
   (q)   “Provider agreement.” Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 5164.01.
   (r)   “Public official.”  Any elected or appointed officer, employee, or
agent of the state or any political subsubsection thereof, whether in a
temporary or permanent capacity, and includes but is not limited to
legislators, judges, and law enforcement officers.  The term does not include
an employee, officer, or governor-appointed member of the board of directors of
the nonprofit corporation formed under Ohio R.C. 187.01.
   (s)   "Public servant."  Any of the following:
      (1)   Any of the following:
         A.   Any public official;
         B.   Any person performing ad hoc a governmental function, including
but not limited to a juror, member of a temporary commission, master,
arbitrator, advisor, or consultant;
         C.   A person who is a candidate for public office, whether or not he
or she is elected or appointed to the office for which he or she is a
candidate. A person is a candidate for purposes of this subsection if he or she
has been nominated according to law for election or appointment to public
office, or if he or she has filed a petition or petitions as required by law to
have his or her name placed on the ballot in a primary, general, or special
election, or if he or she campaigns as a write-in candidate in any primary,
general, or special election.
      (2)   The term does not include an employee, officer, or governor-
appointed member of the board of directors of the nonprofit corporation formed
under Ohio R.C. 187.01.
   (t)   "Risk."  A significant possibility, as contrasted with a remote
possibility, that a certain result may occur or that certain circumstances may
exist.
   (u)   "School", "school building", and "school premises."  Have the same
meanings as in Ohio R.C. 2925.01.
   (v)   "School activity."  Any activity held under the auspices of a board of
education of a city, local, exempted village, joint vocational, or cooperative
education school district; a governing authority of a community school
established under Ohio R.C. Chapter 3314; a governing board of an educational
service center; or the governing body of a nonpublic school for which the state
Board of Education prescribes minimum standards under Ohio R.C. 3301.07.
   (w)   "School bus."  Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 4511.01.
   (x)   "School safety zone."  Consists of a school, school building, school
premises, school activity, and school bus.
   (y)   "Serious physical harm to persons."  Any of the following:
      (1)   Any mental illness or condition of such gravity as would normally
require hospitalization or prolonged psychiatric treatment;
      (2)   Any physical harm that carries a substantial risk of death;
      (3)   Any physical harm that involves some permanent incapacity, whether
partial or total, or that involves some temporary, substantial incapacity;
      (4)   Any physical harm that involves some permanent disfigurement, or
that involves some temporary, serious disfigurement;
      (5)   Any physical harm that involves acute pain of such duration as to
result in substantial suffering, or that involves any degree of prolonged or
intractable pain.
   (z)   "Serious physical harm to property."  Any physical harm to property
that does either of the following:
      (1)   Results in substantial loss to the value of the property, or
requires a substantial amount of time, effort, or money to repair or replace;
      (2)   Temporarily prevents the use or enjoyment of the property, or
substantially interferes with its use or enjoyment for an extended period of
time.
   (aa)   "Substantial risk."  A strong possibility, as contrasted with a
remote or significant possibility, that a certain result may occur or that
certain circumstances may exist.
   (bb)   "Valuable thing" or "valuable benefit."  Includes, but is not limited
to, a contribution. This inclusion does not indicate or imply that a
contribution was not included in those terms before September 17, 1986.
(ORC 2901.01, 2921.01)
§ 606.02  CULPABLE MENTAL STATES.
   (a)   A person acts purposely when it is the person’s specific intention to
cause a certain result, or, when the gist of the offense is a prohibition
against conduct of a certain nature, regardless of what the offender intends to
accomplish thereby, it is the offender’s specific intention to engage in
conduct of that nature.
   (b)   A person acts knowingly, regardless of purpose, when the person is
aware that the person’s conduct will probably cause a certain result or will
probably be of a certain nature. A person has knowledge of circumstances when
the person is aware that such circumstances probably exist. When knowledge of
the existence of a particular fact is an element of an offense, such knowledge
is established if a person subjectively believes that there is a high
probability of its existence and fails to make inquiry or acts with a conscious
purpose to avoid learning the fact.
   (c)   A person acts recklessly when, with heedless indifference to the
consequences, the person disregards a substantial and unjustifiable risk that
the person’s conduct is likely to cause a certain result or is likely to be of
a certain nature. A person is reckless with respect to circumstances when, with
heedless indifference to the consequences, the person disregards a substantial
and unjustifiable risk that such circumstances are likely to exist.
   (d)   A person acts negligently when, because of a substantial lapse from
due care, the person fails to perceive or avoid a risk that the person’s
conduct may cause a certain result or may be of a certain nature. A person is
negligent with respect to circumstances when, because of a substantial lapse
from due care, the person fails to perceive or avoid a risk that such
circumstances may exist.
   (e)   When the section defining an offense provides that negligence suffices
to establish an element thereof, then recklessness, knowledge, or purpose is
also sufficient culpability for such element. When recklessness suffices to
establish an element of an offense, then knowledge or purpose is also
sufficient culpability for such element. When knowledge suffices to establish
an element of an offense, then purpose is also sufficient culpability for such
element.
(ORC 2901.22)
§ 606.03  CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENSES.
   As used in this General Offenses Code:
   (a)   Offenses include misdemeanors of the first, second, third, and fourth
degree, minor misdemeanors, and offenses not specifically classified.
   (b)   Regardless of the penalty that may be imposed, any offense
specifically classified as a misdemeanor is a misdemeanor.
   (c)   Any offense not specifically classified is a misdemeanor if
imprisonment for not more than one year may be imposed as a penalty.
   (d)   Any offense not specifically classified is a minor misdemeanor if the
only penalty that may be imposed is one of the following:
      (1)   For an offense committed prior to January 1, 2004, a fine not
exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00);
      (2)   For an offense committed on or after January 1, 2004, a fine not
exceeding one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00), community service under Ohio
R.C. 2929.27(D), or a financial sanction other than a fine under Ohio R.C.
2929.28.
(ORC 2901.02)
§ 606.04  OFFENSES DEFINED.
   (a)   No conduct constitutes a criminal offense against the municipality
unless it is defined as an offense in this General Offenses Code.
   (b)   An offense is defined when one or more sections of this General
Offenses Code state a positive prohibition or enjoin a specific duty, and
provide a penalty for violation of such prohibition or failure to meet such
duty.
   (c)   This section does not affect the power of a court to punish for
contempt or to employ any sanction authorized by law to enforce an order, civil
judgment or decree.
(ORC 2901.03)
§ 606.05  RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.
   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in subsection (c) or (d) of this section,
sections of this General Offenses Code defining offenses or penalties shall be
strictly construed against the municipality and liberally construed in favor of
the accused.
   (b)   Rules of criminal procedure and sections of this General Offenses Code
providing for criminal procedure shall be construed so as to effect the fair,
impartial, speedy, and sure administration of justice.
   (c)   Any provision of a section of this General Offenses Code that refers
to a previous conviction of or plea of guilty to a violation of a section of
this General Offenses Code, the Ohio Revised Code or a subsection of a section
of this General Offenses Code or the Ohio Revised Code shall be construed to
also refer to a previous conviction of or plea of guilty to a substantially
equivalent offense under an existing or former law of this municipality, state,
another state, or the United States or under an existing or former municipal
ordinance.
   (d)   Any provision of this Code that refers to a section, or to a
subsection of a section, of this Code that defines or specifies a criminal
offense shall be construed to also refer to an existing or former law of this
state, another state, or the United States, to an existing or former municipal
ordinance, or to an existing or former subsection of any such existing or
former law or ordinance that defines or specifies, or that defined or
specified, a substantially equivalent offense.
(ORC 2901.04)
§ 606.055  CRIMINAL LAW JURISDICTION.
   (a)   A person is subject to criminal prosecution and punishment in this
municipality if any of the following occur:
      (1)   The person commits an offense under the laws of this municipality,
any element of which takes place in this municipality;
      (2)   While in this municipality, the person attempts to commit, or is
guilty of complicity in the commission of, an offense in another jurisdiction,
which offense is an offense under both the laws of this municipality and the
other jurisdiction, or, while in this municipality, the person conspires to
commit an offense in another jurisdiction, which offense is an offense under
both the laws of this municipality and the other jurisdiction, and a
substantial overt act in furtherance of the conspiracy is undertaken in this
municipality by the person or another person involved in the conspiracy,
subsequent to the person's entrance into the conspiracy. In any case in which a
person attempts to commit, is guilty of complicity in the commission of, or
conspires to commit an offense in another jurisdiction as described in this
subsection, the person is subject to criminal prosecution and punishment in
this municipality for the attempt, complicity, or conspiracy, and for any
resulting offense that is committed or completed in the other jurisdiction;
      (3)   While out of this municipality, the person conspires or attempts to
commit, or is guilty of complicity in the commission of, an offense in this
municipality;
      (4)   While out of this municipality, the person omits to perform a legal
duty imposed by the laws of this municipality, which omission affects a
legitimate interest of the municipality in protecting, governing or regulating
any person, property, thing, transaction, or activity in this municipality;
      (5)   While out of this municipality, the person unlawfully takes or
retains property and subsequently brings any of the unlawfully taken or
retained property into this municipality;
      (6)   While out of this municipality, the person unlawfully takes or
entices another person and subsequently brings the other person into this
municipality;
      (7)   The person, by means of a computer, computer system, computer
network, telecommunication, telecommunications device, telecommunications
service, or information service, causes or knowingly permits any writing, data,
image or other telecommunication to be disseminated or transmitted into this
municipality in violation of the law of this state or municipality.
   (b)   In homicide, the element referred to in subsection (a)(1) of this
section includes the act that causes death, the physical contact that causes
death, the death itself, or any other element that is set forth in the offense
in question. If any part of the body of a homicide victim is found in this
municipality, the death is presumed to have occurred within this municipality.
   (c)   (1)   This municipality includes the land and water within its
boundaries and the air space above that land and water, with respect to which
this municipality has either exclusive or concurrent legislative jurisdiction.
Where the boundary between this municipality and another jurisdiction is
disputed, the disputed territory is conclusively presumed to be within this
municipality for purposes of this section.
      (2)   The courts of common pleas of Adams, Athens, Belmont, Brown,
Clermont, Columbiana, Gallia, Hamilton, Jefferson, Lawrence, Meigs, Monroe,
Scioto, and Washington counties have jurisdiction beyond the north or northwest
shore of the Ohio River extending to the opposite shore line, between the
extended boundary lines of any adjacent counties or adjacent state. Each of
those courts of common pleas has concurrent jurisdiction on the Ohio River with
any adjacent court of common pleas that borders on that river and with any
court of Kentucky or of West Virginia that borders on the Ohio River and that
has jurisdiction on the Ohio River under the law of Kentucky or the law of West
Virginia, whichever is applicable, or under federal law.
   (d)   When an offense is committed under the laws of this municipality, and
it appears beyond a reasonable doubt that the offense or any element of the
offense took place either in this municipality or in another jurisdiction or
jurisdictions, but it cannot reasonably be determined in which it took place,
the offense or element is conclusively presumed to have taken place in this
municipality for purposes of this section.
   (e)   When a person is subject to criminal prosecution and punishment in
this municipality for an offense committed or completed outside this
municipality, the person is subject to all specifications for that offense that
would be applicable if the offense had been committed within this municipality.
   (f)   Any act, conduct, or element that is a basis of a person being subject
under this section to criminal prosecution and punishment in this municipality
need not be committed personally by the person as long as it is committed by
another person who is in complicity or conspiracy with the person.
   (g)   This section shall be liberally construed, consistent with
constitutional limitations, to allow this municipality the broadest possible
jurisdiction over offenses and persons committing offenses in, or affecting,
this municipality.
   (h)   For purposes of subsection (a)(2) of this section, an overt act is
substantial when it is of a character that manifests a purpose on the part of
the actor that the object of the conspiracy should be completed.
   (i)   As used in this section, "computer", "computer system", "computer
network", "information service", "telecommunication", "telecommunications
device", "telecommunications service", "data" and "writing" have the same
meanings as in Ohio R.C. 2913.01.
(ORC 2901.11)
§ 606.06  LIMITATION ON CRIMINAL PROSECUTIONS.
   (a)   (1)   Except as provided in subsection (a)(2), (a)(3) or (a)(4) of
this section or as otherwise provided in this section, a prosecution shall be
barred unless it is commenced within the following periods after an offense is
committed:
         A.   For a felony, six years;
         B.   For a misdemeanor other than a minor misdemeanor, two years;
         C.   For a minor misdemeanor, six months.
      (2)   There is no period of limitation for the prosecution of a violation
of Ohio R.C. 2903.01 or Ohio R.C. 2903.02.
      (3)   Except as otherwise provided in subsections (b) to (j) of this
section, a prosecution of any of the following offenses shall be barred unless
it is commenced within 20 years after the offense is committed:
         A.   A violation of Ohio R.C. 2903.03, 2903.04, 2905.01, 2905.32,
2907.04, 2907.05, 2907.21, 2909.02, 2909.22, 2909.23, 2909.24, 2909.26,
2909.27, 2909.28, 2909.29, 2911.01, 2911.02, 2911.11, 2911.12, or 2917.02, a
violation of Ohio R.C. 2903.11 or 2903.12 if the victim is a peace officer, a
violation of Ohio R.C. 2903.13 that is a felony, or a violation of former Ohio
R.C. 2907.12.
         B.   A conspiracy to commit, attempt to commit, or complicity in
committing a violation set forth in subsection (a)(3)A. of this section.
      (4)   Except as otherwise provided in subsection (d) to (l) of this
section, a prosecution of a violation of Ohio R.C. 2907.02 or 2907.03 or a
conspiracy to commit, attempt to commit, or complicity in committing a
violation of either section shall be barred unless it is commenced within 25
years after the offense is committed.
   (b)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (b)(2) of this section,
if the period of limitation provided in subsection (a)(1) or (a)(3) of this
section has expired, prosecution shall be commenced for an offense of which an
element is fraud or breach of fiduciary duty within one year after discovery of
the offense either by an aggrieved person or by the aggrieved person's legal
representative who is not a party to the offense.
      (2)   If the period of limitation provided in division (a)(1) or (a)(3)
of this section has expired, prosecution for a violation of Ohio R.C. 2913.49
shall be commenced within five years after discovery of the offense either by
an aggrieved person or the aggrieved person's legal representative who is not a
party to the offense.
   (c)   (1)   If the period of limitation provided in subsection (a)(1) or (a)
(3) of this section has expired, prosecution shall be commenced for the
following offenses during the following specified periods of time:
         A.   For an offense involving misconduct in office by a public servant
at any time while the accused remains a public servant, or within two years
thereafter;
         B.   For an offense by a person who is not a public servant but whose
offense is directly related to the misconduct in office of a public servant, at
any time while that public servant remains a public servant, or within two
years thereafter.
      (2)   As used in this division:
         A.   The phrase "offense is directly related to the misconduct in
office of a public servant" includes, but is not limited to, a violation of
Ohio R.C. 101.71, 101.91, 121.61 or 2921.13, 102.03(F) or (H), 2921.02(A),
2921.43(A) or (B), or 3517.13(F) or (G), that is directly related to an offense
involving misconduct in office of a public servant, or a violation of any
municipal ordinance substantially equivalent to those Ohio Revised Code
sections listed in this division (c)(2)A.
         B.   "Public servant" has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2921.01.
   (d)   (1)   If a DNA record made in connection with the criminal
investigation of the commission of a violation of Ohio R.C. 2907.02 or 2907.03
is determined to match another DNA record that is of an identifiable person and
if the time of the determination is later than 25 years after the offense is
committed, prosecution of that person for a violation of the section may be
commenced within five years after the determination is complete.
      (2)   If a DNA record made in connection with the criminal investigation
of the commission of a violation of Ohio R.C. 2907.02 or 2907.03 is determined
to match another DNA record that is of an identifiable person and if the time
of the determination is within 25 years after the offense is committed,
prosecution of that person for a violation of the section may be commenced
within the longer of 25 years after the offense is committed or five years
after the determination is complete.
      (3)   As used in this division, “DNA record” has the same meaning as in
Ohio R.C. 109.573.
   (e)   An offense is committed when every element of the offense occurs. In
the case of an offense of which an element is a continuing course of conduct,
the period of limitation does not begin to run until such course of conduct or
the accused’s accountability for it terminates, whichever occurs first.
   (f)   A prosecution is commenced on the date an indictment is returned or an
information filed, or on the date a lawful arrest without a warrant is made, or
on the date a warrant, summons, citation, or other process is issued, whichever
occurs first. A prosecution is not commenced by the return of an indictment or
the filing of an information unless reasonable diligence is exercised to issue
and execute process on the same. A prosecution is not commenced upon issuance
of a warrant, summons, citation, or other process unless reasonable diligence
is exercised to execute the same.
   (g)   The period of limitation shall not run during any time when the corpus
delicti remains undiscovered.
   (h)   The period of limitation shall not run during any time when the
accused purposely avoids prosecution. Proof that the accused departed this
municipality or conceals the accused’s identity or whereabouts is prima facie
evidence of the accused’s purpose to avoid prosecution.
   (i)   The period of limitation shall not run during any time a prosecution
against the accused based on the same conduct is pending in this state, even
though the indictment, information, or process that commenced the prosecution
is quashed or the proceedings on the indictment, information, or process are
set aside or reversed on appeal.
   (j)   The period of limitation for a violation of this Part 6 or Title XXIX
of the Ohio Revised Code that involves a physical or mental wound, injury,
disability, or condition of a nature that reasonably indicates abuse or neglect
of a child under 18 years of age or of a child with a developmental disability
or physical impairment under 21 years of age shall not begin to run until
either of the following occurs:
      (1)   The victim of the offense reaches the age of majority.
      (2)   A public children services agency, or a municipal or county peace
officer that is not the parent or guardian of the child, in the county in which
the child resides or in which the abuse or neglect is occurring or has occurred
has been notified that abuse or neglect is known, suspected, or believed to
have occurred.
   (k)   As used in this section, “peace officer” has the same meaning as in
Ohio R.C. 2935.01.
   (l)   The amendments to subsections (a) and (d) of this section apply to a
violation of Ohio R.C. 2907.02 or 2907.03 committed on and after July 16, 2015,
and apply to a violation of either of those sections committed prior to July
16, 2015, if prosecution for that violation was not barred under this section
as it existed on July 15, 2015.
(ORC 2901.13)
§ 606.07  REQUIREMENTS FOR CRIMINAL LIABILITY; VOLUNTARY INTOXICATION.
   (a)   Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, a person is not
guilty of an offense unless both of the following apply:
      (1)   The person’s liability is based on conduct that includes either a
voluntary act, or an omission to perform an act or duty that the person is
capable of performing;
      (2)   The person has the requisite degree of culpability for each element
as to which a culpable mental state is specified by the language defining the
offense.
   (b)   When the language defining an offense does not specify any degree of
culpability, and plainly indicates a purpose to impose strict criminal
liability for the conduct described in the section, then culpability is not
required for a person to be guilty of the offense. The fact that one division
of a section plainly indicates a purpose to impose strict liability for an
offense defined in that division does not by itself plainly indicate a purpose
to impose strict criminal liability for an offense defined in other divisions
of the section that do not specify a degree of culpability.
   (c)   (1)   When language defining an element of an offense that is related
to knowledge or intent or to which mens rea could fairly be applied neither
specifies culpability nor plainly indicates a purpose to impose strict
liability, the element of the offense is established only if a person acts
recklessly.
      (2)   Division (c)(1) of this section does not apply to offenses defined
in R.C. Title XLV.
      (3)   Division (c)(1) of this section does not relieve the prosecution of
the burden of proving the culpable mental state required by any definition
incorporated into the offense.
   (d)   Voluntary intoxication may not be taken into consideration in
determining the existence of a mental state that is an element of a criminal
offense. Voluntary intoxication does not relieve a person of a duty to act if
failure to act constitutes a criminal offense. Evidence that a person was
voluntarily intoxicated may be admissible to show whether or not the person was
physically capable of performing the act with which the person is charged.
   (e)   As used in this section:
      (1)   “Culpability.”  Purpose, knowledge, recklessness, or negligence, as
defined in Ohio R.C. 2901.22.
      (2)   “Intoxication.”  Includes but is not limited to intoxication
resulting from the ingestion of alcohol, a drug, or alcohol and a drug.
      (3)   “Involuntary acts.”  Reflexes, convulsions, body movements during
unconsciousness or sleep, and body movements that are not otherwise a product
of the actor’s volition are involuntary acts.
      (4)   “Possession.”  A voluntary act if the possessor knowingly procured
or received the thing possessed, or was aware of the possessor’s control of the
thing possessed for a sufficient time to have ended possession.
(ORC 2901.21)
§ 606.08  ORGANIZATIONAL CRIMINAL LIABILITY.
   (a)   An organization may be convicted of an offense under any of the
following circumstances:
      (1)   The offense is a minor misdemeanor committed by an officer, agent,
or employee of the organization acting in its behalf and within the scope of
the officer’s, agent’s, or employee’s office or employment, except that if the
section defining the offense designates the officers, agents, or employees for
whose conduct the organization is accountable or the circumstances under which
it is accountable, those provisions shall apply.
      (2)   A purpose to impose organizational liability plainly appears in the
section defining the offense, and the offense is committed by an officer,
agent, or employee of the organization acting in its behalf and within the
scope of the officer’s, agent’s, or employee’s office or employment, except
that if the section defining the offense designates the officers, agents, or
employees for whose conduct the organization is accountable or the
circumstances under which it is accountable, those provisions shall apply.
      (3)   The offense consists of an omission to discharge a specific duty
imposed by law on the organization.
      (4)   If, acting with the kind of culpability otherwise required for the
commission of the offense, its commission was authorized, requested, commanded,
tolerated, or performed by the board of directors, trustees, partners, or by a
high managerial officer, agent, or employee acting in behalf of the
organization and within the scope of such a board’s or person’s office or
employment.
   (b)   If strict liability is imposed for the commission of an offense, a
purpose to impose organizational liability shall be presumed, unless the
contrary plainly appears.
   (c)   In a prosecution of an organization for an offense other than one for
which strict liability is imposed, it is a defense that the high managerial
officer, agent, or employee having supervisory responsibility over the subject
matter of the offense exercised due diligence to prevent its commission. This
defense is not available if it plainly appears inconsistent with the purpose of
the section defining the offense.
   (d)   As used in this section, “organization” means a corporation for profit
or not for profit, partnership, limited partnership, joint venture,
unincorporated nonprofit association, estate, trust, or other commercial or
legal entity. “Organization” does not include an entity organized as or by a
governmental agency for the execution of a governmental program.
(ORC 2901.23)
§ 606.09  PERSONAL ACCOUNTABILITY FOR ORGANIZATIONAL CONDUCT.
   (a)   An officer, agent, or employee of an organization, as defined in Ohio
R.C. 2901.23, may be prosecuted for an offense committed by such organization,
if he or she acts with the kind of culpability required for the commission of
the offense, and any of the following apply:
      (1)   In the name of the organization or in its behalf, he or she engages
in conduct constituting the offense, or causes another to engage in such
conduct, or tolerates such conduct when it is of a type for which he or she has
direct responsibility;
      (2)   He or she has primary responsibility to discharge a duty imposed on
the organization by law, and such duty is not discharged.
   (b)   When a person is convicted of an offense by reason of this section, he
or she is subject to the same penalty as if he or she had acted in his or her
own behalf.
(ORC 2901.24)
§ 606.10  FALSIFICATION.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly make a false statement, or knowingly swear
or affirm the truth of a false statement previously made, when any of the
following applies:
      (1)   The statement is made in any official proceeding.
      (2)   The statement is made with purpose to incriminate another.
      (3)   The statement is made with purpose to mislead a public official in
performing his or her official function.
      (4)   The statement is made with purpose to secure the payment of
unemployment compensation; Ohio Works First; prevention, retention and
contingency benefits and services; disability financial assistance; retirement
benefits or health care coverage from a state retirement system; economic
development assistance as defined in Ohio R.C. 9.66; or other benefits
administered by a governmental agency or paid out of a public treasury.
      (5)   The statement is made with purpose to secure the issuance by a
governmental agency of a license, permit, authorization, certificate,
registration, release, or provider agreement.
      (6)   The statement is sworn or affirmed before a notary public or
another person empowered to administer oaths.
      (7)   The statement is in writing on or in connection with a report or
return that is required or authorized by law.
      (8)   The statement is in writing, and is made with purpose to induce
another to extend credit to or employ the offender, or to confer any degree,
diploma, certificate of attainment, award of excellence, or honor on the
offender, or to extend to or bestow upon the offender any other valuable
benefit or distinction, when the person to whom the statement is directed
relies upon it to his or her detriment.
      (9)   The statement is made with purpose to commit or facilitate the
commission of a theft offense.
      (10)   The statement is knowingly made to a probate court in connection
with any action, proceeding, or other matter within its jurisdiction, either
orally or in a written document, including, but not limited to, an application,
petition, complaint, or other pleading, or an inventory, account, or report.
      (11)   The statement is made on an account, form, record, stamp, label or
other writing that is required by law.
      (12)   The statement is made in connection with the purchase of a
firearm, as defined in Ohio R.C. 2923.11, and in conjunction with the
furnishing to the seller of the firearm of a fictitious or altered driver's or
commercial driver's license or permit, a fictitious or altered identification
card, or any other document that contains false information about the
purchaser's identity.
      (13)   The statement is made in a document or instrument of writing that
purports to be a judgment, lien, or claim of indebtedness and is filed or
recorded with the Secretary of state, a county recorder, or the clerk of a
court of record.
      (14)   The statement is made in an application filed with a county
sheriff pursuant to R.C. § 2923.125 in order to obtain or renew a concealed
handgun license or is made in an affidavit submitted to a county sheriff to
obtain a concealed handgun license on a temporary emergency basis under R.C. §
2923.1213.
      (15)   The statement is required under Ohio R.C. 5743.71 in connection
with the person’s purchase of cigarettes or tobacco products in a delivery
sale.
   (b)   No person, in connection with the purchase of a firearm as defined in
Ohio R.C. 2923.11, shall knowingly furnish to the seller of the firearm a
fictitious or altered driver's or commercial driver's license or permit, a
fictitious or altered identification card, or any other document that contains
false information about the purchaser's identity.
   (c)   No person, in an attempt to obtain a concealed handgun license under
R.C. § 2923.125, shall knowingly present to a sheriff a fictitious or altered
document that purports to be certification of the person’s competence in
handling a handgun as described in division (B)(3) of that section.
   (d)   It is no defense to a charge under subsection (a)(6) of this section
that the oath or affirmation was administered or taken in an irregular manner.
   (e)   If contradictory statements relating to the same fact are made by the
offender within the period of the statute of limitations for falsification, it
is not necessary for the prosecution to prove which statement was false, but
only that one or the other was false.
   (f)   (1)   Whoever violates subsection (a)(1), (2), (3), (4), (5), (6),
(7), (8), (10), (11), (13), or (15) of this section is guilty of falsification.
Except as otherwise provided in this division, falsification is a misdemeanor
of the first degree.
      (2)   Whoever violates subsection (a)(9) of this section is guilty of
falsification in a theft offense. Except as otherwise provided in this
subsection, falsification in a theft offense is a misdemeanor of the first
degree. If the value of the property or services stolen is one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) or more, falsification in a theft offense is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (3)   Whoever violates subsection (a)(12) or (b) of this section is
guilty of falsification to purchase a firearm, a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
      (4)   Whoever violates subsection (a)(14) or (c) of this section is
guilty of falsification to obtain a concealed handgun license, a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (5)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section in removal
proceedings under R.C. § 319.26, 321.37, 507.13 or 733.78 is guilty of
falsification regarding a removal proceeding, a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
(ORC 2921.13)
   (g)   (1)   No person who has knowingly failed to maintain proof of
financial responsibility in accordance with Ohio R.C. 4509.101 shall produce
any document or present to a peace officer an electronic wireless
communications device that is displaying any text or images with the purpose to
mislead a peace officer upon the request of a peace officer for proof of
financial responsibility made in accordance with Ohio R.C. 4509.101(D)(2).
      (2)   Whoever violates this subsection (g) is guilty of falsification, a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 4509.102)
Statutory reference:
   Civil liability for violations of this section, see R.C. § 2921.13(G)
§ 606.105  FALSE REPORT OF CHILD ABUSE OR NEGLECT.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly make or cause another person to make a false
report under Ohio R.C. 2151.421(B) alleging that any person has committed an
act or omission that resulted in a child being an abused child as defined in
Ohio R.C. 2151.031 or a neglected child as defined in Ohio R.C. 2151.03.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of making or causing a false
report of child abuse or child neglect, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(ORC 2921.14)
§ 606.11  COMPOUNDING A CRIME.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly demand, accept, or agree to accept anything
of value in consideration of abandoning or agreeing to abandon a pending
criminal prosecution.
   (b)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section when both
of the following apply:
      (1)   The pending prosecution involved is for a violation of Ohio R.C.
2913.02, 2913.11, 2913.21(B)(2), or 2913.47, or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, of which the actor under this section was the victim.
      (2)   The thing of value demanded, accepted, or agreed to be accepted, in
consideration of abandoning or agreeing to abandon the prosecution, did not
exceed an amount that the actor reasonably believed due him or her as
restitution for the loss caused him or her by the offense.
   (c)   When a prosecuting witness abandons or agrees to abandon a prosecution
under subsection (b) of this section, the abandonment or agreement in no way
binds the state to abandoning the prosecution.
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of compounding a crime, a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(ORC 2921.21)
§ 606.12  FAILURE TO REPORT A CRIME OR DEATH.
   (a)   (1)   Except as provided in subsection (a)(2) of this section, no
person, knowing that a felony has been or is being committed, shall knowingly
fail to report the information to law enforcement authorities.
      (2)   No person, knowing that a violation of Ohio R.C. 2913.04(B) has
been or is being committed or that the person has received information derived
from such a violation, shall knowingly fail to report the violation to law
enforcement authorities.
   (b)   Except for conditions that are within the scope of division (e) of
this section, no person giving aid to a sick or injured person shall
negligently fail to report to law enforcement authorities any gunshot or stab
wound treated or observed by the person, or any serious physical harm to
persons that the person knows or has reasonable cause to believe resulted from
an offense of violence.
   (c)   No person who discovers the body or acquires the first knowledge of
the death of a person shall fail to report the death immediately to a physician
or advanced practice registered nurse whom the person knows to be treating the
deceased for a condition from which death at such time would not be unexpected,
or to a law enforcement officer, an ambulance service, an emergency squad, or
the coroner in a political subdivision in which the body is discovered, the
death is believed to have occurred, or knowledge concerning the death is
obtained. For purposes of this division, “advanced practice registered nurse”
does not include a certified registered nurse anesthetist.
   (d)   No person shall fail to provide upon request of the person to whom a
report required by subsection (c) of this section was made, or to any law
enforcement officer who has reasonable cause to assert the authority to
investigate the circumstances surrounding the death, any facts within his or
her knowledge that may have a bearing on the investigation of the death.
   (e)   (1)   As used in this section, "burn injury" means any of the
following:
         A.   Second or third degree burns;
         B.   Any burns to the upper respiratory tract or laryngeal edema due
to the inhalation of super-heated air;
         C.   Any burn injury or wound that may result in death.
      (2)   No physician, nurse, physician assistant, or limited practitioner
who, outside a hospital, sanitarium, or other medical facility, attends or
treats a person who has sustained a burn injury inflicted by an explosion or
other incendiary device, or that shows evidence of having been inflicted in a
violent, malicious, or criminal manner, shall fail to report the burn injury
immediately to the local arson bureau, if there is such a bureau in the
jurisdiction in which the person is attended or treated, or otherwise to local
law enforcement authorities.
      (3)   No manager, superintendent, or other person in charge of a
hospital, sanitarium, or other medical facility in which a person is attended
or treated for any burn injury inflicted by an explosion or other incendiary
device, or that shows evidence of having been inflicted in a violent,
malicious, or criminal manner, shall fail to report the burn injury immediately
to the local arson bureau, if there is such a bureau in the jurisdiction in
which the person is attended or treated, or otherwise to local law enforcement
authorities.
      (4)   No person who is required to report any burn injury under
subsection (e)(2) or (3) of this section shall fail to file, within three
working days after attending or treating the victim, a written report of the
burn injury with the office of the state Fire Marshal. The report shall be made
on a form provided by the state Fire Marshal.
      (5)   Anyone participating in the making of reports under division (e) of
this section or anyone participating in a judicial proceeding resulting from
the reports is immune from any civil or criminal liability that otherwise might
be incurred or imposed as a result of such actions. Notwithstanding R.C. §
4731.22, the physician-patient relationship or advanced practice registered
nurse-patient relationship is not a ground for excluding evidence regarding a
person’s burn injury or the cause of the burn injury in any judicial proceeding
resulting from a report submitted under division (e) of this section.
   (f)   (1)   Any doctor of medicine or osteopathic medicine, hospital intern
or resident, nurse, psychologist, social worker, independent social worker,
social work assistant, licensed professional clinical counselor, licensed
professional counselor, independent marriage and family therapist, or marriage
and family therapist who knows or has reasonable cause to believe that a
patient or client has been the victim of domestic violence, as defined in R.C.
§ 3113.31, shall note that knowledge or belief and the basis for it in the
patient’s or client’s records.
      (2)   Notwithstanding R.C. § 4731.22, the physician-patient privilege or
advanced practice registered nurse-patient privilege shall not be a ground for
excluding any information regarding the report containing the knowledge or
belief noted under division (f)(1) of this section, and the information may be
admitted as evidence in accordance with the Rules of Evidence.
   (g)   Division (a) or (d) of this section does not require disclosure of
information, when any of the following applies:
      (1)   The information is privileged by reason of the relationship between
attorney and client; physician and patient; advanced practice registered nurse
and patient; licensed psychologist or licensed school psychologist and client;
licensed professional clinical counselor, licensed professional counselor,
independent social worker, social worker, independent marriage and family
therapist, or marriage and family therapist and client; member of the clergy,
rabbi, minister, or priest and any person communicating information
confidentially to the member of the clergy, rabbi, minister, or priest for a
religious counseling purpose of a professional character; husband and wife; or
a communications assistant and those who are a party to a telecommunications
relay service call.
      (2)   The information would tend to incriminate a member of the actor's
immediate family.
      (3)   Disclosure of the information would amount to revealing a news
source, privileged under Ohio R.C. 2739.04 or 2739.12.
      (4)   Disclosure of the information would amount to disclosure by a
member of the ordained clergy of an organized religious body of a confidential
communication made to him or her in his or her capacity as such by a person
seeking his or her aid or counsel.
      (5)   Disclosure would amount to revealing information acquired by the
actor in the course of his or her duties in connection with a bona fide program
of treatment or services for drug dependent persons or persons in danger of
drug dependence, which program is maintained or conducted by a hospital,
clinic, person, agency, or community addiction services provider whose alcohol
and drug addiction services are certified pursuant to Ohio R.C. 5119.36.
      (6)   Disclosure would amount to revealing information acquired by the
actor in the course of his or her duties in connection with a bona fide program
for providing counseling services to victims of crimes that are violations of
Ohio R.C. 2907.02 or 2907.05, or to victims of felonious sexual penetration in
violation of former Ohio R.C. 2907.12. As used in this subsection, "counseling
services" include services provided in an informal setting by a person who, by
education or experience, is competent to provide such services.
   (h)   No disclosure of information pursuant to this section gives rise to
any liability or recrimination for a breach of privilege or confidence.
   (i)   Whoever violates subsection (a) or (b) of this section is guilty of
failure to report a crime. Violation of subsection (a)(1) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree. Violation of subsection (a)(2) or (b) of this
section is a misdemeanor of the second degree.
   (j)   Whoever violates subsection (c) or (d) of this section is guilty of
failure to report knowledge of a death, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
   (k)   (1)   Whoever negligently violates subsection (e) of this section is
guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
      (2)   Whoever knowingly violates subsection (e) of this section is guilty
of a misdemeanor of the second degree.
   (l)   As used in this section, “nurse” includes an advanced practice
registered nurse, registered nurse, and licensed practical nurse.
(ORC 2921.22)
§ 606.13  FAILURE TO AID A LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.
   (a)   No person shall negligently fail or refuse to aid a law enforcement
officer, when called upon for assistance in preventing or halting the
commission of an offense, or in apprehending or detaining an offender, when the
aid can be given without a substantial risk of physical harm to the person
giving it.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of failure to aid a law
enforcement officer, a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 2921.23)
§ 606.14  OBSTRUCTING OFFICIAL BUSINESS.
   (a)   No person, without privilege to do so and with purpose to prevent,
obstruct, or delay the performance by a public official of any authorized act
within the public official's official capacity, shall do any act that hampers
or impedes a public official in the performance of the public official's lawful
duties.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of obstructing official
business. Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, obstructing official
business is a misdemeanor of the second degree. If a violation of this section
creates a risk of physical harm to any person, obstructing official business is
a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(ORC 2921.31)
§ 606.15  OBSTRUCTING JUSTICE.
   (a)   No person, with purpose to hinder the discovery, apprehension,
prosecution, conviction, or punishment of another for crime, or to assist
another to benefit from the commission of a crime, and no person, with purpose
to hinder the discovery, apprehension, prosecution, adjudication as a
delinquent child, or disposition of a child for an act that if committed by an
adult would be a crime or to assist a child to benefit from the commission of
an act that if committed by an adult would be a crime, shall do any of the
following:
      (1)   Harbor or conceal the other person or child.
      (2)   Provide the other person or child with money, transportation, a
weapon, a disguise, or other means of avoiding discovery or apprehension.
      (3)   Warn the other person or child of impending discovery or
apprehension.
      (4)   Destroy or conceal physical evidence of the crime or act, or induce
any person to withhold testimony or information or to elude legal process
summoning him or her to testify or supply evidence.
      (5)   Communicate false information to any person.
      (6)   Prevent or obstruct any person, by means of force, intimidation, or
deception, from performing any act to aid in the discovery, apprehension, or
prosecution of the other person or child.
   (b)   A person may be prosecuted for, and may be convicted of or adjudicated
a delinquent child for committing, a violation of subsection (a) of this
section regardless of whether the person or child aided ultimately is
apprehended for, is charged with, is convicted of, pleads guilty to, or is
adjudicated a delinquent child for committing the crime or act the person or
child aided committed. The crime or act the person or child aided committed
shall be used under subsection (c) of this section in determining the penalty
for violation of subsection (a) of this section, regardless of whether the
person or child aided ultimately is apprehended for, is charge with, is
convicted of, pleads guilty to, or is adjudicated a delinquent child for
committing the crime or act the person or child aided committed.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of obstructing justice.
      (1)   If the crime committed by the person aided is a misdemeanor or if
the act committed by the child aided would be a misdemeanor if committed by an
adult, obstructing justice is a misdemeanor of the same degree as the crime
committed by the person aided or a misdemeanor of the same degree that the act
committed by the child aided would be if committed by an adult.
      (2)   If the crime committed by the person aided is a felony or if the
act committed by the child aided would be a felony if committed by an adult, or
if the crime or act committed by the person or child aided is an act of
terrorism, obstructing justice is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
   (d)   As used in this section:
      (1)   "Act of terrorism" has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2909.21.
      (2)   "Adult" and "child" have the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2151.011.
      (3)   "Delinquent child" has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2152.02.
(ORC 2921.32)
§ 606.16  RESISTING ARREST.
   (a)   No person, recklessly or by force, shall resist or interfere with a
lawful arrest of himself, herself or another.
   (b)   No person, recklessly or by force, shall resist or interfere with a
lawful arrest of the person or another person and, during the course of or as a
result of the resistance or interference, cause physical harm to a law
enforcement officer.
   (c)   No person, recklessly or by force, shall resist or interfere with a
lawful arrest of the person or another person if either of the following
applies:
      (1)   The offender, during the course of or as a result of the resistance
or interference, recklessly causes physical harm to a law enforcement officer
by means of a deadly weapon; or
      (2)   The offender, during the course of the resistance or interference,
brandishes a deadly weapon.
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of resisting arrest. A
violation of subsection (a) of this section is a misdemeanor of the second
degree. A violation of subsection (b) of this section is a misdemeanor of the
first degree. A violation of subsection (c) of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (e)   As used in this section, "deadly weapon" has the same meaning as in
Ohio R.C. 2923.11.
(ORC 2921.33)
Statutory reference:
   Unlawful taking of deadly weapon from law enforcement officer, felony, see
Ohio R.C. 2911.01
§ 606.165  COMPLIANCE WITH LAWFUL ORDER OF POLICE OFFICER; FLEEING.
   (a)   No person shall fail to comply with any lawful order or direction of
any police officer invested with authority to direct, control, or regulate
traffic.
   (b)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle so as willfully to elude or
flee a police officer after receiving a visible or audible signal from a police
officer to bring the person's motor vehicle to a stop.
   (c)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of failure to comply
with an order or signal of a police officer.
      (2)   A violation of subsection (a) of this section is a misdemeanor of
the first degree.
      (3)   Except as provided in subsections (c)(4) and (5) of this section, a
violation of subsection (b) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
      (4)   Except as provided in subsection (c)(5) of this section, a
violation of subsection (b) of this section is a felony and shall be prosecuted
under appropriate state law if the jury or judge as trier of fact finds by
proof beyond a reasonable doubt that in committing the offense, the offender
was fleeing immediately after the commission of a felony.
      (5)   A.   A violation of subsection (b) of this section is a felony and
shall be prosecuted under appropriate state law if the jury or judge as trier
of fact finds any of the following by proof beyond a reasonable doubt:
            1.   The operation of the motor vehicle by the offender was a
proximate cause of serious physical harm to persons or property.
            2.   The operation of the motor vehicle by the offender caused a
substantial risk of serious physical harm to persons or property.
         B.   If a police officer pursues an offender who is violating
subsection (b) of this section and subsection (c)(5)A. of this section applies,
the sentencing court, in determining the seriousness of an offender's conduct
for purposes of sentencing the offender for a violation of subsection (b) of
this section, shall consider, along with the factors set forth in Ohio R.C.
2929.12 and 2929.13 that are required to be considered, all of the following:
            1.   The duration of the pursuit;
            2.   The distance of the pursuit;
            3.   The rate of speed at which the offender operated the motor
vehicle during the pursuit;
            4.   Whether the offender failed to stop for traffic lights or stop
signs during the pursuit;
            5.   The number of traffic lights or stop signs for which the
offender failed to stop during the pursuit;
            6.   Whether the offender operated the motor vehicle during the
pursuit without lighted lights during a time when lighted lights are required;
            7.   Whether the offender committed a moving violation during the
pursuit;
            8.   The number of moving violations the offender committed during
the pursuit;
            9.   Any other relevant factors indicating that the offender's
conduct is more serious than conduct normally constituting the offense.
   (d)   In addition to any other sanction imposed for a violation of
subsection (a) of this section or a misdemeanor violation of subsection (b) of
this section, the court shall impose a class five suspension from the range
specified in Ohio R.C. 4510.02(A)(5). If the offender previously has been found
guilty of an offense under this section or under Ohio R.C. 2921.331 or any
other substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, in addition to any other
sanction imposed for the offense, the court shall impose a class one suspension
as described in Ohio R.C. 4510.02(A)(1). The court may grant limited driving
privileges to the offender on a suspension imposed for a misdemeanor violation
of this section as set forth in Ohio R.C. 4510.021. No judge shall suspend any
portion of the suspension under a class one suspension of an offender’s
license, permit, or privilege required by this subsection.
   (e)   As used in this section:
      (1)   "Moving violation" has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2743.70.
      (2)   "Police officer" has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 4511.01.
(ORC 2921.331(A) - (C), (E), (F))
§ 606.17  HAVING AN UNLAWFUL INTEREST IN A PUBLIC CONTRACT.
   (a)   No public official shall knowingly do any of the following:
      (1)   Authorize or employ the authority of the public official's office
to secure authorization of any public contract in which the public official, a
member of the public official's family, or any of the public official's
business associates has an interest.
      (2)   Authorize or employ the authority or influence of the public
official's office to secure the investment of public funds in any share, bond,
mortgage, or other security with respect to which the public official, a member
of the public official's family, or any of the public official's business
associates either has an interest, is an underwriter, or receives any
brokerage, origination, or servicing fees.
      (3)   During the public official's term of office or within one year
thereafter, occupy any position of profit in the prosecution of a public
contract authorized by the public official or by a legislative body,
commission, or board of which the public official was a member at the time of
authorization, unless the contract was let by competitive bidding to the lowest
and best bidder.
      (4)   Have an interest in the profits or benefits of a public contract
entered into by or for the use of the political subsubsection or governmental
agency or instrumentality with which the public official is connected.
      (5)   Have an interest in the profits or benefits of a public contract
that is not let by competitive bidding when required by law, and that involves
more than one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00).
   (b)   In the absence of bribery or a purpose to defraud, a public official,
member of a public official's family, or any of a public official's business
associates shall not be considered as having an interest in a public contract
or the investment of public funds, if all of the following apply:
      (1)   The interest of that person is limited to owning or controlling
shares of the corporation, or being a creditor of the corporation or other
organization, that is the contractor on the public contract involved, or that
is the issuer of the security in which public funds are invested.
      (2)   The shares owned or controlled by that person do not exceed 5
percent of the outstanding shares of the corporation, and the amount due that
person as creditor does not exceed 5 percent of the total indebtedness of the
corporation or other organization.
      (3)   That person, prior to the time the public contract is entered into,
files with the political subsubsection or governmental agency or
instrumentality involved, an affidavit giving that person's exact status in
connection with the corporation or other organization.
   (c)   This section does not apply to a public contract in which a public
official, member of a public official's family, or one of a public official's
business associates has an interest, when all of the following apply:
      (1)   The subject of the public contract is necessary supplies or
services for the political subsubsection or governmental agency or
instrumentality involved.
      (2)   The supplies or services are unobtainable elsewhere for the same or
lower cost, or are being furnished to the political subsubsection or
governmental agency or instrumentality as part of a continuing course of
dealing established prior to the public official's becoming associated with the
political subsubsection or governmental agency or instrumentality involved.
      (3)   The treatment accorded the political subsubsection or governmental
agency or instrumentality is either preferential to or the same as that
accorded other customers or clients in similar transactions.
      (4)   The entire transaction is conducted at arm's length, with full
knowledge by the political subsubsection or governmental agency or
instrumentality involved, of the interest of the public official, member of the
public official's family, or business associate, and the public official takes
no part in the deliberations or decision of the political subsubsection or
governmental agency or instrumentality with respect to the public contract.
   (d)   Division (a)(4) of this section does not prohibit participation by a
public employee in any housing program funded by public monies if the public
employee otherwise qualifies for the program and does not use the authority or
influence of the public employee's office or employment to secure benefits from
the program and if the monies are to be used on the primary residence of the
public employee. Such participation does not constitute an unlawful interest in
a public contract in violation of this section.
   (e)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of having an unlawful interest
in a public contract. Violation of subsection (a)(1) or (2) of this section is
a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. Violation of subsection
(a)(3), (4), or (5) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
   (f)   It is not a violation of this section for a prosecuting attorney to
appoint assistants and employees in accordance with Ohio R.C. 309.06 and
2921.421, or for a chief legal officer of a municipality or an official
designated as prosecutor in a municipality to appoint assistants and employees
in accordance with Ohio R.C. 733.621 and 2921.421, or for a township law
director appointed under Ohio R.C. 504.15 to appoint assistants and employees
in accordance with Ohio R.C. 504.151 and 2921.421.
   (g)   Any public contract in which a public official, a member of the public
official's family, or any of the public official's business associates has an
interest in violation of this section is void and unenforceable. Any contract
securing the investment of public funds in which a public official, a member of
the public official's family, or any of the public official's business
associates has an interest, is an underwriter, or receives any brokerage,
origination or servicing fees and that was entered into in violation of this
section is void and unenforceable.
   (h)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   "Chief legal officer" has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 733.621.
      (2)   "Public contract" means any of the following:
         A.   The purchase or acquisition, or a contract for the purchase or
acquisition, of property or services by or for the use of the state or any of
its political subsubsections, or any agency or instrumentality of either,
including the employment of an individual by the state, any of its political
subsubsections, or any agency or instrumentality of either.
         B.   A contract for the design, construction, alteration, repair, or
maintenance of any public property.
(ORC 2921.42)
§ 606.175  CONFLICTS OF INTEREST.
   (a)   No officer, member of Council, member of any board or commission,
employee or appointee of the city shall:
      (1)   Be financially interested in, directly or indirectly, in any
contract or transaction in which the city is a party, or which is made by any
officer of the city on behalf of the city. Any such interest shall be grounds
to void such contract, either by action of Council or by the determination of
any tribunal having jurisdiction.
      (2)   Act, directly or indirectly, as attorney, agent, broker, finder,
engineer, architect or employee, or in any other capacity, on behalf of any
private person interested, directly or indirectly, in any manner whatsoever, in
any contract, work or business, or the sale or acquisition of any property, the
cost of which is payable from city funds;
      (3)   Engage in the practice of law or represent or appear on behalf of
an individual or individuals in any court in any matter or controversy in which
the city is or may become a party, except on behalf of the city as an officer
or employee, or voluntarily give opinion evidence against the interests of the
city in any litigation in which the city is a party; or
      (4)   Appear before any board or commission of the city as counsel,
attorney, or agent, except that the Mayor or a member of Council may so appear,
as provided by the Charter and the ordinances of the city and in the
performance of public obligations or official duties.
   (b)   No person named in subsection (a) hereof, within a period of one year
after termination of his or her services, shall appear before any board or
commission of the city as attorney, engineer, architect, broker, finder, agent,
employee or representative for or on behalf of any person, whether or not
receiving compensation for any services rendered thereto, in relation to any
matter which was under his or her charge during the period of his or her
services to the city.
   (c)   No person named in subsection (a) hereof, after termination of his or
her services, shall accept employment as a lawyer, in any particular matter
which he or she has investigated or passed upon while in such office or employ,
or engage in the practice of law before any court in any litigation in which
the city is a party and which involves any such matter.
   (d)   The Mayor or a member of Council shall publicly disclose on the
official records of Council any direct or financial interest or other personal
or private right that he or she may have in any legislation pending before
Council prior to its passage; provided, however, that, such disclosure shall
not deprive the member of Council of the right to vote on such legislation, nor
shall the failure of any member of Council to make such disclosure affect the
validity of the legislation. Such disclosure by the Mayor shall not invalidate
his or her right to veto any ordinance passed by Council.
   (e)   Whoever violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree and shall be subject to
the penalty provided in §
698.02. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on
which a violation or noncompliance occurs or continues.
(Ord. 72-O-84, passed 11-27-1972)
§ 606.18  SOLICITING OR RECEIVING IMPROPER COMPENSATION.
   (a)   No public servant shall knowingly solicit or accept and no person
shall knowingly promise or give to a public servant either of the following:
      (1)   Any compensation, other than as allowed by Ohio R.C. 102.03(G),
(H), (I), or other provisions of law, to perform the public servant's official
duties, to perform any other act or service in the public servant's public
capacity, for the general performance of the duties of the public servant's
public office or public employment, or as a supplement to the public servant's
public compensation.
      (2)   Additional or greater fees or costs than are allowed by law to
perform the public servant's official duties.
   (b)   No public servant for the public servant's own personal or business
use and no person for the person's own personal or business use or for the
personal or business use of a public servant or party official, shall solicit
or accept anything of value in consideration of either of the following:
      (1)   Appointing or securing, maintaining, or renewing the appointment of
any person to any public office, employment, or agency.
      (2)   Preferring, or maintaining the status of, any public employee with
respect to compensation, duties, placement, location, promotion, or other
material aspects of employment.
   (c)   No person for the benefit of a political party, campaign committee,
legislative campaign fund, political action committee or political contributing
entity shall coerce any contribution in consideration of either of the
following:
      (1)   Appointing or securing, maintaining, or renewing the appointment of
any person to any public office, employment, or agency.
      (2)   Preferring, or maintaining the status of, any public employee with
respect to compensation, duties, placement, location, promotion, or other
material aspects of employment.
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of soliciting improper
compensation, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
   (e)   A public servant who is convicted of a violation of this section is
disqualified from holding any public office, employment, or position of trust
in this state for a period of seven years from the date of conviction.
   (f)   Divisions (a), (b), and (c) of this section do not prohibit any person
from making voluntary contributions to a political party, campaign committee,
legislative campaign fund, political action committee or political contributing
entity or prohibit a political party, campaign committee, legislative campaign
fund, political action committee or political contributing entity from
accepting voluntary contributions.
(ORC 2921.43)
§ 606.19  DERELICTION OF DUTY.
   (a)   No law enforcement officer shall negligently do any of the following:
      (1)   Fail to serve a lawful warrant without delay.
      (2)   Fail to prevent or halt the commission of an offense or to
apprehend an offender, when it is in the law enforcement officer's power to do
so alone or with available assistance.
   (b)   No law enforcement, ministerial, or judicial officer shall negligently
fail to perform a lawful duty in a criminal case or proceeding.
   (c)   No officer, having charge of a detention facility, shall negligently
do any of the following:
      (1)   Allow the detention facility to become littered or unsanitary.
      (2)   Fail to provide persons confined in the detention facility with
adequate food, clothing, bedding, shelter, and medical attention.
      (3)   Fail to control an unruly prisoner, or to prevent intimidation of
or physical harm to a prisoner by another.
      (4)   Allow a prisoner to escape.
      (5)   Fail to observe any lawful and reasonable regulation for the
management of the detention facility.
   (d)   No public official shall recklessly create a deficiency, incur a
liability, or expend a greater sum than is appropriated by the Council for the
use in any one year of the department, agency, or institution with which the
public official is connected.
   (e)   No public servant shall recklessly fail to perform a duty expressly
imposed by law with respect to the public servant's office, or recklessly do
any act expressly forbidden by law with respect to the public servant's office.
   (f)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of dereliction of duty, a
misdemeanor of the second degree.
   (g)   Except as otherwise provided by law, a public servant who is a county
treasurer; county auditor; township fiscal officer; city auditor; city
treasurer; village fiscal officer; village clerk-treasurer; village clerk; in
the case of a municipal corporation having a charter that designates an officer
who, by virtue of the charter, has duties and functions similar to those of the
city or village officers referred to in this section, the officer so designated
by the charter; school district treasurer; fiscal officer of a community school
established under R.C. Chapter 3314; treasurer of a science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics school established under R.C. Chapter 3326; or
fiscal officer of a college-preparatory boarding school established under R.C.
Chapter 3328 and is convicted of or pleads guilty to dereliction of duty is
disqualified from holding any public office, employment, or position of trust
in this state for four years following the date of conviction or of entry of
the plea, and is not entitled to hold any public office until any repayment or
restitution required by the court is satisfied.
   (h)   As used in this section, “public servant” includes the following:
      (1)   An officer or employee of a contractor as defined in R.C. § 9.08;
      (2)   A fiscal officer employed by the operator of a community school
established under R.C. Chapter 3314 or by the operator of a college-preparatory
boarding school established under R.C. Chapter 3328.
(ORC 2921.44)
§ 606.20  INTERFERING WITH CIVIL RIGHTS.
   (a)   No public servant, under color of his or her office, employment, or
authority, shall knowingly deprive, conspire or attempt to deprive any person
of a constitutional or statutory right.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of interfering with civil
rights, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(ORC 2921.45)
§ 606.21  ATTEMPTS.
   (a)   No person, purposely or knowingly, and when purpose or knowledge is
sufficient culpability for the commission of an offense, shall engage in
conduct that, if successful, would constitute or result in the offense.
   (b)   It is no defense to a charge under this section that, in retrospect,
commission of the offense that was the object of the attempt was either
factually or legally impossible under the attendant circumstances, if that
offense could have been committed had the attendant circumstances been as the
actor believed them to be.
   (c)   No person who is convicted of committing a specific offense, of
complicity in the commission of an offense, or of conspiracy to commit an
offense, shall be convicted of an attempt to commit the same offense in
violation of this section.
   (d)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section that the
actor abandoned his or her effort to commit the offense or otherwise prevented
its commission, under circumstances manifesting a complete and voluntary
renunciation of his or her criminal purpose.
   (e)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of an attempt to commit
an offense. An attempt to commit aggravated murder, murder, or an offense for
which the maximum penalty is imprisonment for life is a felony of the first
degree, to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. An attempt to commit a
drug abuse offense for which the penalty is determined by the amount or number
of unit doses of the controlled substance involved in the drug abuse offense is
an offense of the same degree as the drug abuse offense attempted would be if
that drug abuse offense had been committed and had involved an amount or number
of unit doses of the controlled substance that is within the next lower range
of controlled substance amounts than was involved in the attempt. An attempt to
commit any other offense is an offense of the next lesser degree than the
offense attempted. In the case of an attempt to commit an offense other than a
violation of Ohio R.C. Chapter 3734 that is not specifically classified, an
attempt is a misdemeanor of the first degree if the offense attempted is a
felony, and a misdemeanor of the fourth degree if the offense attempted is a
misdemeanor. In the case of an attempt to commit a violation of any provision
of Ohio R.C. Chapter 3734, other than Ohio R.C. 3734.18, that relates to
hazardous wastes, an attempt is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law. An attempt to commit a minor misdemeanor, or to engage in
conspiracy, is not an offense under this section.
      (2)   In addition to any other sanctions imposed pursuant to subsection
(e)(1) of this section for an attempt to commit aggravated murder or murder in
violation of subsection (a) of this section, if the offender used a motor
vehicle as the means to attempt to commit the offense, the court shall impose
upon the offender a class two suspension of the offender's driver's license,
commercial driver's license, temporary instruction permit, probationary
license, or nonresident operating privilege as specified in Ohio R.C. 4510.02
(A)(2).
      (3)   If a person is convicted of or pleads guilty to attempted rape and
also is convicted of or pleads guilty to a specification of the type described
in Ohio R.C. 2941.1418, 2941.1419, or 2941.1420, the offender shall be
sentenced to a prison term or term of life imprisonment pursuant to Ohio R.C.
2971.03.
   (f)   As used in this section:
      (1)   "Drug abuse offense" has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2925.01.
      (2)   "Motor vehicle" has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 4501.01.
(ORC 2923.02)
§ 606.22  COMPLICITY.
   (a)   No person, acting with the kind of culpability required for the
commission of an offense, shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Solicit or procure another to commit the offense;
      (2)   Aid or abet another in committing the offense;
      (3)   Conspire with another to commit the offense in violation of Ohio
R.C. 2923.01;
      (4)   Cause an innocent or irresponsible person to commit the offense.
   (b)   It is no defense to a charge under this section that no person with
whom the accused was in complicity has been convicted as a principal offender.
   (c)   No person shall be convicted of complicity under this section unless
an offense is actually committed, but a person may be convicted of complicity
in an attempt to commit an offense in violation of Ohio R.C. 2923.02 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (d)   If an alleged accomplice of the defendant testifies against the
defendant in a case in which the defendant is charged with complicity in the
commission of or an attempt to commit an offense, an attempt to commit an
offense, or an offense, the court shall charge the jury in accordance with Ohio
R.C. 2923.03(D).
   (e)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section that,
prior to the commission of or attempt to commit the offense, the actor
terminated his or her complicity, under circumstances manifesting a complete
and voluntary renunciation of his or her criminal purpose.
   (f)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of complicity in the
commission of an offense, and shall be prosecuted and punished as if he or she
were a principal offender. A charge of complicity may be stated in terms of
this section, or in terms of the principal offense.
(ORC 2923.03)
§ 606.23  DETENTION OF SHOPLIFTERS AND THOSE COMMITTING MOTION PICTURE PIRACY;
PROTECTION OF INSTITUTIONAL PROPERTY.
   (a)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall
apply.
      (1)   "Archival institution."  Any public or private building, structure,
or shelter in which are stored historical documents, devices, records,
manuscripts, or items of public interest, which historical materials are stored
to preserve the materials or the information in the materials, to disseminate
the information contained in the materials, or to make the materials available
for public inspection or for inspection by certain persons who have a
particular interest in, use for, or knowledge concerning the materials.
      (2)   "Audiovisual recording function " and "facility." Have the same
meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2913.07.
      (3)   "Museum."  Any public or private nonprofit institution that is
permanently organized for primarily educational or aesthetic purposes, owns or
borrows objects or items of public interest, and cares for and exhibits to the
public the objects or items.
      (4)   “Pretrial diversion program.”  Means a rehabilitative, educational
program designed to reduce recidivism and promote personal responsibility that
is at least four hours in length and that has been approved by any court in
this state.
   (b)   A merchant, or an employee or agent of a merchant, who has probable
cause to believe that things offered for sale by a mercantile establishment
have been unlawfully taken by a person, may, for the purposes set forth in
subsection (d) below, detain the person in a reasonable manner for a reasonable
length of time within the mercantile establishment or its immediate vicinity.
   (c)   Any officer, employee, or agent of a library, museum, or archival
institution may, for the purposes set forth in subsection (d) below or for the
purpose of conducting a reasonable investigation of a belief that the person
has acted in a manner described in subsections (c)(1) and (2) below, detain a
person in a reasonable manner for a reasonable length of time within, or in the
immediate vicinity of, the library, museum, or archival institution, if the
officer, employee, or agent has probable cause to believe that the person has:
      (1)   Without privilege to do so, knowingly moved, defaced, damaged,
destroyed, or otherwise improperly tampered with property owned by or in the
custody of the library, museum, or archival institution; or
      (2)   With purpose to deprive the library, museum, or archival
institution of property owned by it or in its custody, knowingly obtained or
exerted control over the property without the consent of the owner or person
authorized to give consent, beyond the scope of the express or implied consent
of the owner or person authorized to give consent, by deception, or by threat.
   (d)   An officer, agent, or employee of a library, museum, or archival
institution pursuant to subsection (c) above or a merchant or an employee or
agent of a merchant pursuant to subsection (b) above may detain another person
for any of the following purposes:
      (1)   To recover the property that is the subject of the unlawful taking,
criminal mischief, or theft;
      (2)   To cause an arrest to be made by a peace officer;
      (3)   To obtain a warrant of arrest;
      (4)   To offer the person, if the person is suspected of the unlawful
taking, criminal mischief, or theft and notwithstanding any other provision of
this Code or the Ohio Revised Code, an opportunity to complete a pretrial
diversion program and to inform the person of the other legal remedies
available to the library, museum, archival institution, or merchant.
   (e)   The owner or lessee of a facility in which a motion picture is being
shown, or the owner's or lessee's employee or agent, who has probable cause to
believe that a person is or has been operating an audiovisual recording
function of a device in violation of Ohio R.C. 2917.07 may, for the purpose of
causing an arrest to be made by a peace officer or of obtaining an arrest
warrant, detain the person in a reasonable manner for a reasonable length of
time within the facility or its immediate vicinity.
   (f)   The officer, agent, or employee of the library, museum, or archival
institution, the merchant or an employee or agent of a merchant, or the owner,
lessee, employee, or agent of the facility acting under subsections (b), (c) or
(e) above shall not search the person detained, search or seize any property
belonging to the person detained without the person’s consent, or use undue
restraint upon the person detained.
   (g)   Any peace officer may arrest without a warrant any person that the
officer has probable cause to believe has committed any act described in
subsection (c)(1) or (2) above, that the officer has probable cause to believe
has committed an unlawful taking in a mercantile establishment, or that the
officer has reasonable cause to believe has committed an act prohibited by Ohio
R.C. 2913.07. An arrest under this subsection shall be made within a reasonable
time after the commission of the act or unlawful taking.
(ORC 2935.041)
§ 606.24  DISPOSITION OF UNCLAIMED OR FORFEITED PROPERTY HELD BY POLICE
DIVISION.
   (a)   Safekeeping of property in custody.
      (1)   A.   Any property that has been lost, abandoned, stolen, seized
pursuant to a search warrant, or otherwise lawfully seized or forfeited and
that is in the custody of the Police Division shall be kept safely by the
Police Division, pending the time it no longer is needed as evidence or for
another lawful purpose, and shall be disposed of pursuant to this section or
Ohio R.C. 2981.12 and 2981.13.
         B.   This section does not apply to the custody and disposal of any of
the following:
            1.   Vehicles subject to forfeiture under Ohio R.C. Title 45,
except as provided in subsection (b)(1)F. of this section;
            2.   Abandoned junk motor vehicles or other property of negligible
value;
            3.   Property held by a department of rehabilitation and correction
institution that is unclaimed, that does not have an identified owner, that the
owner agrees to dispose of, or that is identified by the department as having
little value;
            4.   Animals taken, and devices used in unlawfully taking animals,
under Ohio R.C. 1531.20;
            5.   Controlled substances sold by a peace officer in the
performance of the officer's official duties under Ohio R.C. 3719.141;
            6.   Property recovered by a township law enforcement agency under
Ohio R.C. 505.105 to 505.109;
            7.   Property held and disposed of under an ordinance of the
municipality or under Ohio R.C. 737.29 to 737.33, except that if the
municipality has received notice of a citizens' reward program as provided in
subsection (b)(5) of this section and disposes of property under an ordinance
shall pay 25 percent of any monies acquired from any sale or auction to the
citizens' reward program.
      (2)   A.   The Police Division shall adopt and comply with a written
internal control policy that does all of the following:
            1.   Provides for keeping detailed records as to the amount of
property acquired by the Police Division and the date property was acquired;
            2.   Provides for keeping detailed records of the disposition of
the property, which shall include, but not be limited to, both of the
following:
               a.   The manner in which it was disposed, the date of
disposition, detailed financial records concerning any property sold, and the
name of any person who received the property. The record shall not identify or
enable identification of the individual officer who seized any item of
property.
               b.   An itemized list of the specific expenditures made with
amounts that are gained from the sale of the property and that are retained by
the agency, including the specific amount expended on each expenditure, except
that the policy shall not provide for or permit the identification of any
specific expenditure that is made in an ongoing investigation.
            3.   Complies with Ohio R.C. 2981.13 if the Police Division has a
law enforcement trust fund or similar fund created under that section.
         B.   The records kept under the internal control policy shall be open
to public inspection during the Police Division’s regular business hours. The
policy adopted under this section is a public record open for inspection under
Ohio R.C. 149.43.
      (3)   The Police Division, with custody of property to be disposed of
under this section or Ohio R.C. 2981.12 or 2981.13, shall make a reasonable
effort to locate persons entitled to possession of the property, to notify them
of when and where it may be claimed, and to return the property to them at the
earliest possible time. In the absence of evidence identifying persons entitled
to possession, it is sufficient notice to advertise in a newspaper of general
circulation in the county and to briefly describe the nature of the property in
custody and inviting persons to view and establish their right to it.
      (4)   As used in this section:
         A.   "Citizens' reward program" has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C.
9.92.
         B.   "Law enforcement agency" includes correctional institutions.
         C.   “Township law enforcement agency” means an organized police
department of a township, a township police district, a joint police district,
or the office of a township constable.
(ORC 2981.11)
   (b)   Disposition of unclaimed or forfeited property.
      (1)   Unclaimed or forfeited property in the custody of the Police
Division, other than property described in subsection (a)(1)B. of this section,
shall be disposed of by order of any court of record that has territorial
jurisdiction over the municipality, as follows:
         A.   Drugs shall be disposed of pursuant to Ohio R.C. 3719.11 or
placed in the custody of the Secretary of the Treasury of the United States for
disposal or use for medical or scientific purposes under applicable federal
law.
         B.   Firearms and dangerous ordnance suitable for police work may be
given to a law enforcement agency for that purpose. Firearms suitable for
sporting use or as museum pieces or collectors’ items may be sold at public
auction pursuant to subsection (b)(2) of this section. The Police Department
may sell other firearms and dangerous ordnance to a federally licensed firearms
dealer in a manner that the court considers proper. The Police Department shall
destroy any firearms or dangerous ordnance not given to a law enforcement
agency or sold or shall send them to the Bureau of Criminal Identification and
Investigation for destruction by the Bureau.
         C.   Obscene materials shall be destroyed.
         D.   Beer, intoxicating liquor, or alcohol seized from a person who
does not hold a permit issued under Ohio R.C. Chapters 4301 and 4303 or
otherwise forfeited to the state for an offense under Ohio R.C. 4301.45 or Ohio
R.C. 4301.53 shall be sold by the Division of Liquor Control if the Division
determines that it is fit for sale or shall be placed in the custody of the
Investigations Unit in the Ohio Department of Public Safety and be used for
training relating to law enforcement activities. The Ohio Department of Public
Safety, with the assistance of the Division of Liquor Control, shall adopt
rules in accordance with Ohio R.C. Chapter 119 to provide for the distribution
to state or local law enforcement agencies upon their request. If any tax
imposed under Ohio R.C. Title 43 has not been paid in relation to the beer,
intoxicating liquor, or alcohol, any monies acquired from the sale shall first
be used to pay the tax. All other money collected under this subsection (b)
(1)D. shall be paid into the state Treasury. Any beer, intoxicating liquor, or
alcohol that the Division determines to be unfit for sale shall be destroyed.
         E.   Money received by an inmate of a correctional institution from an
unauthorized source or in an unauthorized manner shall be returned to the
sender, if known, or deposited in the inmates' industrial and entertainment
fund of the institution if the sender is not known.
         F.   1.   Any mobile instrumentality forfeited under Ohio R.C. Chapter
2981 may be given to the law enforcement agency that initially seized the
mobile instrumentality for use in performing its duties, if the agency wants
the mobile instrumentality. The agency shall take the mobile instrumentality
subject to any security interest or lien on the mobile instrumentality.
            2.   Vehicles and vehicle parts forfeited under Ohio R.C. 4549.61
to 4549.63 may be given to a law enforcement agency for use in performing its
duties. Those parts may be incorporated into any other official vehicle. Parts
that do not bear vehicle identification numbers or derivatives of them may be
sold or disposed of as provided by rules of the Director of Public Safety.
Parts from which a vehicle identification number or derivative of it has been
removed, defaced, covered, altered, or destroyed and that are not suitable for
police work or incorporation into an official vehicle shall be destroyed and
sold as junk or scrap.
         G.   Computers, computer networks, computer systems, and computer
software suitable for police work may be given to a law enforcement agency for
that purpose or disposed of under subsection (b)(2) of this section.
         H.   Money seized in connection with a violation of Ohio R.C. 2905.32,
2907.21, or 2907.22 shall be deposited in the Victims of Human Trafficking Fund
created by Ohio R.C. 5101.87.
      (2)   Unclaimed or forfeited property that is not described in subsection
(b)(1) of this section or subsection (a)(1)B. of this section, with court
approval, may be used by the law enforcement agency in possession of it. If it
is not used by the agency, it may be sold without appraisal at a public auction
to the highest bidder for cash or disposed of in another manner that the court
considers proper.
      (3)   Except as provided in subsections (b)(1) and (b)(5) of this section
and after compliance with subsection (b)(4) of this section when applicable,
any monies acquired from the sale of property disposed of pursuant to this
section shall be placed in the general revenue fund of the state, or the
general fund of the municipality.
      (4)   If the property was in the possession of the Police Department in
relation to a delinquent child proceeding in a juvenile court, 10% of any
moneys acquired from the sale of property disposed of under this section shall
be applied to one or more community addiction services providers, as defined in
Ohio R.C. 5119.01. A juvenile court shall not specify a services provider,
except as provided in this division, unless the services provider is in the
same county as the court or in a contiguous county. If no services provider is
located in any of those counties, the juvenile court may specify a services
provider anywhere in Ohio. The remaining 90% of the proceeds or cash shall be
applied as provided in division (b)(3) of this section.
      (5)   A.   If the Board of County Commissioners recognizes a citizens'
reward program under Ohio R.C. 9.92, the Board shall notify the Police Division
of the recognition by filing a copy of its resolution conferring that
recognition with the Police Division. When the Board recognizes a citizens'
reward program and the county includes a part, but not all, of the territory of
the municipality, the Board shall so notify the Police Division of the
recognition of the citizens' reward program only if the county contains the
highest percentage of the municipality's population.
         B.   Upon being so notified, the Police Division shall pay 25 percent
of any forfeited proceeds or cash derived from each sale of property disposed
of pursuant to this section to the citizens' reward program for use exclusively
to pay rewards. No part of the funds may be used to pay expenses associated
with the program. If a citizens' reward program that operates in more than one
county or in another state in addition to this state receives funds under this
section, the funds shall be used to pay rewards only for tips and information
to law enforcement agencies concerning offenses committed in the county from
which the funds were received.
      (6)   Any property forfeited under Ohio R.C. Chapter 2981 not be used to
pay any fine imposed upon a person who is convicted of or pleads guilty to an
underlying criminal offense or a different offense arising out of the same
facts and circumstances.
      (7)   Any moneys acquired from the sale of personal effects, tools, or
other property seized because the personal effects, tools, or other property
were used in the commission of a violation of Ohio R.C. 2905.32, 2907.21, or
2907.22 or derived from the proceeds of the commission of a violation of Ohio
R.C. 2905.32, 2907.21, or 2907.22 and disposed of pursuant to this division (b)
shall be placed in the Victims of Human Trafficking Fund created by Ohio R.C.
5101.87.
(ORC 2981.12)
   (c)   Disposition of contraband, proceeds, or instrumentalities. Except as
otherwise provided in Ohio R.C. 2981.13, property ordered forfeited as
contraband, proceeds, or an instrumentality pursuant to Ohio R.C. Chapter 2981
shall be disposed of, used, or sold pursuant to subsection (b) of this section
or Ohio R.C. 2981.12. If the property is to be sold under subsection (b) of
this section or Ohio R.C. 2981.12, the prosecutor shall cause notice of the
proposed sale to be given in accordance with law.
(ORC 2981.13(A))
Statutory reference:
   Forfeiture of property generally, see R.C. Chapter 2981
§ 606.25  IMPERSONATING AN OFFICER.
   (a)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   "Federal law enforcement officer." An employee of the United States
who serves in a position the duties of which are primarily the investigation,
apprehension, or detention of individuals suspected or convicted of offenses
under the criminal laws of the United States.
      (2)   "Impersonate."  To act the part of, assume the identity of, wear
the uniform or any part of the uniform of, or display the identification of a
particular person or of a member of a class of persons with purpose to make
another person believe that the actor is that particular person or is a member
of that class of persons.
      (3)   "Investigator of the Bureau of Criminal Identification and
Investigation." Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2903.11.
      (4)   “Peace officer.”  A sheriff, deputy sheriff, marshal, deputy
marshal, member of the organized police department of a municipal corporation
or township constable, who is employed by a political subdivision of this
state; a member of a police force employed by a metropolitan housing authority
under Ohio R.C. 3735.31(D); a member of a police force employed by a regional
transit authority under Ohio R.C. 306.35(Y); a state university law enforcement
officer appointed under Ohio R.C. 3345.04; a veterans’ home police officer
appointed under Ohio R.C. 5907.02; a special police officer employed by a port
authority under Ohio R.C. 4582.04 or 4582.28; an officer, agent or employee of
the state or any of its agencies, instrumentalities or political subdivisions,
upon whom, by statute, a duty to conserve the peace or to enforce all or
certain laws is imposed and the authority to arrest violators is conferred,
within limits of that statutory duty and authority; or a State Highway Patrol
trooper whose primary duties are to preserve the peace, to protect life and
property and to enforce the laws, ordinances or rules of the state or any of
its political subdivisions.
      (5)   "Private police officer."  Any security guard, special police
officer, private detective, or other person who is privately employed in a
police capacity.
   (b)   No person shall impersonate a peace officer, private police officer,
investigator of the Bureau of Criminal Identification and Investigation, or
Federal law enforcement officer.
   (c)   No person, by impersonating a peace officer, private police officer,
investigator of the Bureau of Criminal Identification and Investigation, or
Federal law enforcement officer, shall arrest or detain any person, search any
person, or search the property of any person.
   (d)   No person, with purpose to commit or facilitate the commission of an
offense, shall impersonate a peace officer, private police officer, Federal law
enforcement officer, an officer, agent or employee of the municipality or the
state, or investigator of the Bureau of Criminal Identification and
Investigation.
   (e)   No person shall commit a felony while impersonating a peace officer,
private police officer, federal law enforcement officer, an officer, agent or
employee of the municipality or of the state, or investigator of the Bureau of
Criminal Identification and Investigation.
   (f)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under subsection (b) of this
section that the impersonation of the peace officer, private police officer,
Federal law enforcement officer, an officer, agent or employee of the
municipality or of the state, or investigator of the Bureau of Criminal
Identification and Investigation was for a lawful purpose.
   (g)   Whoever violates subsection (b) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree. Whoever violates subsection (c) or (d) of
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the purpose of
a violation of subsection (d) of this section is to commit or facilitate the
commission of a felony, a violation of subsection (d) is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law. Whoever violates subsection (e) of this
section is guilty of a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(ORC 2921.51)
§ 606.26  DISPLAY OF LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY EMBLEM.
   (a)   No person who is not entitled to do so shall knowingly display on a
motor vehicle the emblem of a law enforcement agency or an organization of law
enforcement officers.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of the unlawful display of the
emblem of a law enforcement agency or an organization of law enforcement
officers, a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 2913.441)
§ 606.27  RECOVERY OF COSTS OF CONFINEMENT.
   (a)   Any person convicted of a criminal offense, other than a minor
misdemeanor, and who, as a consequence thereof, is confined in the Lake County
Jail or the City of Kirtland Jail, shall reimburse the City of Kirtland for its
expenses incurred by reason of his or her confinement, including, but not
limited to, the expenses relating to the provision of food, closing, medical
care and shelter.
   (b)   The Law Director is hereby authorized to institute an appropriate
civil action in the appropriate trial court for recovery of the expenses
referred to in subsection (a) hereof, the amount of reimbursement to be
determined by the Court pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2929.19(A)(5)(a)(ii).
(Ord. 97-O-60, passed 10-6-1997)
§ 606.28  USING SHAM LEGAL PROCESS.
   (a)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall
apply:
      (1)   "Lawfully issued."  Adopted, issued, or rendered in accordance with
the United States Constitution, the constitution of a state, and the applicable
statutes, rules, regulations and ordinances of the United States, a state, and
the political subsubsections of a state.
      (2)   "Political subsubsections."  municipal corporations, townships,
counties, school districts, and all other bodies corporate and politic that are
organized under state law and are responsible for governmental activities only
in geographical areas smaller than that of a state.
      (3)   "Sham legal process."  An instrument that meets all of the
following conditions:
         A.   It is not lawfully issued.
         B.   It purports to do any of the following:
            1.   To be a summons, subpoena, judgment, or order of a court, a
law enforcement officer, or a legislative, executive or administrative body.
            2.   To assert jurisdiction over or determine the legal or
equitable status, rights, duties, powers, or privileges of any person or
property.
            3.   To require or authorize the search, seizure, indictment,
arrest, trial, or sentencing of any person or property.
         C.   It is designed to make another person believe that it is lawfully
issued.
      (4)   "State."  A state of the United States, including without
limitation the state legislature, the highest court of the state that has
statewide jurisdiction, the offices of all elected state officers, and all
departments, boards, offices, commissions, agencies, institutions, and other
instrumentalities of the state. "State" does not include the political
subsubsections of the state.
   (b)   No person shall, knowing the sham legal process to be a sham legal
process, do any of the following:
      (1)   Knowingly issue, display, deliver, distribute, or otherwise use
sham legal process.
      (2)   Knowingly use sham legal process to arrest, detain, search or seize
any person or the property of another person.
      (3)   Knowingly commit or facilitate the commission of an offense using
sham legal process.
      (4)   Knowingly commit a felony by using sham legal process.
   (c)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under subsection (b)(1) or
(2) of this section that the use of sham legal process was for a lawful
purpose.
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of using sham legal process. A
violation of subsection (b)(1) of this section is a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree. A violation of subsection (b)(2) or (b)(3) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the first degree, except that if the purpose of a violation of
subsection (b)(3) of this section is to commit or facilitate the commission of
a felony, a violation of subsection (b)(3) of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law. A violation of subsection (b)(4) of
this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(ORC 2921.52(A) - (D))
§ 606.29  FAILURE TO DISCLOSE PERSONAL INFORMATION.
   (a)   No person who is in a public place shall refuse to disclose the
person's name, address, or date of birth, when requested by a law enforcement
officer who reasonably suspects either of the following:
      (1)   The person is committing, has committed, or is about to commit a
criminal offense.
      (2)   The person witnessed any of the following:
         A.   An offense of violence that would constitute a felony under the
laws of this state;
         B.   A felony offense that causes or results in, or creates a
substantial risk of, serious physical harm to another person or property;
         C.   Any attempt or conspiracy to commit, or complicity in committing,
any offenses identified in subsection (a)(2)A. or (a)(2)B. of this section;
         D.   Any conduct reasonably indicating that any offense identified in
subsection (a)(2)A. or (a)(2)B. of this section or any attempt, conspiracy, or
complicity described in subsection (a)(2)C. of this section has been, is being,
or is about to be committed.
   (b)   Whoever violates subsection (a) of this section is guilty of failure
to disclose one's personal information, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
   (c)   Nothing in subsection (a) of this section requires a person to answer
any questions beyond that person's name, address, or date of birth. Nothing in
subsection (a) of this section authorizes a law enforcement officer to arrest a
person for not providing any information beyond the person's name, address, or
date of birth or for refusing to describe the offense observed.
   (d)   It is not a violation of subsection (a) of this section to refuse to
answer a question that would reveal a person's age or date of birth if age is
an element of the crime that the person is suspected of committing.
(ORC 2921.29)
   (e)   No person entering an airport, train station, port, or other similar
critical transportation infrastructure site shall refuse to show identification
when requested by a law enforcement officer when there is a threat to security
and the law enforcement officer is requiring identification of all persons
entering the site.
   (f)   A law enforcement officer may prevent any person who refuses to show
identification when asked under the circumstances described in subsection (e)
of this section from entering the critical transportation infrastructure site.
(ORC 2909.31)
§ 606.30  MISUSE OF 9-1-1 SYSTEM.
   (a)   As used in this section, “9-1-1 system” means a system through which
individuals can request emergency service using the telephone number 9-1-1.
(R.C. § 128.01(A))
   (b)   No person shall knowingly use the telephone number of a 9-1-1 system
established under R.C. Chapter 128 to report an emergency if the person knows
that no emergency exists.
   (c)   No person shall knowingly use a 9-1-1 system for a purpose other than
obtaining emergency service.
   (d)   No person shall disclose or use any information concerning telephone
numbers, addresses, or names obtained from the database that serves the public
safety answering point of a 9-1-1 system established under R.C. Chapter 128,
except for any of the following purposes or under any of the following
circumstances:
      (1)   For the purpose of the 9-1-1 system;
      (2)   For the purpose of responding to an emergency call to an emergency
service provider;
      (3)   In the circumstance of the inadvertent disclosure of such
information due solely to  technology of the wireless telephone network portion
of the 9-1-1 system not allowing access to the database to be restricted to 9-
1-1 specific answering lines at a public safety answering point;
      (4)   In the circumstance of access to a database being given by a
telephone company that is a wireless service provider to a public utility or
municipal utility in handling customer calls in times of public emergency or
service outages. The charge, terms and conditions for the disclosure or use of
the information for the purpose of such access to a database shall be subject
to the jurisdiction of the Steering Committee;
      (5)   In the circumstance of access to a database given by a telephone
company that is a wireline service provider to a state and local government in
warning of a public emergency, as determined by the Steering Committee. The
charge, terms and conditions for the disclosure or use of that information for
the purpose of access to a database is subject to the jurisdiction of the
Steering Committee.
(R.C. § 128.32(E) - (G))
   (e)   (1)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (c) or (d) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree on a first offense and a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law on each subsequent offense.
(R.C. § 128.99(A), (B))
CHAPTER 612:  ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Section
612.01   Definitions.
612.02   Sales to underage persons; prohibitions and misrepresentations.
612.03   Sales to intoxicated persons.
612.04   Consumption in motor vehicle.
612.05   Permit required.
612.06   Posting age and firearm warning signs.
612.07   Open container prohibited.
612.08   Hours of sale or consumption.
612.09   Consumption or possession by underage persons on residential premises.
612.10   Conveying intoxicating liquor or cash onto grounds of detention
facilities or other specified governmental facilities.
612.11   Sales of low-alcohol beverages to underage persons; prohibitions and
misrepresentations.
612.12   Alcohol vaporizing devices prohibited.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Definitions generally - see GEN. OFF.
606.01
   Disorderly conduct while voluntarily intoxicated - see GEN. OFF.
648.04
   Driving or physical control while intoxicated - see TRAF.
434.01
   Effect of voluntary intoxication on criminal liability - see GEN. OFF.
606.07
   Liquor Control Law - see Ohio R.C. Ch. 4301
   Liquor permits - see Ohio R.C. Ch. 4303
   Local option - see Ohio R.C. 4303.29
   See section histories for similar state law
   Suspension of alcohol sales during emergency - see Ohio R.C. 4301.251
   Using weapons while intoxicated - see GEN. OFF.
672.03
§ 612.01  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   (a)   "Alcohol."  Ethyl alcohol, whether rectified or diluted with water or
not, whatever its origin may be, and includes synthetic ethyl alcohol. The term
does not include denatured alcohol and wood alcohol.
   (b)   "At retail."  For use or consumption by the purchaser and not for
resale.
   (c)   “Beer.”
      (1)   Includes all beverages brewed or fermented wholly or in part from
malt products and containing 0.5 percent or more, but not more than 12 percent,
of alcohol by volume.
      (2)   Beer, regardless of the percent of alcohol by volume, is not
intoxicating liquor for purposes of this code, the Ohio Revised Code, or any
rules adopted under it.
   (d)   "Cider."  All liquids that are fit to use for beverage purposes that
contain 0.5 percent of alcohol by volume, but not more than 6 percent of
alcohol by weight that are made through the normal alcoholic fermentation of
the juice of sound, ripe apples, including, without limitation, flavored,
sparkling, or carbonated cider and cider made from pure condensed apple must.
   (e)   "Club."  A corporation or association of individuals organized in good
faith for social, recreational, benevolent, charitable, fraternal, political,
patriotic, or athletic purposes, which is the owner, lessor, or occupant of a
permanent building or part of a permanent building operated solely for such
purposes, membership in which entails the prepayment of regular dues, and
includes the place so operated.
   (f)   "Community facility."  Means either of the following:
      (1)   Any convention, sports or entertainment facility or complex, or any
combination of these, that is used by or accessible to the general public and
that is owned or operated in whole or in part by the state, a state agency, or
a political subsubsection of the state or that is leased from, or located on
property owned by or leased from, the state, a state agency, a political
subsubsection of the state, or a convention facilities authority created
pursuant to Ohio R.C. 351.02;
      (2)   An area designated as a community entertainment district pursuant
to Ohio R.C. 4301.80.
   (g)   "Controlled access alcohol and beverage cabinet."  A closed container,
either refrigerated, in whole or in part, or nonrefrigerated, access to the
interior of which is restricted by means of a device that requires the use of a
key, magnetic card, or similar device and from which beer, intoxicating liquor,
other beverages, or food may be sold.
   (h)   "Hotel."  The same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 3731.01, subject to the
exceptions mentioned in Ohio R.C. 3731.03.
   (i)   “Intoxicating liquor” and “liquor.”  All liquids and compounds, other
than beer, containing 0.5 percent or more of alcohol by volume which are fit to
use for beverage purposes, from whatever source and by whatever process
produced, by whatever name called, and whether they are medicated, proprietary,
or patented. “Intoxicating liquor” and “liquor” include cider and alcohol, and
all solids and confections which contain 0.5% or more of alcohol by volume.
   (j)   "Low-alcohol beverage."  Any brewed or fermented malt product or any
product made from the fermented juices of grapes, fruits, or other agricultural
products that contains either no alcohol or less than 0.5 percent of alcohol by
volume. The beverages described in this definition do not include a soft drink
such as root beer, birch beer, or ginger beer.
   (k)   "Manufacture."  All processes by which beer or intoxicating liquor is
produced, whether by distillation, rectifying, fortifying, blending,
fermentation, brewing, or in any other manner.
   (l)   "Manufacturer."  Any person engaged in the business of manufacturing
beer or intoxicating liquor.
   (m)   “Mixed beverages.” Include bottled and prepared cordials, cocktails,
highballs, and solids and confections that are obtained by mixing any type of
whiskey, neutral spirits, brandy, gin or other distilled spirits with, or over,
carbonated or plain water, pure juices from flowers and plants, and other
flavoring materials. The completed product shall contain not less than 0.5
percent of alcohol by volume and not more than 21 percent of alcohol by volume.
   (n)   "Nightclub."  A place habitually operated for profit, where food is
served for consumption on the premises, and one or more forms of amusement are
provided or permitted for a consideration that may be in the form of a cover
charge or may be included in the price of the food and beverages, or both,
purchased by patrons.
   (o)   "Person."  Includes firms and corporations.
   (p)   "Pharmacy."  An establishment as defined in Ohio R.C. 4729.01, that is
under the management or control of a licensed pharmacist in accordance with
Ohio R.C. 4729.27.
   (q)   "Restaurant."  A place located in a permanent building provided with
space and accommodations wherein, in consideration of the payment of money, hot
meals are habitually prepared, sold, and served at noon and evening, as the
principal business of the place. The term does not include pharmacies,
confectionery stores, lunch stands, nightclubs, and filling stations.
   (r)   "Sale" and "sell."  The exchange, barter, gift, offer for sale, sale,
distribution, and delivery of any kind, and the transfer of title or possession
of beer and intoxicating liquor either by constructive or actual delivery by
any means or devices whatever, including the sale of beer or intoxicating
liquor by means of a controlled access alcohol and beverage cabinet pursuant to
Ohio R.C. 4301.21. Such terms do not include the mere solicitation of orders
for beer or intoxicating liquor from the holders of permits issued by the
Division of Liquor Control authorizing the sale of the beer or intoxicating
liquor, but no solicitor shall solicit any orders until the solicitor has been
registered with the Division pursuant to Ohio R.C. 4303.25.
   (s)   "Sales area or territory." An exclusive geographic area or territory
that is assigned to a particular A or B permit holder and that either has one
or more political subsubsections as its boundaries or consists of an area of
land with readily identifiable geographic boundaries.  "Sales area or
territory" does not include, however, any particular retail location in an
exclusive geographic area or territory that had been assigned to another A or B
permit holder before April 9, 2001.
   (t)   "Sealed container."  Any container having a capacity of not more than
128 fluid ounces, the opening of which is closed to prevent the entrance of
air.
   (u)   "Spirituous liquor."  All intoxicating liquors containing more than 21
percent of alcohol by volume.
   (v)   "Vehicle."  All means of transportation by land, by water, or by air,
and everything made use of in any way for such transportation.
   (w)   "Wholesale distributor" and "distributor."  A person engaged in the
business of selling to retail dealers for purposes of resale.
   (x)   "Wine."  All liquids fit to use for beverage purposes containing not
less than 0.5 percent of alcohol by volume and not more than 21 percent of
alcohol by volume, which is made from the fermented juices of grapes, fruits,
or other agricultural products. Except as provided in Ohio R.C. 4301.01(B)(3),
the term does not include cider.
(R.C. §§ 4301.01, 4301.244)
§ 612.02  SALES TO UNDERAGE PERSONS; PROHIBITIONS AND MISREPRESENTATIONS.
   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter or in Ohio R.C. Chapter
4301, no person shall sell beer or intoxicating liquor to an underage person,
shall buy beer or intoxicating liquor for an underage person, or shall furnish
it to an underage person unless given by a physician in the regular line of the
physician's practice or given for established religious purposes or unless the
underage person is supervised by a parent, spouse who is not an underage
person, or legal guardian. In proceedings before the Liquor Control Commission,
no permit holder, or no employee or agent of a permit holder, charged with a
violation of this subsection shall be charged, for the same offense, with a
violation of Ohio R.C. 4301.22(A)(1) or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance.
   (b)   No person who is the owner or occupant of any public or private place
shall knowingly allow any underage person to remain in or on the place while
possessing or consuming beer or intoxicating liquor, unless the intoxicating
liquor or beer is given to the person possessing or consuming it by that
person's parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal guardian and
the parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal guardian is present
at the time of the person's possession or consumption of the beer or
intoxicating liquor. An owner of a public or private place is not liable for
acts or omissions in violation of this subsection that are committed by a
lessee of that place, unless the owner authorizes or acquiesces in the lessee's
acts or omissions.
   (c)   No person shall engage or use accommodations at a hotel, inn, cabin,
campground, or restaurant when the person knows or has reason to know either of
the following:
      (1)   That beer or intoxicating liquor will be consumed by an underage
person on the premises of the accommodations that the person engages or uses,
unless the person engaging or using the accommodations is the spouse of the
underage person and who is not an underage person, or is the parent or legal
guardian of all of the underage persons, who consume beer or intoxicating
liquor on the premises and that person is on the premises at all times when
beer or intoxicating liquor is being consumed by an underage person.
      (2)   That a drug of abuse will be consumed on the premises of the
accommodations by any person, except a person who obtained the drug of abuse
pursuant to a prescription issued by a licensed health professionals authorized
to prescribe drugs and has the drug of abuse in the original container in which
it was dispensed to the person.
   (d)   (1)   No person is required to permit the engagement of accommodations
at any hotel, inn, cabin, or campground by an underage person or for an
underage person, if the person engaging the accommodations knows or has reason
to know that the underage person is intoxicated, or that the underage person
possesses any beer or intoxicating liquor and is not supervised by a parent,
spouse who is not an underage person, or legal guardian who is or will be
present at all times when the beer or intoxicating liquor is being consumed by
the underage person.
      (2)   No underage person shall knowingly engage or attempt to engage
accommodations at any hotel, inn, cabin, or campground by presenting
identification that falsely indicates that the underage person is 21 years of
age or older for the purpose of violating this section.
   (e)   (1)   No underage person shall knowingly order, pay for, share the
cost of, attempt to purchase, possess, or consume any beer or intoxicating
liquor in any public or private place. No underage person shall knowingly be
under the influence of any beer or intoxicating liquor in any public place. The
prohibitions set forth in this subsection against an underage person knowingly
possessing, consuming, or being under the influence of any beer or intoxicating
liquor shall not apply if the underage person is supervised by a parent, spouse
who is not an underage person, or legal guardian, or the beer or intoxicating
liquor is given by a physician in the regular line of the physician's practice
or given for established religious purposes.
      (2)   A.   If a person is charged with violating subsection (e)(1) of
this section in a complaint filed under Ohio R.C. 2151.27, the court may order
the child into a diversion program specified by the court and hold the
complaint in abeyance pending successful completion of the diversion program. A
child is ineligible to enter into a diversion program under this subsection if
the child previously has been diverted pursuant to this subsection. If the
child completes the diversion program to the satisfaction of the court, the
court shall dismiss the complaint and order the child's record in the case
sealed under Ohio R.C. 2151.356 through 2151.358. If the child fails to
satisfactorily complete the diversion program, the court shall proceed with the
complaint.
         B.   If a person is charged in a criminal complaint with violating
subsection (e)(1) of this section, Ohio R.C. 2935.36 shall apply to the
offense, except that a person is ineligible for diversion under that section if
the person previously has been diverted pursuant to subsections (e)(2)A. or (e)
(2)B. of this section. If the person completes the diversion program to the
satisfaction of the court, the court shall dismiss the complaint and order the
record in the case sealed under Ohio R.C. 2953.52. If the person fails to
satisfactorily complete the diversion program, the court shall proceed with the
complaint.
   (f)   No parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal guardian of
a minor shall knowingly permit the minor to violate this section or Ohio R.C.
4301.63, 4301.633, or 4301.634, or any substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance.
   (g)   The operator of any hotel, inn, cabin, or campground shall make the
provisions of this section available in writing to any person engaging or using
accommodations at the hotel, inn, cabin, or campground.
   (h)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   "Drug of abuse" has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 3719.011.
      (2)   "Hotel" has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 3731.01.
      (3)   "Licensed health professional authorized to prescribe drugs" and
"prescription" have the same meanings as in Ohio R.C. 4729.01.
      (4)   "Minor" means a person under the age of 18 years.
      (5)   "Underage person" means a person under the age of 21 years.
(ORC 4301.69)
   (i)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter or in Ohio R.C. Chapter
4301, no person under the age of 21 years shall purchase beer or intoxicating
liquor.
(ORC 4301.63)
   (j)   Editor's note:
      Division (j) was repealed because substantially equivalent state law,
Ohio R.C. 4301.632, was repealed in 2002.
   (k)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter or in Ohio R.C. Chapter
4301, no person shall knowingly furnish any false information as to the name,
age, or other identification of any person under 21 years of age, for the
purpose of obtaining, or with the intent to obtain, beer or intoxicating liquor
for a person under 21 years of age, by purchase, or as a gift.
(ORC 4301.633)
   (l)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter or in Ohio R.C. Chapter
4301, no person under the age of 21 years shall knowingly show or give false
information concerning his or her name, age, or other identification for the
purpose of purchasing or otherwise obtaining beer or intoxicating liquor in any
place in this municipality where beer or intoxicating liquor is sold under a
permit issued by the Division of Liquor Control, or sold by the Division of
Liquor Control.
(ORC 4301.634)
   (m)   Whoever violates subsection (a) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor, shall be fined not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) nor
more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), and in addition to the fine, may be
imprisoned for a definite term of not more than six months.
(ORC 4301.99(I))
   (n)   Whoever violates subsection (b), (c), (d), (e)(1), (f), (g) or (k) of
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. If an offender who
violates subsection (e)(1) of this section was under the age of 18 years at the
time of the offense and the offense occurred while the offender was the
operator of or a passenger in a motor vehicle, the court, in addition to any
other penalties it imposes upon the offender, shall suspend the offender's
temporary instruction permit or probationary driver's license for a period of
six months. If the offender is 15 years and 6 months of age or older and has
not been issued a temporary instruction permit or probationary driver's
license, the offender shall not be eligible to be issued such a license or
permit for a period of six months. If the offender has not attained the age of
15 years and 6 months, the offender shall not be eligible to be issued a
temporary instruction permit until the offender attains the age of 16 years.
(ORC 4301.99(C))
   (o)   Whoever violates subsection (i) of this section shall be fined not
less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than one hundred dollars
($100.00). The court imposing a fine for a violation of this section may order
that the fine be paid by the performance of public work at a reasonable hour
rate established by the court. The court shall designate the time within which
the public work shall be completed.
(ORC 4301.99(E))
   (p)   Editor's note:
      Division (p) was repealed because the penalty for a substantially
equivalent state law, Ohio R.C. 4301.632, was repealed in 2002.
   (q)   (1)   Whoever violates subsection (l) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If, in committing a first violation of
subsection (l), the offender presented to the permit holder or his or her
employee or agent a false, fictitious, or altered identification card, a false
or fictitious driver's license purportedly issued by any state, or a driver's
license issued by any state that has been altered, the offender is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree and shall be fined not less than two hundred
fifty dollars ($250.00) and not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), and
may be sentenced to a term of imprisonment of not more than six months.
      (2)   On a second violation in which, for the second time, the offender
presented to the permit holder or his or her employee or agent a false,
fictitious, or altered identification card, a false or fictitious driver's
license purportedly issued by any state, or a driver's license issued by any
state that has been altered, the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
first degree and shall be fined not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00)
nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), and may be sentenced to a term
of imprisonment of not more than six months. The court also may impose a class
seven suspension of the offender's driver's or commercial driver's license or
permit or nonresident operation privilege from the range specified in Ohio R.C.
4510.02(A)(7).
      (3)   On a third or subsequent violation in which, for the third or
subsequent time, the offender presented to the permit holder or his or her
employee or agent a false, fictitious, or altered identification card, a false
or fictitious driver’s license purportedly issued by any state, or a driver’s
license issued by any state that has been altered, the offender is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree and shall be fined not less than five hundred
dollars ($500.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), and may be
sentenced to a term of imprisonment of not more than six months. Except as
provided in this division, the court also may impose a class six suspension of
the offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit or nonresident
operating privilege from the range specified in Ohio R.C. 4510.02(A)(6), and
the court may order that the suspension or denial remain in effect until the
offender attains the age of 21 years. The court, in lieu of suspending the
offender’s temporary instruction permit, probationary driver’s license, or
driver’s license, instead may order the offender to perform a determinate
number of hours of community service, with the court determining the actual
number of hours and the nature of the community service the offender shall
perform.
(ORC 4301.99(F))
§ 612.03  SALES TO INTOXICATED PERSONS.
   (a)   No permit holder and no agent or employee of a permit holder shall
sell or furnish beer or intoxicating liquor to an intoxicated person.
(ORC 4301.22(B))
   (b)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(ORC 4301.99(D), (H))
§ 612.04  CONSUMPTION IN MOTOR VEHICLE.
   (a)   No person shall consume any beer or intoxicating liquor in a motor
vehicle. This section does not apply to persons described in Ohio R.C. 4301.62
(D) or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
(ORC 4301.64)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree. If an offender who violates this section was under the age of 18 years
at the time of the offense, the court, in addition to any other penalties it
imposes upon the offender, may suspend the offender’s temporary instruction
permit, probationary driver’s license or driver’s license for a period of not
less than six months and not more than one year. In lieu of suspending the
offender’s temporary instruction permit, probationary driver’s license, or
driver’s license, the court instead may require the offender to perform
community service for a number of hours determined by the court. If the
offender is 15 years and six months of age or older and has not been issued a
temporary instruction permit or probationary driver’s license, the offender
shall not be eligible to be issued such a license or permit for a period of six
months. If the offender has not attained the age of 15 years and six months,
the offender shall not be eligible to be issued a temporary instruction permit
until the offender attains the age of 16 years.
(ORC 4301.99(B))
§ 612.05  PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (a)   (1)   No person personally or by the person's clerk, agent, or
employee, shall manufacture, manufacture for sale, offer, keep, or possess for
sale, furnish or sell, or solicit the purchase or sale of any beer or
intoxicating liquor in this state, or transport, import, or cause to be
transported or imported any beer, intoxicating liquor, or alcohol in or into
this municipality for delivery, use or sale, unless the person has fully
complied with Ohio R.C. Chapters 4301 and 4303 or is the holder of a permit
issued by the Division of Liquor Control and in force at the time.
      (2)   No manufacturer, supplier, wholesale distributor, broker, or
retailer of beer or intoxicating liquor, or other person shall employ, retain,
or otherwise utilize any person in this state to act as an employee, agent,
solicitor, or salesperson, or act in any other representative capacity to sell,
solicit, take orders, or receive offers to purchase or expressions of interest
to purchase beer or intoxicating liquor from any person, at any location other
than a liquor permit premises, except as specifically authorized by Ohio R.C.
Chapter 4301 or Ohio R.C. Chapter 4303 or rules adopted thereunder. No
function, event, or party shall take place at any location other than a liquor
permit premises where any person acts in any manner to sell, solicit, take
orders, or receive offers to purchase or expressions of intent to purchase beer
or intoxicating liquor to or from any person, except as specifically authorized
by Ohio R.C. Chapter 4301 or Ohio R.C. Chapter 4303 or rules adopted
thereunder.
(ORC 4303.25)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. A
separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a
violation occurs or continues.
§ 612.06  POSTING AGE AND FIREARM WARNING SIGNS.
   (a)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in Ohio R.C. 4301.691, every place
in this municipality where beer, intoxicating liquor, or any low-alcohol
beverage is sold for beverage purposes shall display at all times, in a
prominent place on the premises thereof, a printed card, which shall be
furnished by the Division of Liquor Control and which shall read substantially
as follows:
   WARNING TO PERSONS UNDER AGE
   If you are under the age of 21
Under the statutes of the state of Ohio, if you order, pay for, share the cost
of, or attempt to purchase, or possess or consume beer or intoxicating liquor
in any public place, or furnish false information as to name, age, or other
identification, you are subject to a fine of up to $1,000, or imprisonment up
to 6 months, or both.
   If you are under the age of 18
Under the statutes of the state of Ohio, if you order, pay for, share the cost
of, or attempt to purchase, or posses or consume, any type of beer or wine that
contains either no alcohol or less than one-half of one per cent of alcohol by
volume in any public place, or furnish false information as to the name, age,
or other identification, you are subject to a fine of up to $250 or to
imprisonment up to 30 days, or both.
      (2)   No person shall be subject to any criminal prosecution or any
proceedings before the Department or the Liquor Control Commission for failing
to display this card. No permit issued by the Department shall be suspended,
revoked, or canceled because of the failure of the permit holder to display
this card.
   (b)   (1)   Every place in this municipality for which a D permit has been
issued under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4303 shall be issued a printed card by the
Division of Liquor Control that shall read substantially as follows:
   WARNING
   If you are carrying a firearm
Under the statutes of Ohio, if you possess a firearm in any room in which
liquor is being dispensed in premises for which a D permit has been issued
under Chapter 4303 of the Revised Code, you may be guilty of a felony and may
be subjected to a prison term of up to one year.
      (2)   No person shall be subject to any criminal prosecution or any
proceedings before the Division of Liquor Control or the Liquor Control
Commission for failing to display this card. No permit issued by the Department
shall be suspended, revoked, or canceled because of the failure of the permit
holder to display this card.
(ORC 4301.637)
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4301.70, 4301.99(A))
§ 612.07  OPEN CONTAINER PROHIBITED.
   (a)   As used in this section:
      (1)   "Chauffeured limousine" means a vehicle registered under Ohio R.C.
4503.24.
      (2)   "Street", "highway", and "motor vehicle" have the same meanings as
in Ohio R.C. 4511.01.
   (b)   No person shall have in the person's possession an opened container of
beer or intoxicating liquor in any of the following circumstances:
      (1)   Except as provided in division (c)(1)E. of this section, in a state
liquor store;
      (2)   Except as provided in subsection (c) of this section, on the
premises of the holder of any permit issued by the Division of Liquor Control;
      (3)   In any other public place;
      (4)   Except as provided in subsection (d) or (e) of this section while
operating or being a passenger in or on a motor vehicle on any street, highway,
or other public or private property open to the public for purposes of
vehicular travel or parking;
      (5)   Except as provided in subsection (d) or (e) of this section while
being in or on a stationary motor vehicle on any street, highway, or other
public or private property open to the public for purposes of vehicular travel
or parking.
   (c)   (1)   A person may have in the person's possession an opened container
of any of the following:
         A.   Beer or intoxicating liquor that has been lawfully purchased for
consumption on the premises where bought from the holder of an A-1-A, A-2, A-
2f, A-3a, D-1, D-2, D-3, D-3a, D-4, D-4a, D-5, D-5a, D-5b, D-5c, D-5d, D-5e, D-
5f, D-5g, D-5h, D-5i, D-5j, D-5k, D-5l, D-5m, D-5n, D-5o, D-7, D-8, E, F, F-2,
F-5, F-7, or F-8 permit;
         B.   Beer, wine, or mixed beverages served for consumption on the
premises by the holder of an F-3 permit, wine served as a tasting sample by an
A-2 permit holder or S permit holder for consumption on the premises of a
farmers market for which an F-10 permit has been issued, or wine served for
consumption on the premises by the holder of an F-4 or F-6 permit;
         C.   Beer or intoxicating liquor consumed on the premises of a
convention facility as provided in Ohio R.C. 4303.201;
         D.   Beer or intoxicating liquor to be consumed during tastings and
samplings approved by rule of the Liquor Control Commission;
         E.   Spiritous liquor to be consumed for purposes of a tasting sample,
as defined in Ohio R.C. 4301.171.
      (2)   A person may have in the person's possession on an F liquor permit
premises an opened container of beer or intoxicating liquor that was not
purchased from the holder of the F permit if the premises for which the F
permit is issued is a music festival and the holder of the F permit grants
permission for that possession on the premises during the period for which the
F permit is issued. As used in this subsection (c)(2), "music festival" means a
series of outdoor live musical performances extending for a period of at least
three consecutive days and located on an area of land of at least 40 acres.
      (3)   A.   A person may have in the person's possession on a D-2 liquor
permit premises an opened or unopened container of wine that was not purchased
from the holder of the D-2 permit if the premises for which the D-2 permit is
issued is an outdoor performing arts center, the person is attending an
orchestral performance, and the holder of the D-2 permit grants permission for
the possession and consumption of wine in certain predesignated areas of the
premises during the period for which the D-2 permit is issued.
         B.   As used in subsection (c)(3)A. of this section:
            1.   "Orchestral performance" means a concert comprised of a group
of not fewer than 40 musicians playing various musical instruments.
            2.   “Outdoor performing arts center” means an outdoor performing
arts center that is located on not less than 150 acres of land and that is open
for performances from the first day of April to the last day of October of each
year.
      (4)   A person may have in the person’s possession an opened or unopened
container of beer or intoxicating liquor at an outdoor location at which the
person is attending an orchestral performance as defined in division (c)(3)B.
of this section if the person with supervision and control over the performance
grants permission for the possession and consumption of beer or intoxicating
liquor in certain predesignated areas of that outdoor location.
      (5)   A.   A person may have in the person’s possession on an F-9 liquor
permit premises an opened or unopened container of beer or intoxicating liquor
that was not purchased from the holder of the F-9 permit if the person is
attending either of the following:
            1.   An orchestral performance and the F-9 permit holder grants
permission for the possession and consumption of beer or intoxicating liquor in
certain predesignated areas of the premises during the period for which the F-
9 permit is issued;
            2.   An outdoor performing arts event or orchestral performance
that is free of charge and the F-9 permit holder annually hosts not less than
25 other events or performances that are free of charge on the permit premises.
         B.   As used in division (c)(5) of this section, “orchestral
performance” has the same meaning as in division (c)(3)B. of this section.
      (6)   A.   A person may have in the person’s possession on the property
of an outdoor motorsports facility an opened or unopened container of beer or
intoxicating liquor that was not purchased from the owner of the facility if
both of the following apply:
            1.   The person is attending a racing event at the facility; and
            2.   The owner of the facility grants permission for the possession
and consumption of beer or intoxicating liquor on the property of the facility.
         B.   As used in division (c)(6)A. of this section:
            1.   “Outdoor motorsports facility.” An outdoor racetrack to which
all of the following apply:
               a.   It is 2.4 miles or more in length.
               b.   It is located on 200 acres or more of land.
               c.   The primary business of the owner of the facility is the
hosting and promoting of racing events.
               d.   The holder of a D-1, D-2, or D-3 permit is located on the
property of the facility.
            2.   “Racing event.” A motor vehicle racing event sanctioned by one
or more motor racing sanctioning organizations.
      (7)   A.   A person may have in the person’s possession an opened
container of beer or intoxicating liquor at an outdoor location within an
outdoor refreshment area created under Ohio R.C. 4301.82 if the opened
container of beer or intoxicating liquor was purchased from a qualified permit
holder to which both of the following apply:
            1.   The permit holder’s premises is located within the outdoor
refreshment area.
            2.   The permit held by the permit holder has an outdoor
refreshment area designation.
         B.   Subsection (c)(7) of this section does not authorize a person to
do either of the following:
            1.   Enter the premises of an establishment within an outdoor
refreshment area while possessing an opened container of beer or intoxicating
liquor acquired elsewhere;
            2.   Possess an opened container of beer or intoxicating liquor
while being in or on a motor vehicle within an outdoor refreshment area, unless
the motor vehicle is stationary and is not being operated in a lane of
vehicular travel or unless the possession is otherwise authorized under
subsection (d) or (e) of this section.
      (8)   A.   A person may have in the person’s possession on the property
of a market, within a defined F-8 permit premises, an opened container of beer
or intoxicating liquor that was purchased from a D permit premises that is
located immediately adjacent to the market if both of the following apply:
            1.   The market grants permission for the possession and
consumption of beer and intoxicating liquor within the defined F-8 permit
premises;
            2.   The market is hosting an event pursuant to an F-8 permit and
the market has notified the division of liquor control about the event in
accordance with R.C. § 4303.208(A)(3).
         B.   As used in division (c)(8) of this section, “market” means a
market, for which an F-8 permit is held, that has been in operation since 1860.
   (d)   This section does not apply to a person who pays all or a portion of
the fee imposed for use of a chauffeured limousine pursuant to a prearranged
contract or the guest of the person, when all of the following apply:
      (1)   The person or guest is a passenger in the limousine.
      (2)   The person or guest is located in the limousine, but is not
occupying a seat in the front compartment of the limousine where the operator
of the limousine is located.
      (3)   The limousine is located on any street, highway, or other public or
private property open to the public for purposes of vehicular travel or
parking.
   (e)   An opened bottle of wine that was purchased from the holder of a
permit that authorizes the sale of wine for consumption on the premises where
sold is not an opened container for the purposes of this section if both of the
following apply:
      (1)   The opened bottle of wine is securely resealed by the permit holder
or an employee of the permit holder before the bottle is removed from the
premises. The bottle shall be secured in such a manner that it is visibly
apparent if the bottle has been subsequently opened or tampered with.
      (2)   The opened bottle of wine that is resealed in accordance with
subsection (e)(1) of this section is stored in the trunk of a motor vehicle or,
if the motor vehicle does not have a trunk, behind the last upright seat or in
an area not normally occupied by the driver or passengers and not easily
accessible by the driver.
(ORC 4301.62)
   (f)   (1)   Except if an ordinance or resolution is enacted or adopted under
subsection (f)(2) of this section, this section does not apply to a person who,
pursuant to a prearranged contract, is a passenger riding on a commercial
quadricycle when all of the following apply:
         A.   The person is not occupying a seat in the front of the commercial
quadricycle where the operator is steering or braking.
         B.   The commercial quadricycle is being operated on a street,
highway, or other public or private property open to the public for purposes of
vehicular travel or parking.
         C.   The person has in their possession on the commercial quadricycle
an opened container of beer or wine.
         D.   The person has in their possession on the commercial quadricycle
not more than either 36 ounces of beer or 18 ounces of wine.
      (2)   The Legislative Authority may enact an ordinance or adopt a
resolution, as applicable, that prohibits a passenger riding on a commercial
quadricycle from possessing an opened container of beer or wine.
      (3)   As used in this section, “commercial quadricycle” means a vehicle
that has fully- operative pedals for propulsion entirely by human power and
that meets all of the following requirements:
         A.   It has four wheels and is operated in a manner similar to a
bicycle.
         B.   It has at least five seats for passengers.
         C.   It is designed to be powered by the pedaling of the operator and
the passengers.
         D.   It is used for commercial purposes.
         E.   It is operated by the vehicle owner or an employee of the owner.
   (g)   (1)   This section does not apply to a person that has in the person’s
possession an opened container of beer or intoxicating liquor on the premises
of a market if the beer or intoxicating liquor has been purchased from a D
liquor permit holder that is located in the market.
      (2)   As used in division (g) of this section, “market” means an
establishment that:
         A.   Leases space in the market to individual vendors, not less than
50% of which are retail food establishments or food service operations licensed
under R.C. Chapter 3717;
         B.   Has an indoor sales floor area of not less than 22,000 square
feet;
         C.   Hosts a farmer’s market on each Saturday from April through
December.
(R.C. § 4301.62)
   (h)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4301.99(A))
§ 612.08  HOURS OF SALE OR CONSUMPTION.
   (a)   This section shall apply to the retail sale of beer, wine, mixed
beverages, or spirituous liquor.
   (b)   No beer, wine, mixed beverages, or spirituous liquor shall be sold or
delivered by an A-1, A-1C, A-2, B-1, B-2, B-4, B-5, C-1, C-2, C-2X, D-1, D-2,
D-2X, D-3 when issued without a D-3A, D-3X, D-4, D-5H, D-5K, D-8, F, F-1, F-2,
F-3, F-4, F-5, F-6, F-7, F-8, F-9, G, or I permit holder:
      (1)   From Monday to Saturday between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 5:30
a.m.
      (2)   On Sunday between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and Sunday midnight,
unless statutorily authorized otherwise.
      (3)   Consumption of beer, wine, mixed beverages, or spirituous liquor is
also prohibited during the above hours upon the premises of the above permit
holders who are authorized by their permit to sell beer, wine, mixed beverages,
or spirituous liquor for on-premises consumption.
   (c)   No beer, wine, mixed beverages, or spirituous liquor shall be sold or
delivered by an A-1A, D-3 when issued with a D-3A, D-4A, D-5, D-5A, D-5B, D-5C,
D-5D, D-5E, D-5F, D-5G, D-5I, D-5J, D-5L, D-5M, D-5N, D-5O, or D-7 permit
holder:
      (1)   From Monday to Saturday between the hours of 2:30 a.m. and 5:30
a.m.
      (2)   On Sunday between the hours of 2:30 a.m. and Sunday midnight,
unless statutorily authorized otherwise.
      (3)   Consumption of beer, wine, mixed beverages, or spirituous liquor is
also prohibited during the above hours upon the premises of the above permit
holders who are authorized by their permit to sell beer, wine, mixed beverages,
or spirituous liquor for on-premises consumption.
   (d)   Permit holders authorized to sell beer, wine, mixed beverages, or
spirituous liquor at retail who are not specifically identified in subsections
(b) or (c) above shall be subject to the provisions of subsection (b), unless
statutorily authorized otherwise.
   (e)   The hours on Sunday during which sales, delivery, or consumption of
alcoholic beverages may take place are established by statute, but in no event
shall they begin prior to 5:30 a.m.
(O.A.C. 4301:1-1-49)
   (f)   No association, corporation, local unit of an association or
corporation, or D permit holder who holds an F-2 permit shall sell beer or
intoxicating liquor beyond the hours of sale allowed by the permit. This
subsection imposes strict liability on the holder of such permit and on any
officer, agent or employee of such permit holder.
(ORC 4303.202(D)(2))
   (g)   No F-8 permit holder shall sell beer or intoxicating liquor beyond the
hours of sale allowed by the permit. This subsection imposes strict liability
on the holder of an F-8 permit and on any officer, agent or employee of that
permit holder.
(ORC 4303.208(C))
   (h)   Whoever violates subsections (f) or (g) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(ORC 4303.99(D))
§ 612.09  CONSUMPTION OR POSSESSION BY UNDERAGE PERSONS ON RESIDENTIAL
PREMISES.
   (a)   No owner or occupant of any residential premises located within the
municipality shall knowingly allow any person under the age of twenty-one years
to remain on such premises while such person is in the possession of
intoxicating liquor or beer or while such person is consuming intoxicating
liquor or beer. However, this section shall not apply to a person allowing
possession of intoxicating liquor or beer by his or her own children in his or
her own residence or when the intoxicating liquor or beer is furnished pursuant
to an order of a physician in the regular line of his or her practice.
(Adopting Ordinance)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor and
shall be subject to the penalty provided in §
698.02.
(Ord. 87-O-25, passed 6-1-1987)
§ 612.10  CONVEYING INTOXICATING LIQUOR OR CASH ONTO GROUNDS OF DETENTION
FACILITIES OR OTHER SPECIFIED GOVERNMENTAL FACILITIES.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly convey, or attempt to convey, onto the
grounds of a detention facility or of an institution, office building or other
place that is under the control of the Department of Mental Health and
Addiction Services, the Department of Developmental Disabilities, the
Department of Youth Services or the Department of Rehabilitation and
Correction, any of the following items:
      (1)   Any deadly weapon or dangerous ordnance, as defined in Ohio R.C.
2923.11, or any part of or ammunition for use in the deadly weapon or dangerous
ordnance.
      (2)   Any drug of abuse, as defined in Ohio R.C. 3719.011.
      (3)   Any intoxicating liquor, as defined in Ohio R.C. 4301.01.
   (b)   Subsection (a) of this section does not apply to any person who
conveys or attempts to convey an item onto the grounds of a detention facility
or of an institution, office building or other place under the control of the
Department of Mental Health and Addiction Services, the Department of
Developmental Disabilities, the Department of Youth Services or the Department
of Rehabilitation and Correction, with written authorization of the person in
charge of the detention facility or the institution and in accordance with the
written rules of the detention facility or the institution, office building or
other place.
   (c)   No person shall knowingly deliver, or attempt to deliver, to any
person who is confined in a detention facility, to a child confined in a youth
services facility, to a prisoner who is temporarily released from confinement
for a work assignment, or to any patient in an institution under the control of
the Department of Mental Health and Addiction Services, or the Department of
Developmental Disabilities, any item listed in subsection (a).
   (d)   No person shall knowingly deliver or attempt to deliver cash to any
person who is confined in a detention facility, to a child confined in a youth
services facility, or to a prisoner who is temporarily released from
confinement for a work assignment.
   (e)   No person shall knowingly deliver, or attempt to deliver, to any
person who is confined in a detention facility, to a child confined in a youth
services facility, or to a prisoner who is temporarily released from
confinement for a work assignment a cellular telephone, two-way radio or other
electronic communications device.
   (f)   (1)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under subsection (a)(1)
of this section that the weapon or dangerous ordnance in question was being
transported in a motor vehicle for any lawful purpose, that it was not on the
actor’s person, and if the weapon or dangerous ordnance was a firearm, that it
was unloaded and was being carried in a closed package, box or case or in a
compartment that can be reached only by leaving the vehicle.
      (2)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under subsection (c) of
this section that the actor was not otherwise prohibited by law from delivering
the item to the confined person, the child, the prisoner or the patient and
that either of the following applies:
         A.   The actor was permitted by the written rules of the detention
facility or the institution, office building or other place to deliver the item
to the confined person or the patient.
         B.   The actor was given written authorization by the person in charge
of the detention facility or the institution, office building or other place to
deliver the item to the confined person or the patient.
   (g)   (1)   Whoever violates subsection (a)(1) of this section or commits a
violation of subsection (c) of this section involving any item listed in
subsection (a)(1) of this section is guilty of illegal conveyance of weapons
onto the grounds of a specified governmental facility, a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   Whoever violates subsection (a)(2) of this section or commits a
violation of subsection (c) of this section involving any drug of abuse is
guilty of illegal conveyance of drugs of abuse onto the grounds of a specified
governmental facility, a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (3)   Whoever violates subsection (a)(3) of this section or commits a
violation of subsection (c) of this section involving any intoxicating liquor
is guilty of illegal conveyance of intoxicating liquor onto the grounds of a
specified governmental facility, a misdemeanor of the second degree.
      (4)   Whoever violates subsection (d) of this section is guilty of
illegal conveyance of cash onto the grounds of a detention facility, a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted
of or pleaded guilty to a violation of subsection (d) of this section or a
substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, illegal conveyance
of cash onto the grounds of a detention facility is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.
      (5)   Whoever violates subsection (e) of this section is guilty of
illegal conveyance of a communications device onto the grounds of a specified
governmental facility, a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender
previously has been convicted or pleaded guilty to a violation of subsection
(e) of this section or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal
ordinance, illegal conveyance of a communications device onto the grounds of a
detention facility is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(ORC 2921.36)
§ 612.11  SALES OF LOW-ALCOHOL BEVERAGES TO UNDERAGE PERSONS; PROHIBITIONS AND
MISREPRESENTATIONS.
   (a)   As used in this section, "underage person" means a person under 18
years of age.
   (b)   No underage person shall purchase any low-alcohol beverage.
   (c)   No underage person shall order, pay for, share the cost of, or attempt
to purchase any low-alcohol beverage.
   (d)   No person shall knowingly furnish any false information as to the
name, age, or other identification of any underage person for the purpose of
obtaining or with the intent to obtain any low-alcohol beverage for an underage
person, by purchase or as a gift.
   (e)   No underage person shall knowingly show or give false information
concerning his or her name, age, or other identification for the purpose of
purchasing or otherwise obtaining any low-alcohol beverage in any place in this
municipality.
   (f)   No person shall sell or furnish any low-alcohol beverage to, or buy
any low-alcohol beverage for, an underage person, unless given by a physician
in the regular line of his or her practice or given for established religious
purposes, or unless the underage person is accompanied by a parent, spouse who
is not an underage person, or legal guardian.
   (g)   (1)   No person who is the owner or occupant of any public or private
place shall knowingly allow any underage person to remain in or on the place
while possessing or consuming any low-alcohol beverage, unless the low-alcohol
beverage is given to the person possessing or consuming it by that person's
parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal guardian, and the
parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal guardian is present when
the person possesses or consumes the low-alcohol beverage.
      (2)   An owner of a public or private place is not liable for acts or
omissions in violation of subsection (g)(1) that are committed by a lessee of
that place, unless the owner authorizes or acquiesces in the lessee's acts or
omissions.
   (h)   No permit issued by the Division of Liquor Control shall be suspended,
revoked, or cancelled because of a violation of either subsection (f) or (g).
   (i)   No underage person shall knowingly possess or consume any low-alcohol
beverage in any public or private place, unless he or she is accompanied by a
parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal guardian, or unless the
low-alcohol beverage is given by a physician in the regular line of his or her
practice or given for established religious purposes.
   (j)   No parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal guardian of
an underage person shall knowingly permit the underage person to violate this
section.
(ORC 4301.631)
   (k)   No low-alcohol beverage shall be sold to any person under 18 years of
age.
(ORC 4301.22(A)(2))
   (l)   Whoever violates subsection (b) of this section shall be fined not
less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than one hundred dollars
($100.00). The court imposing a fine for a violation of subsection (b) of this
section may order that the fine be paid by the performance of public work at a
reasonable hour rate established by the court. The court shall designate the
time within which the public work shall be completed.
(ORC 4301.99(E))
   (m)   Whoever violates subsections (c) through (k) hereof is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(ORC 4301.99(B))
§ 612.12  ALCOHOL VAPORIZING DEVICES PROHIBITED.
   (a)   As used in this section, "alcohol vaporizing device" means a machine
or other device that mixes beer or intoxicating liquor with pure oxygen or any
other gas to produce a vaporized product for the purpose of consumption by
inhalation.
   (b)   No person shall sell or offer for sale an alcohol vaporizing device.
   (c)   No person shall purchase or use an alcohol vaporizing device.
(ORC 4301.65)
   (d)   (1)   Whoever violates subsection (b) of this section is guilty of
misdemeanor of the third degree. For a second or subsequent violation occurring
within a period of five consecutive years after the first violation, a person
is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(ORC 4301.99(J))
      (2)   Whoever violates subsection (c) of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4301.99(A))
CHAPTER 618:  ANIMALS
Section
618.01   Definitions.
618.02   Dogs and other animals running at large.
618.03   Abandoning animals.
618.04   Killing or injuring animals.
618.05   Poisoning animals.
618.06   Cruelty to animals; cruelty to companion animals.
618.07   Coloring rabbits and baby poultry; sale or display of poultry.
618.08   Barking or howling dogs.
618.09   Registration of dogs required.
618.10   Hindering capture of unregistered dog.
618.11   Dogs required to wear tags.
618.12   Unlawful tags.
618.13   Rabies quarantine.
618.14   Hunting limited.
618.15   Nuisance conditions prohibited.
618.16   Impounding and disposition; records.
618.17   Birds.
618.18   Restrictions on dog ownership for certain convicted felons.
618.19   Designation of nuisance, dangerous and vicious dogs.
618.20   Impoundment of a dog for public safety.
618.21   Confining, restraining, debarking dangerous and vicious dogs.
618.22   Nuisance dog classification.
618.23   Control of nuisance dogs.
618.24   Dog classified by another jurisdiction.
618.25   Objection hearings.
618.26   Dangerous and vicious dog ownership restrictions.
618.27   Exemptions.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Assaulting police dog or horse or assistance dog - see GEN. OFF.
642.08
   Definitions generally - see GEN. OFF.
606.01
   Driving animals upon roadway - see TRAF.
404.04,
412.05
   Offensive odors from places where animals are kept or fed - see GEN. OFF.
660.04
   Power to restrain and impound animals - see Ohio R.C. 715.23
   See section histories for similar state law
§ 618.01  DEFINITIONS.
   (a)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   "Boarding kennel" has the same meaning as in R.C. § 956.01.
      (2)   "Captive white-tailed deer" has the same meaning as in R.C. §
1531.01.
      (3)   "Classified dog" in this chapter shall mean a dog that has been
previously classified as a potential nuisance dog, dangerous dog, or vicious
dog pursuant to this Code, or similar designation in another jurisdiction,
under the provisions of R.C. §§ 955.11 et seq. or comparable local ordinance.
      (4)   "Companion animal" shall mean any animal that is kept inside a
residential dwelling and any dog or cat regardless of where it is kept.
"Companion animal" does not include livestock or any wild animal.
      (5)   "Cruelty" has the same meaning as in R.C. § 1717.01.
      (6)   "Dangerous dog" shall mean the following:
         A.   A dog that, without provocation, and subject to R.C. § 955.11(B),
has done any of the following:
            1.   Caused injury, other than killing or serious injury, to any
person;
            2.   Killed another dog;
            3.   Been the subject of a third or subsequent violation of R.C. §
955.22(C) or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
         B.   "Dangerous dog" does not include a police dog that has caused
injury, other than killing or serious injury, to any person or has killed
another dog while the police dog is being used to assist one or more law
enforcement officers in the performance of their official duties.
      (7)   "Dog kennel" shall mean an animal rescue for dogs that is
registered under R.C. § 956.06, a boarding kennel, or a training kennel.
      (8)   "Federal Animal Welfare Act." The "Laboratory Animal Act of 1966",
Pub. L. No. 89-544, 80 Stat. 350 (1966), 7 U.S.C. 2131 et seq., as amended by
the "Animal Welfare Act of 1970", Pub. L. No. 91-579, 84 Stat. 1560 (1970), the
"Animal Welfare Act Amendments of 1976", Pub. L. No. 94-279, 90 Stat. 417
(1976), and the "Food Security Act of 1985", Pub. L. No. 99-198, 99 Stat. 1354
(1985), and as it may be subsequently amended.
      (9)   "Final determination" shall mean a determination that is not
subject to appeal.
      (10)   "Livestock" shall mean horses, mules, and other equidae; cattle,
sheep, goats, and other bovidae; swine and other suidae; poultry; alpacas;
llamas; captive white-tailed deer; and any other animal that is raised or
maintained domestically for food or fiber.
      (11)   "Menacing fashion" shall mean a dog that would cause any person
being chased or approached to reasonably believe that the dog will cause
physical injury to that person.
      (12)   "Nuisance dog" shall mean the following:
         A.   Subject to R.C. § 955.11(B), "nuisance dog" means a dog that
without provocation and while off the premises of its owner, keeper, or
harborer has chased or approached a person in either a menacing fashion or an
apparent attitude of attack or has attempted to bite or otherwise endanger any
person.
         B.   "Nuisance dog" does not include a police dog that, while being
used to assist one or more law enforcement officers in the performance of
official duties, has chased or approached a person in either a menacing fashion
or an apparent attitude of attack or has attempted to bite or otherwise
endanger any person.
      (13)   "Police chief" shall mean the police chief or his/her designee or
any person authorized to enforce R.C. Chapter 955.
      (14)   "Police dog" shall mean a dog that has been trained and may be
used to assist one or more law enforcement officers in the performance of their
official duties.
      (15)   "Practice of veterinary medicine" shall have the same meaning as
in R.C. § 4741.01.
      (16)   "Residential dwelling" shall mean a structure or shelter or the
portion of a structure or shelter that is used by one or more humans for the
purpose of a habitation.
      (17)   "Serious injury" shall mean any of the following:
         A.   Any physical harm that carries a substantial risk of death;
         B.   Any physical harm that involves a permanent incapacity, whether
partial or total, or a temporary, substantial incapacity;
         C.   Any physical harm that involves a permanent disfigurement or a
temporary, serious disfigurement;
         D.   Any physical harm that involves acute pain of a duration that
results in substantial suffering or any degree of prolonged or intractable
pain.
      (18)   "Torment" has the same meaning as in R.C. § 1717.01.
      (19)   "Torture" has the same meaning as in R.C. § 1717.01.
      (20)   "Unprovoked bite" or "without provocation bite" in this chapter
shall mean that the dog was not:
         A.   Being abused, teased, tormented, or physically threatened or
injured by a person;
         B.   Being abused or physically threatened or injured by an animal;
         C.   Being aggressively teased or tormented by an animal;
         D.   Directing its behavior at a trespasser on the property of its
owner, keeper, or harborer;
         E.   Reasonably coming to the defense of a human or domestic animal
within the immediate vicinity of the dog and under perceived threat; or
         F.   Directing its behavior at some domestic animal that was running
at large and unattended by some person.
      (21)   "Vicious dog" in this chapter shall mean the following:
         A.   A dog that, without provocation and subject to R.C. § 955.11(B),
has killed or caused serious injury to any person.
         B.   "Vicious dog" does not include either of the following:
            1.   A police dog that has killed or caused serious injury to any
person while the police dog is being used to assist one or more law enforcement
officers in the performance of their official duties;
            2.   A dog that has killed or caused serious injury to any person
while a person was committing or attempting to commit a trespass or other
criminal offense on the property of the owner, keeper, or harborer of the dog.
      (22)   "Wild animal" in this chapter has the same meaning as in R.C. §
1531.01.
(Ord. 16-O-60, passed 5-3-2017)
§ 618.02  DOGS AND OTHER ANIMALS RUNNING AT LARGE.
   (a)   No person, who is the owner or keeper of, horses, mules, cattle,
bison, sheep, goats, swine, llamas, alpacas, poultry or other domesticated
animal shall permit them to run at large in the public road, highway, street,
lane, or alley, or upon unenclosed land, or cause the animals to be herded,
kept, or detained for the purpose of grazing on premises other than those owned
or lawfully occupied by the owner or keeper of the animals.
   (b)   No owner, keeper or harborer of any female dog shall permit it to go
beyond the premises of the owner, keeper or harborer at any time the dog is in
heat unless the dog is properly in leash.
   (c)   Except when a dog is lawfully engaged in hunting and accompanied by
the owner, keeper, harborer, or handler of the dog, no owner, keeper or
harborer of any dog shall fail at any time to do either of the following;
      (1)   Keep the dog physically confined or restrained upon the premises of
the owner, keeper or harborer by any of the following means: (1) a leash; (2) a
tether; (3) an adequate fence; (4) by supervision by a person; (5) by other
secure enclosure to prevent such dog from escaping; or
      (2)   Keep the dog under the reasonable control of some person.
   (d)   The running at large of any such animal in or upon any of the places
mentioned in this section is prima facie evidence that it is running at large
in violation of this section.
   (e)   Penalty.  Whoever violates this section, where the animal at large is
not a classified dog, is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. Whoever violates this
section shall be fined not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) or more than
one hundred dollars ($100.00).
(Ord. 16-O-60, passed 5-3-2017)
Statutory reference:
   Animals running at large on public roads - grazing on another's land, see
R.C. § 951.02
§ 618.03  ABANDONING ANIMALS.
   (a)   No owner or keeper of any domestic animal shall abandon the animal.
   (b)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the second degree on a first offense and a misdemeanor of the
first degree on each subsequent offense.
(Ord. 16-O-60, passed 5-3-2017)
Statutory reference:
   Abandoning animals, see R.C. § 959.01
   Violation; penalties, see R.C. § 959.99(E)(2)
§ 618.04  KILLING OR INJURING ANIMALS.
   (a)   No person shall maliciously, or willfully and without the consent of
the owner, kill or injure a dog, cat, or any other domestic animal that is the
property of another. This section does not apply to a licensed veterinarian
acting in an official capacity.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (a) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree.
If the value of the animal killed or the injury done amounts to three hundred
dollars ($300.00) or more, whoever violates division (a) of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(Ord. 16-O-60, passed 5-3-2017)
Statutory reference:
   Injuring animals, see R.C. § 959.02
   Violations, penalties, see R.C. § 959.99(B)
§ 618.05  POISONING ANIMALS.
   (a)   No person shall maliciously, or willfully and without the consent of
the owner, administer poison, except a licensed veterinarian acting in such
capacity, to a dog, cat, or any other domestic animal that is the property of
another; and no person shall, willfully and without the consent of the owner,
place any poisoned food where it may be easily found and eaten by any such
animal, either upon his or her own lands or the lands of another.
   (b)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the second degree.
(Ord. 16-O-60, passed 5-3-2017)
Statutory reference:
   Poisoning animals, see R.C. § 959.03
   Violations, penalties, see R.C. § 959.99(C)
§ 618.06  CRUELTY TO ANIMALS; CRUELTY TO COMPANION ANIMALS.
   (a)   No person shall:
      (1)   Torture an animal, deprive one of necessary sustenance,
unnecessarily or cruelly beat, needlessly mutilate or kill, or impound or
confine an animal without supplying it during the confinement with a sufficient
quantity of good wholesome food and water;
      (2)   Impound or confine an animal without affording it, during the
confinement, access to shelter from wind, rain, snow, or excessive direct
sunlight, if it can reasonably be expected that the animal would otherwise
become sick or in some other way suffer. This division does not apply to
animals impounded or confined prior to slaughter. For the purpose of this
section, "shelter" means an artificial enclosure, windbreak, sunshade, or
natural windbreak or sunshade that is developed from the earth's contour, tree
development, or vegetation;
      (3)   Carry or convey an animal in a cruel or inhuman manner;
      (4)   Keep animals other than cattle, poultry or fowl, swine, sheep, or
goats in an enclosure without wholesome exercise and change of air, nor feed
cows on food that produces impure or unwholesome milk;
      (5)   Detain livestock in railroad cars or compartments longer than 28
hours after they are so placed without supplying them with necessary food,
water, and attention, nor permit the stock to be so crowded as to overlie,
crush, wound, or kill each other.
   (b)   Upon the written request of the owner or person in custody of any
particular shipment of livestock, which written request shall be separate and
apart from any printed bill of lading or other railroad form, the length of
time in which the livestock may be detained in any cars or compartment without
food, water, and attention may be extended to 36 hours without penalty
therefor. Division (a) of this section does not prevent the dehorning of
cattle.
   (c)   All fines collected for violations of division (a) of this section
shall be paid to the society or association for the prevention of cruelty to
animals, if there is one in the municipality; otherwise, all fines shall be
paid to the general fund.
   (d)   Cruelty to companion animals.
      (1)   No person shall knowingly torture, torment, needlessly mutilate or
maim, cruelly beat, poison, needlessly kill or commit an act of cruelty against
a companion animal.
      (2)   No person who confines or who is the custodian or caretaker of a
companion animal shall negligently do any of the following:
         A.   Commit any act by which unnecessary or unjustifiable pain or
suffering is caused, permitted, or allowed to continue, when there is a
reasonable remedy or relief, against the companion animal;
         B.   Omit any act of care by which unnecessary or unjustifiable pain
or suffering is caused, permitted, or allowed to continue, when there is a
reasonable remedy or relief, against the companion animal;
         C.   Commit any act of neglect by which unnecessary or unjustifiable
pain or suffering is caused, permitted, or allowed to continue, when there is a
reasonable remedy or relief, against the companion animal;
         D.   Needlessly kill the companion animal;
         E.   Deprive the companion animal of necessary sustenance, confine the
companion animal without supplying it during the confinement with sufficient
quantities of good, wholesome food and water, or impound or confine the
companion animal without affording it, during the impoundment or confinement,
with access to shelter from heat, cold, wind, rain, snow or excessive direct
sunlight, if it can reasonably be expected that the companion animal would
become sick or suffer in any other way as a result of or due to the
deprivation, confinement or impoundment or confinement in any of those
specified manners.
      (3)   No person shall confine an animal in a motor vehicle under any
conditions that endanger the safety or well-being of the animal.
      (4)   No person shall fail to provide the animal shelter from the
elements if housed outside.
         A.   The structure must be completely enclosed having a single
entrance/exit secured with a flap or door. The structure shall be moisture-
resistant, wind-resistant, suitable size and type to allow the animal to stand,
turn about freely, lie in a normal position, and regulate proper body
temperature. It shall be made of a durable material with a solid, moisture-
proof floor and a floor raised at least two inches from the ground. Proper
bedding of straw or similar material that remains dry must be utilized inside
the structure.
         B.   Suitable drainage shall be provided so that water cannot be
reasonably expected to gather and stand within ten feet of the structure, and
so the animal has access to a dry area at all times.
      (5)   No person shall tether an animal if there is no owner or occupant
present at the premises.
         A.   The tether should be made of a material that is suitable for the
animal's size and weight and a minimum of 20 feet in length, unless such length
would violate other sections in this Code.
         B.   The tethered animal shall be provided a house or shelter for
protection from sun, snow, rain or other inclement weather. The animal shall
also be provided access to a surface of grass, properly drained, with enough
area to permit the animal to freely move about without risk of entanglement or
injury. The animal shall also be provided with adequate food and water.
         C.   The tethered animal shall not be allowed to continuously bark,
enter the property of another or be attached with a prong type, pinch type, or
choke type collar, or a collar that will cause injury to the animal.
      (6)   No owner, manager, or employee of a dog kennel who confines or is
the custodian or caretaker of a companion animal shall knowingly do any of the
following:
         A.   Torture, torment, needlessly mutilate or maim, cruelly beat,
poison, needlessly kill, or commit an act of cruelty against the companion
animal;
         B.   Deprive the companion animal of necessary sustenance, confine the
companion animal without supplying it during the confinement with sufficient
quantities of food and water, or impound or confine the companion animal
without affording it, during the impoundment or confinement, with access to
shelter if it is substantially certain that the companion animal would die or
experience unnecessary or unjustifiable pain or suffering due to the
deprivation, confinement, or impoundment or confinement in any of those
specified manners.
      (7)   No owner, manager, or employee of a dog kennel who confines or is
the custodian or caretaker of a companion animal shall negligently do any of
the following:
         A.   Commit any act by which unnecessary or unjustifiable pain or
suffering is caused, permitted, or allowed to continue, when there is a
reasonable remedy or relief, against the companion animal;
         B.   Omit any act of care by which unnecessary or unjustifiable pain
or suffering is caused, permitted, or allowed to continue, when there is a
reasonable remedy or relief, against the companion animal;
         C.   Commit any act of neglect by which unnecessary or unjustifiable
pain or suffering is caused, permitted, or allowed to continue, when there is a
reasonable remedy or relief, against the companion animal;
         D.   Needlessly kill the companion animal;
         E.   Deprive the companion animal of necessary sustenance, confine the
companion animal without supplying it during the confinement with sufficient
quantities of good, wholesome food and water, or impound or confine the
companion animal without affording it, during the impoundment or confinement,
with access to shelter from heat, cold, wind, rain, snow, or excessive direct
sunlight if it can reasonably be expected that the companion animal would
become sick or suffer in any other way as a result of or due to the
deprivation, confinement, or impoundment or confinement in any of those
specified manners.
      (8)   Divisions (d)(1), (d)(2), (d)(3), (d)(4), (d)(5), (d)(6) and (d)(7)
of this section do not apply to any of the following:
         A.   A companion animal used in scientific research conducted by an
institution in accordance with the Federal Animal Welfare Act and related
regulations;
         B.   The lawful practice of veterinary medicine by a person who has
been issued a license, temporary permit or registration certificate to do so
under R.C. Chapter 4741;
         C.   Dogs being used or intended for use for hunting or field trial
purposes, provided that the dogs are being treated in accordance with usual and
commonly accepted practices for the care of hunting dogs;
         D.   The use of common training devices, if the companion animal is
being treated in accordance with usual and commonly accepted practices for the
training of animals;
         E.   The administering of medicine to a companion animal that was
properly prescribed by a person who has been issued a license, temporary permit
or registration certificate under R.C. Chapter 4741.
      (9)   Notwithstanding any section of the Ohio Revised Code that otherwise
provides for the distribution of fine moneys, the Clerk of Court shall forward
all fines the Clerk collects that are so imposed for any violation of this
division (d) to the treasurer of the municipality, whose county humane society
or law enforcement agency is to be paid the fine money as determined under this
division. The treasurer shall pay the fine moneys to the county humane society
or the county, township, municipal corporation or state law enforcement agency
in this state that primarily was responsible for or involved in the
investigation and prosecution of the violation. If a county humane society
receives any fine moneys under this division, the county humane society shall
use the fine moneys to provide the training that is required for humane agents
under R.C. § 1717.06.
   (e)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree. In addition, the court may order the offender
to forfeit the animal or livestock and may provide for its disposition
including, but not limited to, the sale of the animal or livestock. If an
animal or livestock is forfeited and sold pursuant to this division, the
proceeds from the sale first shall be applied to pay the expenses incurred with
regard to the care of the animal from the time it was taken from the custody of
the former owner. The balance of the proceeds from the sale, if any, shall be
paid to the former owner of the animal.
   (f)   (1)   Whoever violates division (d)(1) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree on a first offense and a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law on each subsequent offense.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (d)(2) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the second degree on a first offense and a misdemeanor of the
first degree on each subsequent offense.
      (3)   Whoever violates division (d)(3) through (d)(5) of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree. In addition, the court may order
the offender to forfeit the animal and may provide for its disposition
including, but not limited to, the sale of the animal. If an animal is
forfeited and sold pursuant to this division, the proceeds from the sale first
shall be applied to pay the expenses incurred with regard to the care of the
animal from the time it was taken from the custody of the former owner. The
balance of the proceeds from the sale, if any, shall be paid to the former
owner of the animal.
      (4)   Whoever violates division (d)(6) of this section is guilty of a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (5)   Whoever violates division (d)(7) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (6)   A.   A court may order a person who is convicted of or pleads
guilty to a violation of division (d) of this section to forfeit to an
impounding agency, as defined in R.C. § 959.132, any or all of the companion
animals in that person's ownership or care. The court also may prohibit or
place limitations on the person's ability to own or care for any companion
animals for a specified or indefinite period of time.
         B.   A court may order a person who is convicted of or pleads guilty
to a violation of division (d) of this section to reimburse an impounding
agency for the reasonably necessary costs incurred by the agency for the care
of a companion animal that the agency impounded as a result of the
investigation or prosecution of the violation, provided that the costs were not
otherwise paid under R.C. § 959.132.
      (7)   If a court has reason to believe that a person who is convicted of
or pleads guilty to a violation of division (d) of this section suffers from a
mental or emotional disorder that contributed to the violation, the court may
impose as a community control sanction or as a condition of probation a
requirement that the offender undergo psychological evaluation or counseling.
The court shall order the offender to pay the costs of the evaluation or
counseling.
(Ord. 16-O-60, passed 5-3-2017)
Statutory reference:
   Cruelty to animals, see R.C. § 959.13
   Prohibitions concerning companion animals, see R.C. § 959.131
   Impoundment of companion animals; notice and hearing, see R.C. § 959.132
   Violations, penalties, see R.C. § 959.99(D), (E)
§ 618.07  COLORING RABBITS AND BABY POULTRY; SALE OR DISPLAY OF POULTRY.
   (a)   No person shall dye or otherwise color any rabbit or baby poultry,
including, but not limited to, chicks and ducklings. No person shall sell,
offer for sale, expose for sale, raffle or give away any rabbit or baby poultry
which has been dyed or otherwise colored. No poultry younger than four weeks of
age may be sold, given away or otherwise distributed to any person in lots of
less than six. Stores, shops, vendors and others offering young poultry for
sale or other distribution shall provide and operate brooders or other heating
devices that may be necessary to maintain poultry in good health, and shall
keep adequate food and water available to the poultry at all times.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree on a first offense; each subsequent offense is a misdemeanor of the
third degree.
(Ord. 16-O-60, passed 5-3-2017)
Statutory reference:
   Dying rabbits and chicks, see R.C. § 925.62
   Penalty, see R.C. § 925.99(B)
§ 618.08  BARKING OR HOWLING DOGS.
   (a)   No person shall own, harbor or keep in custody a dog which disturbs
the peace by barking, yelping, howling or making other loud noises to the
annoyance and/or discomfort of any person. Continuous barking, yelping, howling
and/or making other loud noises for 15 consecutive minutes by such dog, whether
confined inside a residence or building or to the outside area, shall be deemed
to have disturbed the peace and to have caused the annoyance and discomfort of
persons; provided, that at the time of the complaint, no person or persons were
trespassing or threatening to trespass upon the private property of the owner,
and provided that the dog was not being teased or provoked in any manner.
   (b)   Any person who shall allow any dog habitually to remain, be lodged or
fed within any dwelling, building, yard or enclosure owned or occupied by such
person shall be considered as harboring or keeping such dog.
   (c)   Upon an initial complaint, an enforcement officer shall warn the
person in writing of the violation. Upon a second such complaint within 30
days, the enforcement officer shall charge the person with a violation of this
section.
   (d)   Division (a) of this section does not apply to owners, operators or
employees of licensed veterinary hospitals, licensed kennels, or licensed
animal boarding establishments, nor does this section apply to blind, deaf or
hearing impaired, or mobility impaired persons when the dog serves as an
assistance dog.
   (e)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(Ord. 16-O-60, passed 5-3-2017)
§ 618.09  REGISTRATION OF DOGS REQUIRED.
   (a)   No owner, keeper, or harborer of a dog more than three months of age,
nor owner of a dog kennel, shall fail to file an application for registration
required by R.C. § 955.01, nor shall he or she fail to pay the legal fee
therefor.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not less than twenty-five
dollars ($25.00) nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) on a first
offense, and on each subsequent offense shall be fined not less than seventy-
five dollars ($75.00) nor more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) and may
be imprisoned for not more than 30 days.
(Ord. 16-O-60, passed 5-3-2017)
Statutory reference:
   Prohibition against failure to register kennel dog, see R.C. § 955.21
   Penalty, see R.C. § 955.99(E)
§ 618.10  HINDERING CAPTURE OF UNREGISTERED DOG.
   (a)   No person shall obstruct or interfere with anyone lawfully engaged in
capturing an unlicensed dog or making an examination of a dog wearing a tag.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(Ord. 16-O-60, passed 5-3-2017)
Statutory reference:
   Prohibition against hindering the capture of an unregistered dog, see R.C. §
955.24
   Penalty, see R.C. § 955.99(B)
§ 618.11  DOGS REQUIRED TO WEAR TAGS.
   (a)   No owner of a dog, except a dog constantly confined to a dog kennel
registered under R.C. Chapter 955 or one licensed under R.C. Chapter 956, shall
fail to require the dog to wear, at all times, a valid tag issued in connection
with a certificate of registration. A dog found not wearing at any time a valid
tag shall be prima-facie evidence of lack of registration and shall subject any
dog found not wearing such a tag to impounding, sale, or destruction but only
after first having the dog scanned for chip information.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(Ord. 16-O-60, passed 5-3-2017)
Statutory reference:
   Tags to be worn, see R.C. § 955.10
   Penalty, see R.C. § 955.99(B)
§ 618.12  UNLAWFUL TAGS.
   (a)   No person shall own, keep, or harbor a dog wearing a fictitious,
altered, or invalid registration tag or a registration tag not issued by the
County Auditor in connection with the registration of that animal.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(Ord. 16-O-60, passed 5-3-2017)
Statutory reference:
   Unlawful tag, see R.C. § 955.25
   Penalty, see R.C. § 955.99(B)
§ 618.13  RABIES QUARANTINE.
   (a)   No person having knowledge of the existence of rabies in an animal, or
knowledge that an animal has exhibited symptoms or behavior suggestive of
rabies, or knowledge that an animal has bitten any person, shall fail to
immediately report such information to the Mayor or the Chief of Police.
   (b)   Whenever it is established by the Mayor or Chief of Police that any
animal has bitten any person or exhibits symptoms or behavior suggestive of
rabies, the person who owns, harbors or otherwise cares for such animal shall
confine it in close quarantine and isolation or shall place such animal in the
establishment of a veterinarian until, in either case, it is determined by the
County Board of Health that the animal is not afflicted with rabies. The
isolation and quarantine period hereby required shall be not less than ten days
from the date the person was bitten. If the animal has, or develops, any
symptoms suspicious of rabies during the ten-day period, the County Board of
Health shall be notified immediately. All expenses incurred for the keeping of
such animal, or the necessary tests to determine whether rabies exists, shall
be borne exclusively by the person who owns, harbors or otherwise cares for
such animal.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(Ord. 16-O-60, passed 5-3-2017)
§ 618.14  HUNTING LIMITED.
   (a)   No person shall hunt, kill or attempt to kill any animal or fowl by
the use of a firearm, bow and arrow, cross bow, air rifle, sling or sling shot,
or by the use of any other weapon capable of expelling or propelling one or
more projectiles, except upon the following terms and conditions:
      (1)   Annually there shall be issued a permit by the Chief of Police, or
his or her agent;
      (2)   The applicant uses no weapon except a bow and arrow, longbow,
compound bow or crossbow during bow hunting season.
   (b)   Prior to the issuance of the permit, the Chief of Police or his or her
agent shall make a determination that the applicant for said permit has
complied with all laws, rules, and regulations of the state and its
subsections. The Chief shall further determine that:
      (1)   The applicant has received signed written permission to hunt,
specifying the current hunting season and game to be hunted from the owner of
the parcel of property involved, or owners, if more than one parcel of property
is involved, unless such applicant is hunting on his or her own property;
      (2)   The parcel of property or properties involved consists of at least
ten contiguous acres. If more than one parcel of property is involved, no more
than three parcels may be combined to form the ten contiguous acres needed for
hunting. Each parcel shall be contiguous to the others and the combined acreage
of the parcels must consist of at least ten contiguous acres. No hunting shall
take place within 100 feet of the perimeter lot line of the parcel or parcels
of property or within 100 feet of any residence, public or private street,
drive; and
      (3)   For the year in which the application is filed, the applicant has
provided proof of proficiency with a longbow, compound bow or crossbow by such
test or tests established by the State Game Protector for Lake County.
Applicant must provide written proof of the type of bow utilized in the
proficiency test (longbow, compound bow or crossbow).
   (c)   The permit shall set forth and be subject to whatever terms and
conditions, in the sole discretion of the Chief of Police, are necessary to
provide for the safety of the residents of the city, and be premised upon the
applicant complying with all laws, rules and regulations of the state and its
subdivisions.
   (d)   The first deer harvested by a hunter in any season must be an
"antlerless deer", as defined by the Ohio Department of Natural Resources,
Division of Wildlife, in the Ohio 2003-2004 Hunting and Trapping Regulations.
   (e)   Any hunter who kills a deer or any other animal shall report such kill
to the Police Division at the city Police Station within 24 hours of the
killing.
   (f)   Whoever violates this section, including the terms or conditions of a
permit issued hereunder, is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree and
shall be subject to the penalty provided in §
698.02.
(Ord. 02-O-48, passed 9-4-2002; Am. Ord. 03-O-43, passed 9-3-2003; Am. Ord. 16-
O-60, passed 5-3-2017)
§ 618.15  NUISANCE CONDITIONS PROHIBITED.
   (a)   No person shall keep or harbor any animal or fowl in the municipality
so as to create noxious or offensive odors or unsanitary conditions which are a
menace to the health, comfort or safety of the public.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor on a
first offense and a fourth degree misdemeanor on each subsequent offense.
(Ord. 16-O-60, passed 5-3-2017)
§ 618.16  IMPOUNDING AND DISPOSITION; RECORDS.
   (a)   A police officer or animal warden may impound every dog or other
animal found in violation of §
618.01. If the impounded dog is not wearing a valid registration tag, the dog
shall forthwith be turned over to an officer charged by law with the custody
and disposal of such dogs. If the dog is wearing a valid registration tag or
the identity of the owner or harborer is otherwise established, notice shall
immediately be given to such owner or harborer that the dog has been impounded.
Notice may be by telephone or by ordinary mail to the last known address of
such owner or harborer. The dog shall not be released except upon the payment
of reasonable expenses for its taking and keeping. Any dog not redeemed within
three days of the time it is seized or impounded may be sold or otherwise
disposed of as provided by R.C. § 955.16.
   (b)   A record of all dogs impounded, the disposition of the same, the
owner's name and address, if known, and a statement of any costs or receipts
involving such dog shall be kept.
(Ord. 16-O-60, passed 5-3-2017)
§ 618.17  BIRDS.
   (a)   Except to abate a nuisance, no person shall shoot, trap or molest, in
any manner, any song bird, or rob nests thereof, in the city.
(Ord. 71-O-79, passed 8-30-1971)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor and
shall be subject to the penalty provided in §
698.02.
(Ord. 16-O-60, passed 5-3-2017)
§ 618.18  RESTRICTIONS ON DOG OWNERSHIP FOR CERTAIN CONVICTED FELONS.
   (a)   No person who is convicted of or pleads guilty to a felony offense of
violence committed on or after May 22, 2012 or a felony violation of any
provision of R.C. Chapter 959, R.C. Chapter 2923 or R.C. Chapter 2925 committed
on or after May 22, 2012 shall knowingly own, possess, have custody of, or
reside in a residence with either of the following for a period of three years
commencing either upon the date of release of the person from any period of
incarceration imposed for the offense or violation or, if the person is not
incarcerated for the offense or violation, upon the date of the person's final
release from the other sanctions imposed for the offense or violation:
      (1)   An unspayed or unneutered dog older than 12 weeks of age;
      (2)   Any dog that has been determined to be a dangerous dog under R.C.
Chapter 955 or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (b)   A person described in division (a) of this section shall microchip for
permanent identification any dog owned, possessed by, or in the custody of the
person.
   (c)   (1)   Division (a) of this section does not apply to any person who is
confined in a correctional institution of the Department of Rehabilitation and
Correction.
      (2)   Division (a) of this section does not apply to any person with
respect to any dog that the person owned, possessed, had custody of, or resided
in a residence with prior to May 22, 2012.
   (d)   Whoever violates division (a) or (b) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(Ord. 16-O-60, passed 5-3-2017)
Statutory reference:
   Possession of certain dogs by convicted felons prohibited, see R.C. § 955.54
   Penalty, see R.C. § 955.99(O)
§ 618.19  DESIGNATION OF NUISANCE, DANGEROUS AND VICIOUS DOGS.
   (a)   The Police Chief shall have authority to determine whether a dog is a
nuisance dog, dangerous dog, or vicious dog. This determination may be based
upon an investigation that includes observation of and evidence about the dog's
behavior, including the dog's upbringing and the owner's or keeper's control of
the dog, and other relevant evidence as determined by the Police Chief. These
observations and other relevant evidence can be provided by any witness who
personally observed the behavior. Such witness shall sign a written statement
attesting to the observed behavior and agree to provide testimony regarding the
dog's behavior. Forms for providing witness testimony shall be made available
at the Police Department.
   (b)   Upon reasonable determination by the Police Chief that a dog is a
nuisance dog, dangerous dog, or vicious dog, the Police Chief shall give the
dog's owner or keeper written notice by certified mail or personal service. The
notice shall state:
      (1)   The description of the dog;
      (2)   The level of classification;
      (3)   The facts upon which the classification is based;
      (4)   The availability of a hearing to object to the classification and
instructions to request that hearing;
      (5)   The restrictions placed on the dog as a result of the
classification;
      (6)   The penalties for violation of the restrictions; and
      (7)   The availability of declassification procedures.
   (c)   Upon receipt of notice of the dog's classification as a nuisance dog,
dangerous dog, or vicious dog pursuant to division (b) of this section, the
owner or keeper shall comply with the restrictions as specified in §§
618.21 and
618.23.
   (d)   If the owner, keeper, or harborer of the dog disagrees with the
designation of the dog as a nuisance dog, dangerous dog, or vicious dog, as
applicable, the owner, keeper, or harborer may request a hearing regarding the
determination pursuant to R.C. § 955.222.
(Ord. 16-O-60, passed 5-3-2017)
§ 618.20  IMPOUNDMENT OF A DOG FOR PUBLIC SAFETY.
   (a)   Upon the resultant death or serious injury of a domestic animal or
human, the Police Department shall have the authority but not the duty, in the
interest of public safety, to seize the killing/seriously injuring dog and
impound it. Any person keeping or harboring a dog sought to be impounded shall
give possession of such dog to a police officer or health officer upon demand.
   (b)   If a dangerous or vicious dog without provocation bites any person or
domestic animal, the Police Department shall have the authority but not the
duty, in the interest of public safety, to seize the offending dog and impound
it. Any person keeping or harboring a dog sought to be impounded shall give
possession of such dog to a police officer or health officer upon demand.
   (c)   The owner, keeper, or harborer of the dog shall be responsible for any
and all costs associated with the housing of the dog.
   (d)   A dog impounded pursuant to division (a) of this section shall remain
impounded until there has been a final determination as to the dog's
classification or until the owner or keeper provides satisfactory proof to the
Police Chief that they have complied with all applicable provisions of §
618.21 and renders payment for the costs of housing the dog. Upon a final
determination, the owner or keeper of an impounded dog shall claim it within 14
calendar days by rendering proof to the Police Chief that they have complied
with all provisions of §
618.21 and payment for the costs of housing the dog. If the dog is not claimed
pursuant to the foregoing, the city may dispose of the dog at its discretion.
   (e)   A dog impounded pursuant to division (c) of this section shall remain
impounded until the court makes a final determination as to whether a violation
of §
618.21 has occurred or until the owner or keeper provides satisfactory proof to
the Police Chief that they have complied with all applicable provisions of §
618.21 and renders payment for the costs of housing the dog. Upon a final
determination, the owner or keeper of an impounded dog shall claim it within 14
calendar days by rendering proof to the Police Chief that they have complied
with all applicable provisions of §
618.21 and payment for the costs of housing the dog. If the dog is not claimed
pursuant to the foregoing provisions, the city may dispose of the dog at its
discretion.
   (f)   Whoever violates division (a) or (b) of this section by refusing or
otherwise purposefully failing to give possession of a dog that the Police
Department is authorized by such divisions to seize and impound is guilty of a
second degree misdemeanor and shall be subject to the penalty provided in §
698.02.
(Ord. 16-O-60, passed 5-3-2017)
§ 618.21  CONFINING, RESTRAINING, DEBARKING DANGEROUS AND VICIOUS DOGS.
   (a)   No owner or keeper of a dangerous or vicious dog shall fail to do the
following:
      (1)   While the dog is on the premises of the owner, keeper, or harborer,
so as to prevent it from causing injury to any person or domestic animal,
securely confine it at all times by complying with one of the following:
         A.   Keep the dog securely confined within the house on the premises
of the owner, keeper or harborer;
         B.   Keep the dog in a locked pen which has a secured top, under
direct supervision of a person who is at least 18 years of age and of
sufficient size and strength to control the dog;
         C.   In a locked fenced yard, which fence is located in the rear yard
with self-closing/self-latching gates on any openings of the fenced yard, at
least six feet tall, and fitted with a properly sized muzzle of sufficient
material and strength, in a manner that will not cause injury to the dog or
interfere with its vision or respiration, or restrained by a leash or tether
controlled by a person who is at least 18 years of age and of sufficient size
and strength to control the dog or securely attach, tie, or affix the leash or
tether to the ground, a run, or other stationary object or fixture so that the
dog is adequately restrained and that the dog cannot reach any part of the
fence while so restrained;
         D.   If the dog is confined in any other locked enclosure that has a
top outdoors, keep the dog under the direct supervision of a person who is at
least 18 years of age and of sufficient size and strength to control the dog;
or
         E.   Keep the dog confined in a locked enclosure that has a top
outdoors and all sides of the enclosure extend 18 inches below grade.
      (2)   While the dog is off the premises of the owner, keeper, or
harborer, so as to prevent it from causing injury to any person or domestic
animal:
         A.   Muzzle the dog in a manner that will not cause injury to the dog
or interfere with its vision or respiration, but allows the dog to eat and
drink and prevents it from biting any person or animal, and also keep the dog
restrained by a chain-link leash or tether no longer than six feet in length
controlled by a person who is at least 18 years of age and of sufficient size
and strength to control the dog or securely attach, tie, or affix the leash or
tether to the ground or a stationary object or fixture so that the dog is
adequately restrained and station such person in close proximity;
         B.   Keep the dog securely confined within a house;
         C.   Keep the dog in a locked fenced yard, which fence is located in
the rear yard with self-closing/self-latching gates on any openings of the
fenced yard, at least six feet tall, and restrained by a leash or tether
controlled by a person who is at least 18 years of age and of sufficient size
and strength to control the dog or securely attach, tie, or affix the leash or
tether to the ground, a run, or other stationary object or fixture so that the
dog is adequately restrained and that the dog cannot reach any part of the
fence while so restrained and station such person in close proximity; or
         D.   If the dog is confined in any other locked enclosure that has a
top outdoors, keep the dog under the direct supervision of a person who is at
least 18 years of age and of sufficient size and strength to control the dog.
   (b)   No owner, keeper, or harborer of a dangerous or vicious dog shall fail
to do the following:
      (1)   Maintain a policy of liability insurance with an insurer authorized
to write liability insurance in this state providing coverage in each
occurrence, subject to a limit, exclusive of interest and costs, of not less
than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000) for a dangerous or vicious dog
because of damage or bodily injury to or death of a person or animal caused by
such dog. Such insurance must be obtained within 14 calendar days of the final
determination of the dog as a dangerous or vicious dog. The owner or keeper of
any dangerous or vicious dog shall provide a copy of the policy for liability
insurance to the Police Chief on a yearly basis and provide proof of that
liability insurance upon request to any law enforcement officer, county dog
warden or public health official charged with enforcing this section.
      (2)   Obtain a dangerous dog registration certificate from the county
auditor pursuant to division (I) of R.C. § 955.22 within 14 calendar days of
the final determination of the dog as a dangerous or vicious dog, affix a tag
that identifies the dog as a dangerous or vicious dog to the dog's collar,
ensure that the dog wears the collar and tag at all times, and present the
dangerous dog registration certificate upon being requested to do so by any law
enforcement officer, dog warden, animal warden or control officer, or public
health official including evidence that the dog has been micro chipped, rabies
vaccinated, and neutered or spayed, unless a license veterinarian determines
that neutering or spaying of the dog is medically contraindicated.
      (3)   Notify the local dog warden and Police Department immediately if
any of the following occurs:
         A.   The dog is loose or unconfined;
         B.   The dog bites a person, unless the dog is on the property of the
owner of the dog, and the person who is bitten is unlawfully trespassing or
committing a criminal act within the boundaries of that property;
         C.   The dog attacks another animal while the dog is off the property
of the owner of the dog;
         D.   The dog is sold, given to another person, or dies, within ten
calendar days of the sale, transfer, or death, and also notify the country
auditor.
      (4)   Post and display on the premises where the dangerous or vicious dog
is kept a conspicuous and legible sign visible from all areas of customary or
actual public access, including adjacent properties, warning the public that
there is a dangerous or vicious dog on the premises. Such sign shall be at
least 12 inches by 18 inches in rectangular dimensions and shall contain only
the words "DANGEROUS DOG," or "VICIOUS DOG" in lettering not less than three
inches in height. All signs in residential areas must be setback from the front
property line a minimum of five feet. All signs are to be purchased by the dog
owner and are to be approved by the Chief of Police or his designee.
      (5)   Within ten calendar days of the notice of classification, provide
the Police Department with an identifying color photograph of the dog.
      (6)   Notify veterinarians, veterinary staff, groomers, and other members
of the public who come into direct contact with the designated dog that the dog
has been designated as a dangerous or vicious dog prior to such contact.
      (7)   Successfully complete a dog obedience or behavior modification
course that includes a minimum of six hours of in-person professional training
or behavior modification within 90 calendar days of the final determination of
the dog as a dangerous or vicious dog and provide proof of completion to the
Police Chief.
      (8)   Consent to an inspection of the property where the dog is kept,
other than within any private structure unless otherwise authorized by law, by
the Police Chief for the purpose of determining compliance with the
requirements of this section.
   (c)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Debark or surgically silence a dog that the person knows or has
reason to believe is a dangerous or vicious dog;
      (2)   Possess a dangerous or vicious dog if the person knows or has
reason to believe that the dog has been debarked or surgically silenced;
      (3)   Falsely attest on a wavier form provided by the veterinarian under
division (F) of R.C. § 955.22 that the person's dog is not a dangerous or
vicious dog or otherwise provide false information on that written waiver form.
It is an affirmative defense to a charge of a violation of this division that
the veterinarian who is charged with the violation obtain, prior to debarking
or surgically silencing the dog, a written waiver form that complies with
division (F) of R.C. § 955.22 and that attests that the dog is not a dangerous
or vicious dog.
   (d)   Penalties.
      (1)   A.   Whoever violates this section, when the violation involves a
nuisance dog is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree on the first
offense, a misdemeanor of the third degree on the second offense, and a
misdemeanor of the first degree on the third or any subsequent offense.
         B.   Notwithstanding the foregoing penalties, if the dog without
provocation bites a domestic animal or human without provocation as a result of
a violation of this section, then whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree. Additionally, the court shall order the
offender to complete dog obedience training within a specified period of time
and provide written proof thereof to the Police Chief.
      (2)   A.   Whoever violates this section when the violation involves a
dangerous dog is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree on the first
offense, a misdemeanor of the second degree on the second offense, and a
misdemeanor of the first degree on the third or any subsequent offense.
         B.   Notwithstanding the foregoing penalties, if the dog without
provocation bites a domestic animal or human without provocation, causing
serious injury, then whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor
of the first degree. The court may further impose reasonable terms, conditions
and restrictions deemed necessary to protect the public health, safety and
welfare, including humane euthanasia of the dog by a licensed veterinarian.
         C.   Notwithstanding the foregoing penalties, if the dog without
provocation bites a domestic animal or human without provocation as a result of
a violation of this section, then whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree. Additionally, the court shall order the
offender to complete dog obedience training within a specified period of time
and provide written proof thereof to the Police Chief. The court may further
impose reasonable terms, conditions and restrictions deemed necessary to
protect the public health, safety and welfare.
         D.   Notwithstanding the foregoing penalties, if the dog kills a
domestic animal or causes serious injury to a human as a result of a violation
of this section, then whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor
of the first degree. The court may impose reasonable terms, conditions and
restrictions deemed necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare,
including humane euthanasia of the dog by a licensed veterinarian.
         E.   Notwithstanding the foregoing penalties, it is a felony of the
fourth degree if the dog kills a person as a result of a violation of R.C. §
955.22.  The penalties in this section shall not apply whenever the conduct
proscribed in this section constitutes a felony under R.C. § 955.99.
(Ord. 16-O-60, passed 5-3-2017)
§ 618.22  NUISANCE DOG CLASSIFICATION.
   (a)   Classification of a dog as a nuisance dog shall be based upon specific
behaviors exhibited by the dog. For purposes of this section, behaviors
establishing a nuisance dog are the following:
      (1)   Nuisance classification is established if a dog without provocation
bites any domestic animal without provocation.
      (2)   Nuisance classification is established if a dog, without
provocation, engages in any of the following conduct:
         A.   Chases any person or domestic animal;
         B.   Displays behavior of which a reasonable person can conclude that
the dog intends to attack and or cause harm to a person;
         C.   Attempts to bite a person;
      (3)   References to "designated dog" or "classified dog" in this section
shall mean a dog classified as a nuisance dog.
   (b)   The Police Chief shall have authority to determine whether a dog has
engaged in the behaviors specified in divisions (a)(2)A. and B. of this
section.  This determination may be based upon an investigation that includes
observation of and evidence testimony about the dog's behavior, including the
dog's upbringing and the owner's or keeper's control of the dog, and other
relevant evidence as determined by the Police Chief. These observations and
evidence can be provided by any witness who personally observed the behavior.
Such witness shall sign a written statement attesting to the observed behavior
and agree to provide testimony regarding the dog's behavior. Forms for
providing witness testimony shall be made available at the Police Department.
   (c)   Upon reasonable determination by the Police Chief that a dog has
engaged in a behavior specified in divisions (a)(2)A. and B. of this section,
the Police Chief shall give the dog's owner or keeper written notice by
certified mail or personal service. The notice shall state:
      (1)   The description of the dog;
      (2)   The level of classification;
      (3)   The facts upon which the classification is based;
      (4)   The availability of a hearing to object to the classification;
      (5)   The restrictions placed on the dog as a result of the
classification;
      (6)   The penalties for violation of the restrictions; and
      (7)   The availability of declassification procedures.
   (d)   Upon receipt of notice of the dog's classification as a nuisance dog
pursuant to division (b) of this section, the owner or keeper shall comply with
the restrictions as specified in §
618.23.
   (e)   Notwithstanding divisions (a) through (c) of this section, the Police
Chief shall have discretionary authority to refrain from classifying a dog as a
nuisance dog, even if the dog has engaged in the behaviors specified in
divisions (a)(l)A. and B. of this section, if the Police Chief determines that
the behavior was provoked or other similar mitigating or extenuating
circumstances existed.
   (f)   If a dog is classified pursuant to division (b) of this section, the
owner or keeper of the dog shall have the right to an administrative hearing to
object to the designation pursuant to §
618.25. At hearing, the Police Chief must show, by a preponderance of the
evidence, that the designated dog is a nuisance dog.
(Ord. 16-O-60, passed 5-3-2017)
§ 618.23  CONTROL OF NUISANCE DOGS.
   (a)   No owner, keeper, or harborer of any nuisance dog shall fail to do the
following:
      (1)   While the dog is on the premises of the owner, keeper, or harborer,
so as to prevent it from causing injury to any person or domestic animal:
         A.   Securely confine the dog indoors;
         B.   Securely confine the dog in a locked pen which has a secured top;
         C.   Securely confine the dog in a locked fenced yard, which fence is
located in the rear yard with self-closing/self-latching gates on any openings
of the fenced yard, at least six feet high; or
         D.   Keep the dog restrained by a non-retractable leash or tether no
longer than six feet in length and have the leash or tether controlled by a
person who is of sufficient size and strength to control the dog or securely
attach, tie, or affix the leash or tether to the ground or a stationary object
or fixture so that the dog is adequately restrained and station such person in
close proximity.
      (2)   While the dog is off the premises of the owner, keeper, or
harborer, so as to prevent it from causing injury to any person or domestic
animal, muzzle the dog in a manner that will not cause injury to the dog or
interfere with its vision or respiration, but allows the dog to eat and drink
and prevents it from biting any person or animal, and also keep the dog
restrained by a chain-link leash or tether no longer than six feet in length
controlled by a person who is at least 18 years of age and of sufficient size
and strength to control the dog or securely attach, tie, or affix the leash or
tether to the ground or a stationary object or fixture so that the dog is
adequately restrained and station such person in close proximity.
      (3)   Post and display on the premises where the nuisance dog is kept a
conspicuous and legible sign visible from all areas of customary or actual
public access, including adjacent properties, warning the public that there is
a nuisance dog on the premises. Such sign shall be at least 12 inches by 18
inches in rectangular dimensions and shall contain only the words "NUISANCE
DOG"in lettering not less than three inches in height. All signs in residential
areas must be setback from the front property line a minimum of five feet. All
signs are to be purchased by the dog owner and are to be approved by the Chief
of Police or his designee.
      (4)   Within ten calendar days of the notice of classification, provide
the Police Department with an identifying color photograph of the dog and
microchip information if the dog is microchipped.
      (5)   Notify the Police Department immediately if the dog is loose or
unconfined or has without provocation bitten a human or another domestic
animal.
      (6)   Notify the Police Department in writing within five calendar days
if the dog is transferred to another owner or keeper or dies. If the dog is
transferred to another owner, the written notice shall include the name,
address, and phone number of the transferee.
      (7)   Notify veterinarians, veterinary staff, groomers, and other members
of the public who come into direct contact with the designated dog that the dog
has been designated as a nuisance dog prior to such contact.
   (b)   In addition to the provisions of division (a) of this section, no
owner or keeper of any nuisance dog shall fail to do the following:
      (1)   Muzzle the dog while the dog is off the premises of the owner,
keeper, or harborer. The muzzle must be made in a manner that will not cause
injury to the dog or interfere with its vision or respiration, but must prevent
it from biting any personal or animal.
      (2)   Microchip the dog within 14 calendar days of the final
determination of the dog as Level 1 potential nuisance dog and provide the
microchip information to the Police Chief upon demand.
      (3)   Vaccinate the dog for rabies yearly and provide proof of
vaccination to the Police Chief upon demand.
      (4)   Neuter or spay the dog within 14 calendar days of the final
determination of the dog as a nuisance dog, unless a licensed veterinarian
determines that neutering or spaying of the dog is medically contraindicated,
and provide proof of alteration or exemption to the Police Chief upon demand.
      (5)   Maintain a policy of liability insurance with an insurer authorized
to write liability insurance in this state providing coverage in each
occurrence, subject to a limit, exclusive of interest and costs, of not less
than ten thousand dollars ($10,000) because of damage or bodily injury to or
death of a person or animal caused by such dog. Such insurance must be obtained
within 14 calendar days of the final determination of the dog as a nuisance
dog. The owner of any nuisance dog shall provide a copy of the policy for
liability insurance to the Police Chief on a yearly basis.
   (c)   Notwithstanding divisions (a) and (b) of this section, the Police
Chief shall have the discretion to decrease or increase a classified dog's
restrictions at the time of classification based upon relevant circumstances
and may order the owner or keeper to complete dog obedience training within a
specified period of time. The Police Chief shall notify the owner or keeper of
any modifications to the restrictions in writing.
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree on the first offense, a misdemeanor of the third degree on the second
offense, and a misdemeanor of the first degree on the third or any subsequent
offense. Notwithstanding the foregoing penalties, if a domestic animal or human
is bitten by the dog without provocation as a result of a violation of this
section, then whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
first degree. Additionally, the court shall order the offender to complete dog
obedience training within a specified period of time and provide written proof
thereof to the Police Chief.
(Ord. 16-O-60, passed 5-3-2017)
§ 618.24  DOG CLASSIFIED BY ANOTHER JURISDICTION.
   (a)   Any person desiring to bring a dog to live in the city which has been
previously declared to be a nuisance dog, dangerous dog, vicious dog, or
similar designation in another jurisdiction, under the provisions of R.C. §§
955.11, et seq. or comparable local ordinance, must notify the Police
Department prior to moving the dog to the city.
   (b)   The Police Chief shall have the authority to determine whether a
previously classified dog has engaged in the behaviors specified in §§
618.19 or
618.22. This determination may be based upon an investigation that includes
observation of and testimony about the dog's behavior, including the dog's
upbringing and the owner's or keeper's control of the dog, and other relevant
evidence as determined by the Police Chief. The owner or keeper of the dog
shall provide the Police Chief with all information requested related to that
dog.
   (c)   Upon reasonable determination by the Police Chief that a previously
classified dog has engaged in the behaviors specified in §§
618.19 or
618.22, the Police Chief shall give the dog's owner or keeper written notice by
certified mail or personal service. The notice shall state;
      (1)   The description of the dog;
      (2)   The level of classification;
      (3)   The facts upon which the classification is based;
      (4)   The availability of a hearing to object to the classification;
      (5)   The restrictions placed on the dog as a result of the
classification;
      (6)   The penalties for violation of the restrictions; and
      (7)   The availability of declassification procedures.
   (d)   Upon receipt of notice of the dog's classification as a potential
nuisance dog, dangerous dog, or vicious dog pursuant to division (c) of this
section, the owner or keeper shall comply with the restrictions specified in §§
618.21 or
618.23 for that dog.
   (e)   If a dog is classified pursuant to division (c) of this section, the
owner or keeper of the dog shall have the right to an administrative hearing to
object to the designation pursuant to §
618.25. At hearing, the dog's owner or keeper must show, by clear and
convincing evidence, that the classification as determined by the Police Chief
does not match the dog's previous behavior or classification.
   (f)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of a second
degree misdemeanor and shall be subject to the penalty provided in §
698.02.
(Ord. 16-O-60, passed 5-3-2017)
§ 618.25  OBJECTION HEARINGS.
   (a)   If a dog is classified pursuant to §§
618.19 or
618.22 or is denied classification pursuant to §
618.24, the owner or keeper of the dog shall have the right to an
administrative hearing to object to the determination. The hearing shall be
heard by the Director of Public Safety. An owner or keeper has ten calendar
days from the date listed on the written notice of the determination to inform
the Director of Public Safety in writing that a hearing is requested. The
Director of Public Safety will schedule the hearing and notify the party
requesting the hearing in writing of the time, date, and location of the
hearing.
   (b)   The objection hearing shall be conducted as follows:
      (1)   Parties may appear pro se or be represented by an attorney.
      (2)   Parties may present their position, arguments, and contentions,
including by making statements, presenting evidence, and offering witnesses on
their behalf, on any relevant issue.
      (3)   Parties may refute evidence and testimony offered in opposition to
their position, arguments and contentions, including by making statements,
presenting evidence, and offering witnesses on their behalf, of any relevant
issue.
      (4)   Parties shall be entitled to the right of cross-examination.
      (5)   The hearing shall be quasi-judicial in nature and all testimony
shall be under oath.
      (6)   Any party shall be entitled to transcribe the proceeding at his own
cost.
      (7)   After considering all substantial, reliable and probative evidence
accepted for review, the Director of Public Safety shall affirm, deny, or
affirm with conditions the determination.
      (8)   Within five business days of such hearing, the Director of Public
Safety shall issue a written decision making a factual finding as to the
determination and shall serve the decision upon all parties. The decision of
the Director of Public Safety is a final order.
(Ord. 16-O-60, passed 5-3-2017)
§ 618.26  DANGEROUS AND VICIOUS DOG OWNERSHIP RESTRICTIONS.
   (a)   No person shall own, keep, maintain, allow, harbor, or permit more
than one dangerous or vicious dog at any one residence that has without
provocation bitten and killed a dog or without provocation bitten and caused
serious injury or death to a person.
   (b)   The provisions as set forth in seizure of the Ohio Revised Code shall
apply inside the city, with the exception of division (a) of this section which
shall be construed to include vicious dogs in addition to dangerous dogs.
   (c)   Penalty.
      (1)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of a second
degree misdemeanor and shall be subject to the penalty provided in §
698.02.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (b) of this section is guilty of a first
degree misdemeanor and shall be subject to the penalty provided in §
698.02.
(Ord. 16-O-60, passed 5-3-2017)
§ 618.27  EXEMPTIONS.
   
Chapter 618 of this Code shall exempt the following:
   (a)   Any dog which is lawfully engaged in hunting or training for the
purposes of hunting while accompanied by a licensed hunter. However, such dogs
at all other times and in all other respects shall be subject to the ordinance
or resolution permitted by this section, unless actually in the field and
engaged in hunting or in legitimate training for such purpose;
   (b)   A service animal, as defined by the Americans with Disabilities Act
and the regulations promulgated pursuant thereto, that has caused injury or
serious injury to any person or has killed a person or domestic animal while
the service animal is actually being used to assist a person in the performance
of that animal's trained duties;
   (c)   A police dog that has caused injury or serious injury to any person or
has killed a person or a domestic animal while the police dog is actually being
used to assist one or more law enforcement officers in the performance of their
actual duties.
(Ord. 16-O-60, passed 5-3-2017)
Editor's note:
   Prior §
618.16, Reporting Escapes, was repealed as part of the 2013 updating and
revision of this Municipal Code because substantially equivalent state law
(R.C. § 2927.21) was repealed by the Ohio General Assembly.
CHAPTER 624:  DRUGS
Editor's note:
   Res. 83-R-13, passed May 16, 1983, authorized the Mayor to enter into an
agreement relating to the organization and operation of the Lake County
Narcotics Unit. Copies of such resolution and the agreement, which is attached
to original Res. 83-R-13, as Exhibit "A", may be obtained from the Clerk of
Council.
Section
624.01   Definitions.
624.02   Trafficking in controlled substances; gift of marihuana.
624.025   Cultivation of marihuana.
624.03   Drug possession offenses.
624.04   Possession of drug abuse instruments.
624.05   Permitting drug abuse.
624.06   Deception to obtain a dangerous drug. (Repealed)
624.07   Abusing harmful intoxicants.
624.073   Improperly dispensing or distributing nitrous oxide.
624.076   Possessing nitrous oxide in motor vehicles.
624.08   Illegal dispensing of drug samples.
624.09   Possession, sale and disposal of hypodermics.
624.10   Evidence.
624.11   Double jeopardy.
624.12   Controlled substance schedules.
624.13   Controlled substance or prescription labels.
624.14   Use or possession of paraphernalia.
624.15   Counterfeit controlled substances.
624.16   Pseudoephedrine sales.
624.17   Prohibited activities relating to medical marijuana.
624.18   Public nuisance; violation; remedies not exclusive; penalty.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Alcoholic beverages - see GEN. OFF.
Ch. 612
   Disorderly conduct while voluntarily intoxicated - see GEN. OFF.
648.04
   Driving or physical control while under the influence - see TRAF.
434.01
   Effect of voluntary intoxication on criminal liability - see GEN. OFF.
606.07
   Intoxicated pedestrians - see TRAF.
416.10
   Placing harmful substance or objects in food or confection - see GEN. OFF.
636.16
   See section histories for similar state law
   Treatment of drug dependent persons in lieu of conviction - see Ohio R.C.
2951.041
   Using weapons while intoxicated - see GEN. OFF.
672.03
§ 624.01  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. Words,
terms and phrases and their derivatives used in this chapter which are not
defined in this section shall have the meanings given to them in the Ohio
Revised Code.
   (a)   “Administer.”  The direct application of a drug, whether by injection,
inhalation, ingestion, or any other means to a person or an animal.
   (b)   “Adulterate.”  To cause a drug to be adulterated as described in Ohio
R.C. 3715.63.
   (c)   “Benzodiazepine.” A controlled substance that has United States Food
and Drug Administration approved labeling indicating that it is a
benzodiazepine, benzodiazepine derivative, triazolobenzodiazepine, or
triazolobenzodiazepine derivative, including the following drugs and their
varying salt forms or chemical congeners: alprazolam, chlordiazepoxide
hydrochloride, clobazam, clonazepam, clorazepate, diazepam, estazolam,
flurazepam hydrochloride, lorazepam, midazolam, oxazepam, quazepam, temazepam,
and triazolam.
   (d)   “Bulk amount.”  Of a controlled substance means any of the following:
      (1)   For any compound, mixture, preparation, or substance included in
Schedule I, Schedule II or Schedule III, with the exception of controlled
substance analogs, marihuana, cocaine, L.S.D., heroin, and hashish and except
as provided in subsection (2) or (5) of this definition, whichever of the
following is applicable:
         A.   An amount equal to or exceeding ten grams or 25 unit doses of a
compound, mixture, preparation, or substance that is or contains any amount of
a Schedule I opiate or opium derivative;
         B.   An amount equal to or exceeding ten grams of a compound, mixture,
preparation, or substance that is or contains any amount of raw or gum opium;
         C.   An amount equal to or exceeding 30 grams or ten unit doses of a
compound, mixture, preparation, or substance that is or contains any amount of
a Schedule I hallucinogen other than tetrahydrocannabinol or lysergic acid
amide, or a Schedule I stimulant or depressant;
         D.   An amount equal to or exceeding 20 grams or five times the
maximum daily dose in the usual dose range specified in a standard
pharmaceutical reference manual of a compound, mixture, preparation, or
substance that is or contains any amount of a Schedule II opiate or opium
derivative;
         E.   An amount equal to or exceeding five grams or ten unit doses of a
compound, mixture, preparation, or substance that is or contains any amount of
phencyclidine;
         F.   An amount equal to or exceeding 120 grams or 30 times the maximum
daily dose in the usual dose range specified in a standard pharmaceutical
reference manual of a compound, mixture, preparation, or substance that is or
contains any amount of a Schedule II stimulant that is in a final dosage form
manufactured by a person authorized by the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act
(21 U.S.C. §§ 301 et seq., as amended) and the federal drug abuse control laws,
as defined in this section, that is or contains any amount of a Schedule II
depressant substance or a Schedule II hallucinogenic substance;
         G.   An amount equal to or exceeding three grams of a compound,
mixture, preparation, or substance that is or contains any amount of a Schedule
II stimulant, or any of its salts or isomers, that is not in a final dosage
form manufactured by a person authorized by the Federal Food, Drug, and
Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. §§ 301 et seq., as amended) and the Federal drug abuse
control laws;
      (2)   An amount equal to or exceeding 120 grams or 30 times the maximum
daily dose in the usual dose range specified in a standard pharmaceutical
reference manual of a compound, mixture, preparation, or substance that is or
contains any amount of a Schedule III or IV substance other than an anabolic
steroid or a Schedule III opiate or opium derivative;
      (3)   An amount equal to or exceeding 20 grams or five times the maximum
daily dose in the usual dose range specified in a standard pharmaceutical
reference manual of a compound, mixture, preparation, or substance that is or
contains any amount of a Schedule III opiate or opium derivative;
      (4)   An amount equal to or exceeding 250 milliliters or 250 grams of a
compound, mixture, preparation, or substance that is or contains any amount of
a Schedule V substance;
      (5)   An amount equal to or exceeding 200 solid dosage units, 16 grams,
or 16 milliliters of a compound, mixture, preparation, or substance that is or
contains any amount of a Schedule III anabolic steroid.
   (e)   “Certified grievance committee.”  A duly constituted and organized
committee of the Ohio state Bar Association or of one or more local bar
associations of the state that complies with the criteria set forth in Rule V,
§ 6 of the Rules for the Government of the Bar of Ohio.
   (f)   “Cocaine.”  Any of the following:
      (1)   A cocaine salt, isomer, or derivative, a salt of a cocaine isomer
or derivative, or the base form of cocaine.
      (2)   Coca leaves or a salt, compound, derivative, or preparation of coca
leaves, including ecgonine, a salt, isomer, or derivative of ecgonine, or a
salt of an isomer or derivative of ecgonine.
      (3)   A salt, compound, derivative, or preparation of a substance
identified in subsection (1) or (2) of this definition that is chemically
equivalent to or identical with any of those substances, except that the
substances shall not include decocainized coca leaves or extraction of coca
leaves if the extractions do not contain cocaine or ecgonine.
   (g)   “Committed in the vicinity of a juvenile.”  An offense is “committed
in the vicinity of a juvenile” if the offender commits the offense within 100
feet of a juvenile or within the view of a juvenile, regardless of whether the
offender knows the age of the juvenile, whether the offender knows the offense
is being committed within 100 feet of or within view of the juvenile, or
whether the juvenile actually views the commission of the offense.
   (h)   “Committed in the vicinity of a school.”  An offense is “committed in
the vicinity of a school” if the offender commits the offense on school
premises, in a school building, or within 1,000 feet of the boundaries of any
school premises, regardless of whether the offender knows the offense is being
committed on school premises, in a school building, or within 1,000 feet of the
boundaries of any school premises.
   (i)   “Controlled substance.” A drug, compound, mixture, preparation, or
substance included in Schedule I, II, III, IV, or V of Ohio R.C. 3719.41.
   (j)   “Controlled substance analog.”
      (1)   The phrase means, except as provided in subsection (2) of this
definition, a substance to which both of the following apply:
         A.   The chemical structure of the substance is substantially similar
to the structure of a controlled substance in Schedule I or II.
         B.   One of the following applies regarding the substance:
            1.   The substance has a stimulant, depressant, or hallucinogenic
effect on the central nervous system that is substantially similar to or
greater than the stimulant, depressant, or hallucinogenic effect on the central
nervous system of a controlled substance in Schedule I or II.
            2.   With respect to a particular person, that person represents or
intends the substance to have a stimulant, depressant, or hallucinogenic effect
on the central nervous system that is substantially similar to or greater than
the stimulant, depressant, or hallucinogenic effect on the central nervous
system of a controlled substance in Schedule I or II.
      (2)   The phrase does not include any of the following:
         A.   A controlled substance;
         B.   Any substance for which there is an approved new drug
application;
         C.   With respect to a particular person, any substance if an
exemption is in effect for investigational use for that person pursuant to
federal law to the extent that conduct with respect to that substance is
pursuant to that exemption;
         D.   Any substance to the extent it is not intended for human
consumption before the exemption described in subsection (2)C. of this
definition takes effect with respect to that substance.
      (3)   Except as otherwise provided in R.C. § 2925.03 or R.C. § 2925.11, a
"controlled substance analog", to the extent intended for human consumption,
shall be treated for purposes of any provision of this Code or the Ohio Revised
Code as a controlled substance in Schedule I.
   (k)   “Counterfeit controlled substance.”  Any of the following:
      (1)   Any drug that bears, or whose container or label bears, a
trademark, trade name, or other identifying mark used without authorization of
the owner of rights to the trademark, trade name, or identifying mark.
      (2)   Any unmarked or unlabeled substance that is represented to be a
controlled substance manufactured, processed, packed, or distributed by a
person other than the person that manufactured, processed, packed, or
distributed it.
      (3)   Any substance that is represented to be a controlled substance but
is not a controlled substance or is a different controlled substance.
      (4)   Any substance other than a controlled substance that a reasonable
person would believe to be a controlled substance because of its similarity in
shape, size, and color, or its markings, labeling, packaging, distribution, or
the price for which it is sold or offered for sale.
   (l)   “Cultivate.”  Includes planting, watering, fertilizing or tilling.
   (m)   “Dangerous drug.”  Any of the following:
      (1)   Any drug to which either of the following applies:
         A.   Under the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act, is required to
bear a label containing the legend “Caution: Federal law prohibits dispensing
without a prescription” or “Caution: Federal law restricts this drug to use by
or on the order of a licensed veterinarian” or any similar restrictive
statement, or may be dispensed only upon a prescription.
         B.   Under Ohio R.C. Chapter 3715 or 3719, may be dispensed only upon
a prescription.
      (2)   Any drug that contains a Schedule V controlled substance and that
is exempt from Ohio R.C. Chapter 3719 or to which that chapter does not apply.
      (3)   Any drug intended for administration by injection into the human
body other than through a natural orifice of the human body.
      (4)   Any drug that is a biological product, as defined in R.C. §
3715.01.
   (n)   “Deception.”  Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2913.01.
   (o)   “Disciplinary counsel.” The disciplinary counsel appointed by the
Board of Commissioners on Grievances and Discipline of the Ohio Supreme Court
under the Rules for the Government of the Bar of Ohio.
   (p)   “Dispense.”  Means to sell, leave with, give away, dispose of, or
deliver.
   (q)   “Distribute.”  Means to deal in, ship, transport or deliver, but does
not include administering or dispensing a drug.
   (r)   “Drug.”  Any of the following:
      (1)   Any article recognized in the official United States pharmacopeia,
national formulary, or any supplement intended for use in the diagnosis, cure,
mitigation, treatment, or prevention of disease in humans or other animals.
      (2)   Any other article intended for use in the diagnosis, cure,
mitigation, treatment, or prevention of disease in humans or other animals.
      (3)   Any article, other than food, intended to affect the structure or
any function of the body of humans or other animals.
      (4)   Any article intended for use as a component of any article
specified in subsection (1), (2), or (3) above; but does not include devices or
their components, parts, or accessories.
   (s)   “Drug abuse offense.”  Any of the following:
      (1)   A violation of Ohio R.C. 2913.02(A) that constitutes theft of
drugs, or any violation of Ohio R.C. 2925.02, 2925.03, 2925.04, 2925.041,
2925.05, 2925.06, 2925.11, 2925.12, 2925.13, 2925.22, 2925.23, 2925.24,
2925.31, 2925.32, 2925.36, or 2925.37.
      (2)   A violation of an existing or former law of any municipality,
state, or of the United States, that is substantially equivalent to any section
listed in subsection (1) of this definition.
      (3)   An offense under an existing or former law of any municipality,
state, or of the United States, of which planting, cultivating, harvesting,
processing, making, manufacturing, producing, shipping, transporting,
delivering, acquiring, possessing, storing, distributing, dispensing, selling,
inducing another to use, administering to another, using, or otherwise dealing
with a controlled substance is an element.
      (4)   A conspiracy to commit, attempt to commit, or complicity in
committing or attempting to commit, any offense under subsection (1), (2), or
(3) of this definition.
   (t)   “Drug dependent person.”  Any person who, by reason of the use of any
drug of abuse, is physically and/or psychologically dependent upon the use of
such drug to the detriment of the person’s health or welfare.
   (u)   “Drug of abuse.”  Any controlled substance, any harmful intoxicant,
and any dangerous drug, as defined in this section.
   (v)   “Emergency facility.” A hospital emergency department or any other
facility that provides emergency care.
   (w)   “Federal drug abuse control laws.”  The “Comprehensive Drug Abuse
Prevention and Control Act of 1970”, 21 U.S.C. §§ 801 et seq., as amended.
   (x)   “Felony drug abuse offense.”  Any drug abuse offense that would
constitute a felony under the laws of this state, any other state, or the
United States.
   (y)   “Harmful intoxicant.”  Does not include beer or intoxicating liquor,
but means any of the following:
      (1)   Any compound, mixture, preparation, or substance the gas, fumes, or
vapor of which when inhaled can induce intoxication, excitement, giddiness,
irrational behavior, depression, stupefaction, paralysis, unconsciousness,
asphyxiation, or other harmful physiological effects, and includes but is not
limited to any of the following:
         A.   Any volatile organic solvent, plastic cement, model cement,
fingernail polish remover, lacquer thinner, cleaning fluid, gasoline, or other
preparation containing a volatile organic solvent.
         B.   Any aerosol propellant.
         C.   Any fluorocarbon refrigerant.
         D.   Any anesthetic gas.
      (2)   Gamma Butyrolactone;
      (3)   1,4 Butanediol.
   (z)   “Hashish.”  The resin or a preparation of the resin contained in
marihuana, whether in solid form or in a liquid concentrate, liquid extract, or
liquid distillate form.
   (aa)   “Hypodermic.”  A hypodermic syringe or needle, or other instrument or
device for the injection of medication.
   (bb)   “Juvenile.”  A person under 18 years of age.
   (cc)   “Laboratory.”  A laboratory approved by the state Board of Pharmacy
as proper to be entrusted with the custody of controlled substances and the use
of controlled substances for scientific and clinical purposes and for purposes
of instruction.
   (dd)   “Lawful prescription.”  A prescription that is issued for a
legitimate medical purpose by a licensed health professional authorized to
prescribe drugs, that is not altered or forged, and that was not obtained by
means of deception or by the commission of any theft offense.
   (ee)   “Licensed health professional authorized to prescribe drugs” or
“prescriber.”  An individual who is authorized by law to prescribe drugs or
dangerous drugs or drug therapy related devices in the course of the
individual’s professional practice, including only the following:
      (1)   A dentist licensed under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4715.
      (2)   A clinical nurse specialist, certified nurse-midwife, or certified
nurse practitioner who holds a current, valid license to practice nursing as an
advanced practice registered nurse issued under R.C. Chapter 4723.
      (3)   An optometrist licensed under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4725 to practice
optometry under a therapeutic pharmaceutical agents certificate.
      (4)   A physician authorized under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4731 to practice
medicine and surgery, osteopathic medicine and surgery, or podiatric medicine
and surgery.
      (5)   A physician assistant who holds a license to practice as a
physician assistant issued under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4730, holds a valid
prescriber number issued by the Ohio Medical Board, and has been granted
physician-delegated prescriptive authority.
      (6)   A veterinarian licensed under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4741.
   (ff)   “L.S.D.”  Lysergic acid diethylamide.
   (gg)   “Major drug offender.”  Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2929.01.
   (hh)   “Mandatory prison term.”  Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C.
2929.01.
   (ii)   “Manufacture.”  To plant, cultivate, harvest, process, make, prepare,
or otherwise engage in any part of the production of a drug, by propagation,
extraction, chemical synthesis, or compounding, or any combination of the same,
and includes packaging, repackaging, labeling, and other activities incident to
production.
   (jj)   “Manufacturer.”  A person who manufactures a controlled substance, as
“manufacture” is defined by this section.
   (kk)   “Marihuana.”  All parts of a plant of the genus cannabis, whether
growing or not, the seeds of a plant of that type; the resin extracted from a
part of a plant of that type; and every compound, manufacture, salt,
derivative, mixture, or preparation of a plant of that type or of its seeds or
resin. “Marihuana” does not include the mature stalks of the plant, fiber
produced from the stalks, oils or cake made from the seeds of the plant, any
other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the
mature stalks, except the resin extracted from the mature stalks, fiber, oil,
or cake, or the sterilized seed of the plant that is incapable of germination.
“Marihuana” does not include “hashish.”
   (ll)   “Methamphetamine.” Methamphetamine, any salt, isomer, or salt of an
isomer of methamphetamine, or any compound, mixture, preparation, or substance
containing methamphetamine or any salt, isomer, or salt of an isomer of
methamphetamine.
   (mm)   “Minor drug possession offense.”  Either of the following:
      (1)   A violation of Ohio R.C. 2925.11 as it existed prior to July 1,
1996, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
      (2)   A violation of Ohio R.C. 2925.11 as it exists on and after July 1,
1996, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, that is a misdemeanor
or a felony of the fifth degree.
   (nn)   “Official written order.”  An order written on a form provided for
that purpose by the Director of the United States Drug Enforcement
Administration, under any laws of the United States making provision for the
order, if the order forms are authorized and required by Federal law.
   (oo)   “Opioid analgesic.” A controlled substance that has analgesic
pharmacologic activity at the opioid receptors of the central nervous system,
including the following drugs and their varying salt forms or chemical
congeners: buprenorphine, butorphanol, codeine (including acetaminophen and
other combination products), dihydrocodeine, fentanyl, hydrocodone (including
acetaminophen combination products), hydromorphone, meperidine, methadone,
morphine sulfate, oxycodone (including acetaminophen, aspirin, and other
combination products), oxymorphone, tapentadol, and tramadol.
   (pp)   “Person.”  Means any individual, corporation, government,
governmental subsubsection or agency, business trust, estate, trust,
partnership, association or other legal entity.
   (qq)   “Pharmacist.”  A person licensed under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4729 to
engage in the practice of pharmacy.
   (rr)   “Pharmacy.”  Except when used in a context that refers to the
practice of pharmacy, means any area, room, rooms, place of business,
department, or portion of any of the foregoing, where the practice of pharmacy
is conducted.
   (ss)   “Possess” or “possession.”  Having control over a thing or substance
but may not be inferred solely from mere access to the thing or substance
through ownership or occupation of the premises upon which the thing or
substance is found.
   (tt)   “Prescription.”  Means all of the following:
      (1)   A written, electronic or oral order for drugs or combination or
mixtures of drugs to be used by a particular individual or for treating a
particular animal, issued by a licensed health professional authorized to
prescribe drugs.
      (2)   For purposes of Ohio R.C. 2925.61, 4723.488, 4729.44, 4730.431, and
4731.94, a written, electronic, or oral order for naloxone issued to and in the
name of a family member, friend, or other individual in a position to assist an
individual who there is reason to believe is at risk of experiencing an opioid-
related overdose.
      (3)   For purposes of Ohio R.C. 4723.4810, 4729.282, 4730.432, and
4731.93, a written, electronic, or oral order for a drug to treat chlamydia,
gonorrhea, or trichomoniasis issued to and in the name of a patient who is not
the intended user of the drug but is the sexual partner of the intended user.
      (4)   For purposes of R.C. §§ 3313.7110, 3313.7111, 3314.143, 3326.28,
3328.29, 4723.483, 4729.88, 4730.433, 4731.96, and 5101.76, a written,
electronic, or oral order for an epinephrine autoinjector issued to and in the
name of a school, school district, or camp.
      (5)   For purposes of R.C. Chapter 3728 and R.C. §§ 4723.483, 4729.88,
4730.433, and 4731.96, a written, electronic, or oral order for an epinephrine
autoinjector issued to and in the name of a qualified entity, as defined in
R.C. § 3728.01.
   (uu)   “Presumption for a prison term” or “presumption that a prison term
shall be imposed.”  A presumption as described in Ohio R.C. 2929.13(D) that a
prison term is a necessary sanction for a felony in order to comply with the
purposes and principles of sentencing under Ohio R.C. 2929.11.
   (vv)   “Professional license.”  Any license, permit, certificate,
registration, qualification, admission, temporary license, temporary permit,
temporary certificate, or temporary registration that is described in Ohio R.C.
2925.01(W)(1) to (36) and that qualifies a person as a professionally licensed
person.
   (ww)   “Professionally licensed person.”  Any of the following:
      (1)   A person who has obtained a license as a manufacturer of controlled
substances or a wholesaler of controlled substances under Ohio R.C. Chapter
3719;
      (2)   A person who has received a certificate or temporary certificate as
a certified public accountant or who has registered as a public accountant
under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4701 and who holds an Ohio permit issued under that
chapter;
      (3)   A person who holds a certificate of qualification to practice
architecture issued or renewed and registered under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4703;
      (4)   A person who is registered as a landscape architect under Ohio R.C.
Chapter 4703 or who holds a permit as a landscape architect issued under that
chapter;
      (5)   A person licensed under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4707;
      (6)   A person who has been issued a certificate of registration as a
registered barber under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4709;
      (7)   A person licensed and regulated to engage in the business of a debt
pooling company by a legislative authority, under authority of Ohio R.C.
Chapter 4710;
      (8)   A person who has been issued a cosmetologist’s license, hair
designer’s license, manicurist’s license, esthetician’s license, natural hair
stylist’s license, advanced cosmetologist’s license, advanced hair designer’s
license, advanced manicurist’s license, advanced esthetician’s license,
advanced natural hair stylist’s license, cosmetology instructor’s license, hair
design instructor’s license, manicurist instructor’s license, esthetics
instructor’s license, natural hair style instructor’s license, independent
contractor’s license, or tanning facility permit under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4713;
      (9)   A person who has been issued a license to practice dentistry, a
general anesthesia permit, a conscious intravenous sedation permit, a limited
resident’s license, a limited teaching license, a dental hygienist’s license,
or a dental hygienist’s teacher’s certificate under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4715;
      (10)   A person who has been issued an embalmer’s license, a funeral
director’s license, a funeral home license, or a crematory license, or who has
been registered for an embalmer’s or funeral director’s apprenticeship under
Ohio R.C. Chapter 4717;
      (11)   A person who has been licensed as a registered nurse or practical
nurse, or who has been issued a certificate for the practice of nurse-midwifery
under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4723;
      (12)   A person who has been licensed to practice optometry or to engage
in optical dispensing under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4725;
      (13)   A person licensed to act as a pawnbroker under Ohio R.C. Chapter
4727;
      (14)   A person licensed to act as a precious metals dealer under Ohio
R.C. Chapter 4728;
      (15)   A person licensed as a pharmacist, a pharmacy intern, a wholesale
distributor of dangerous drugs, or a terminal distributor of dangerous drugs
under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4729;
      (16)   A person who is authorized to practice as a physician assistant
under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4730;
      (17)   A person who has been issued a license to practice medicine and
surgery, osteopathic medicine and surgery, or podiatric medicine and surgery
under R.C. Chapter 4731 or has been issued a certificate to practice a limited
branch of medicine under that chapter;
      (18)   A person licensed as a psychologist or school psychologist under
Ohio R.C. Chapter 4732;
      (19)   A person registered to practice the profession of engineering or
surveying under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4733;
      (20)   A person who has been issued a license to practice chiropractic
under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4734;
      (21)   A person licensed to act as a real estate broker or real estate
salesperson under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4735;
      (22)   A person registered as a registered sanitarian under Ohio R.C.
Chapter 4736;
      (23)   A person licensed to operate or maintain a junkyard under Ohio
R.C. Chapter 4737;
      (24)   A person who has been issued a motor vehicle salvage dealer’s
license under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4738;
      (25)   A person who has been licensed to act as a steam engineer under
Ohio R.C. Chapter 4739;
      (26)   A person who has been issued a license or temporary permit to
practice veterinary medicine or any of its branches, or who is registered as a
graduate animal technician under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4741;
      (27)   A person who has been issued a hearing aid dealer’s or fitter’s
license or trainee permit under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4747;
      (28)   A person who has been issued a class A, class B, or class C
license or who has been registered as an investigator or security guard
employee under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4749;
      (29)   A person licensed and registered to practice as a nursing home
administrator under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4751;
      (30)   A person licensed to practice as a speech-language pathologist or
audiologist under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4753;
      (31)   A person issued a license as an occupational therapist or physical
therapist under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4755;
      (32)   A person who is licensed as a licensed professional clinical
counselor, licensed professional counselor, social worker, independent social
worker, independent marriage and family therapist, or marriage and family
therapist, or registered as a social work assistant under R.C. Chapter 4757;
      (33)   A person issued a license to practice dietetics under Ohio R.C.
Chapter 4759;
      (34)   A person who has been issued a license or limited permit to
practice respiratory therapy under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4761;
      (35)   A person who has been issued a real estate appraiser certificate
under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4763;
      (36)   A person who has been admitted to the bar by order of the Ohio
Supreme Court in compliance with its prescribed and published rules.
   (xx)   “Public premises.” Any hotel, restaurant, tavern, store, arena, hall,
or other place of public accommodation, business, amusement, or resort.
   (yy)   “Sale.” Includes delivery, barter, exchange, transfer, or gift, or
offer thereof, and each transaction of those natures made by any person,
whether as principal, proprietor, agent, servant or employee.
   (zz)   “Sample drug.”  A drug or pharmaceutical preparation that would be
hazardous to health or safety if used without the supervision of a licensed
health professional authorized to prescribe drugs, or a drug of abuse, and
that, at one time, had been placed in a container plainly marked as a sample by
a manufacturer.
   (aaa)   “Schedule I, II, III, IV or V.”  Controlled substance Schedules I,
II, III, IV, and V established pursuant to Ohio R.C. 3719.41, as amended
pursuant to Ohio R.C. 3719.43 or 3719.44.
   (bbb)   “School.”  Any school operated by a board of education, any
community school established under Ohio R.C. Chapter 3314, or any nonpublic
school for which the state Board of Education prescribes minimum standards
under Ohio R.C. 3301.07, whether or not any instruction, extracurricular
activities, or training provided by the school is being conducted at the time a
criminal offense is committed.
   (ccc)   “School building.”  Any building in which any of the instruction,
extracurricular activities, or training provided by a school is conducted,
whether or not any instruction, extracurricular activities, or training
provided by the school is being conducted in the school building at the time a
criminal offense is committed.
   (ddd)   “School premises.”  Either of the following:
      (1)   The parcel of real property on which any school is situated,
whether or not any instruction, extracurricular activities, or training
provided by the school is being conducted on the premises at the time a
criminal offense is committed.
      (2)   Any other parcel of real property that is owned or leased by a
board of education of a school, the governing authority of a community school
established under Ohio R.C. Chapter 3314, or the governing body of a nonpublic
school for which the state Board of Education prescribes minimum standards
under Ohio R.C. 3301.07 and on which some of the instruction, extracurricular
activities, or training of the school is conducted, whether or not any
instruction, extracurricular activities, or training provided by the school is
being conducted on the parcel of real property at the time a criminal offense
is committed.
   (eee)   “Standard Pharmaceutical Reference Manual.”  The current edition,
with cumulative changes if any, of  references that are approved by the State
Board of Pharmacy.
   (fff)   “Theft offense.”  Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2913.01.
   (ggg)   “Unit dose.”  An amount or unit or a compound, mixture, or
preparation containing a controlled substance that is separately identifiable
and in a form that indicates that it is the amount or unit by which the
controlled substance is separately administered to or taken by an individual.
   (hhh)   “Wholesaler.”  A person who, on official written orders other than
prescriptions, supplies controlled substances that the person has not
manufactured, produced or prepared personally and includes “wholesale
distributor of dangerous drugs”, which means a person engaged in the sale of
dangerous drugs at wholesale and includes any agent or employee of that person
authorized by that person to engage in the sale of dangerous drugs at
wholesale.
(ORC 2925.01, 3719.01, 3719.011, 3719.013, 4729.01)
§ 624.02  TRAFFICKING IN CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES; GIFT OF MARIHUANA.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly do any of the following:
      (1)   Sell or offer to sell a controlled substance or a controlled
substance analog;
      (2)   Prepare for shipment, ship, transport, deliver, prepare for
distribution, or distribute a controlled substance or a controlled substance
analog, when the offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe that the
controlled substance or a controlled substance analog is intended for sale or
resale by the offender or another person.
   (b)   This section does not apply to any of the following:
      (1)   Manufacturers, licensed health professionals authorized to
prescribe drugs, pharmacists, owners of pharmacies, and other persons whose
conduct is in accordance with Ohio R.C. Chapters 3719, 4715, 4723, 4729, 4730,
4731, and 4741.
      (2)   If the offense involves an anabolic steroid, any person who is
conducting or participating in a research project involving the use of an
anabolic steroid if the project has been approved by the United States Food and
Drug Administration.
      (3)   Any person who sells, offers for sale, prescribes, dispenses, or
administers for livestock or other nonhuman species an anabolic steroid that is
expressly intended for administration through implants to livestock or other
nonhuman species and approved for that purpose under the "Federal Food, Drug
and Cosmetic Act" (21 U.S.C. §§ 301 et seq., as amended), and is sold, offered
for sale, prescribed, dispensed, or administered for that purpose in accordance
with that Act.
   (c)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of the
following:
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (c)(2) of this section,
trafficking in controlled substances is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, if the offense
involves a gift of 20 grams or less of marihuana, trafficking in marihuana is a
minor misdemeanor upon a first offense and a misdemeanor of the third degree
upon a subsequent offense.  If the offense involves a gift of 20 grams or less
of marihuana and if the offense was committed in the vicinity of a school or in
the vicinity of a juvenile, trafficking in marihuana is a misdemeanor of the
third degree.
   (d)   In addition to any prison term authorized or required by subsection
(c) of this section and Ohio R.C. 2929.13 and 2929.14, and in addition to any
other sanction imposed for the offense under this section or Ohio R.C. 2929.11
through 2929.18, the court that sentences a person who is convicted of or
pleads guilty to a violation of subsection (a) of this section may suspend the
driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit of the offender in accordance
with R.C. § 2925.03(G). However, if the offender pleaded guilty to or was
convicted of a violation of R.C. § 4511.19 or a substantially similar municipal
ordinance or the law of another state or the United States arising out of the
same set of circumstances as the violation, the court shall suspend the
offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit in accordance with
R.C. § 2925.03(G). If the offender is a professionally licensed person, the
court immediately shall comply with R.C. § 2925.38.
   (e)   (1)   Notwithstanding any contrary provision of Ohio R.C. 3719.21 and
except as provided in Ohio R.C. 2925.03(H), the Clerk of the Court shall pay
any mandatory fine imposed pursuant to this section and any fine other than a
mandatory fine that is imposed for a violation of this section pursuant to Ohio
R.C. 2929.18(A) or (B)(5) to the County, Township, municipality, park district,
as created pursuant to Ohio R.C. 511.18 or 1545.04, or state law enforcement
agencies in this state that primarily were responsible for or involved in
making the arrest of, and in prosecuting, the offender. However, the Clerk
shall not pay a mandatory fine so imposed to a law enforcement agency unless
the agency has adopted a written internal control policy under subsection (e)
(2) of this section that addresses the use of the fine monies that it receives.
Each agency shall use the mandatory fines so paid to subsidize the agency's law
enforcement efforts that pertain to drug offenses, in accordance with the
written internal control policy adopted by the recipient agency under
subsection (e)(2) of this section.
      (2)   Prior to receiving any fine monies under subsection (e)(1) of this
section or Ohio R.C. 2925.42(B), a law enforcement agency shall adopt a written
internal control policy that addresses the agency’s use and disposition of all
fine monies so received and that provides for the keeping of detailed financial
records of the receipts of those fine monies, the general types of expenditures
made out of those fine monies, and the specific amount of each general type of
expenditure. The policy shall not provide for or permit the identification of
any specific expenditure that is made in an ongoing investigation. All
financial records of the receipts of those fine monies, the general type of
expenditures made out of those fine monies, and the specific amount of each
general type of expenditure by an agency are public records open for inspection
under Ohio R.C. 149.43. Additionally, a written internal control policy adopted
under this subsection is such a public record, and the agency that adopted it
shall comply with it.
      (3)   As used in subsection (e) of this section:
         A.   "Law enforcement agencies" includes, but is not limited to, the
state Board of Pharmacy and the office of a prosecutor.
         B.   "Prosecutor" has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2935.01.
   (f)   As used in this section, "drug" includes any substance that is
represented to be a drug.
(ORC 2925.03)
Statutory reference:
   Felony drug trafficking offenses, see Ohio R.C. 2925.03(C)
§ 624.025  CULTIVATION OF MARIHUANA.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly cultivate marihuana.
   (b)   This section does not apply to any person listed in Ohio R.C. 2925.03
(B)(1), (2) or (3), or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, to the
extent and under the circumstances described in that subsection.
   (c)   Whoever commits a violation of subsection (a) of this section is
guilty of illegal cultivation of marihuana.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in the following subsections, illegal
cultivation of marihuana is a minor misdemeanor or, if the offense was
committed in the vicinity of a school or in the vicinity of a juvenile, a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
      (2)   If the amount of marihuana involved equals or exceeds 100 grams but
is less than 200 grams, illegal cultivation of marihuana is a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree or, if the offense was committed in the vicinity of a school
or in the vicinity of a juvenile, a misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (3)   If the amount of marihuana involved equals or exceeds 200 grams,
illegal cultivation of marihuana is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
   (d)   In addition to any prison term authorized or required by subsection
(c) of this section and Ohio R.C. 2929.13 and 2929.14, and in addition to any
other sanction imposed for the offense under this section or Ohio R.C. 2929.11
through 2929.18, the court that sentences a person who is convicted of or
pleads guilty to a violation of subsection (a) of this section may suspend the
offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit in accordance with
R.C. § 2925.03(G). However, if the offender pleaded guilty to or was convicted
of a violation of R.C. § 4511.19 or a substantially similar municipal ordinance
or the law of another state or the United States arising out of the same set of
circumstances as the violation, the court shall suspend the offender’s driver’s
or commercial driver’s license or permit in accordance with R.C. § 2925.03(G).
If the offender is a professionally licensed person, the court immediately
shall comply with R.C. § 2925.38.
   (e)   Arrest or conviction for a minor misdemeanor violation of this section
does not constitute a criminal record and need not be reported by the person so
arrested or convicted in response to any inquiries about the person’s criminal
record, including any inquiries contained in any application for employment,
license, or other right or privilege, or made in connection with the person’s
appearance as a witness.
   (f)   (1)   If the sentencing court suspends the offender’s driver’s or
commercial driver’s license or permit under this section in accordance with
R.C. § 2925.03(G), the offender may request termination of, and the court may
terminate, the suspension of the offender in accordance with that division.
      (2)   A.   Any offender who received a mandatory suspension of the
offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit under this section
prior to September 13, 2016 may file a motion with the sentencing court
requesting the termination of the suspension. However, an offender who pleaded
guilty to or was convicted of a violation of R.C. § 4511.19 or a substantially
similar municipal ordinance or law of another state or the United States that
arose out of the same set of circumstances as the violation for which the
offender’s license or permit was suspended under this section shall not file
such a motion.
         B.   Upon the filing of a motion under this division (f)(2), the
sentencing court, in its discretion, may terminate the suspension.
(ORC 2925.04)
§ 624.03  DRUG POSSESSION OFFENSES.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly obtain, possess, or use a controlled
substance or a controlled substance analog.
   (b)   (1)   This section does not apply to any of the following:
         A.   Manufacturers, licensed health professionals authorized to
prescribe drugs, pharmacists, owners of pharmacies, and other persons whose
conduct is in accordance with R.C. Chapters 3719, 4715, 4723, 4729, 4730, 4731
and 4741.
         B.   If the offense involves an anabolic steroid, any person who is
conducting or participating in a research project involving the use of an
anabolic steroid if the project has been approved by the United States Food and
Drug Administration.
         C.   Any person who sells, offers for sale, prescribes, dispenses or
administers for livestock or other nonhuman species an anabolic steroid that is
expressly intended for administration through implants to livestock or other
nonhuman species and approved for that purpose under the Federal Food, Drug and
Cosmetic Act, and is sold, offered for sale, prescribed, dispensed or
administered for that purpose in accordance with that Act.
         D.   Any person who obtained the controlled substance pursuant to a
prescription issued by a licensed health professional authorized to prescribe
drugs.
      (2)   A.   As used in division (b)(2) of this section:
            1.   “Community addiction services provider.” Has the same meaning
as in R.C. § 5119.01.
            2.   “Community control sanction.” Has the same meanings as in R.C.
§ 2929.01
            3.   “Drug treatment program.” Has the same meanings as in R.C. §
2929.01.
            4.   “Health care facility.” Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
2919.16.
            5.   “Minor drug possession offense.” A violation of this section
or R.C. § 2925.11 that is a misdemeanor or a felony of the fifth degree.
            6.   “Peace officer.” Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2935.01.
            7.   “Post-release control sanction.” Has the same meaning as in
R.C. § 2967.28.
            8.   “Public agency.” Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2930.01.
            9.   “Qualified individual.” A person who is not on community
control or post-release control and is a person acting in good faith who seeks
or obtains medical assistance for another person who is experiencing a drug
overdose, a person who experiences a drug overdose and who seeks medical
assistance for that overdose, or a person who is the subject of another person
seeking or obtaining medical assistance for that overdose as described in
division (b)(2)B. of this section.
            10.   “Seek or obtain medical assistance.” Includes, but is not
limited to making a 9-1-1 call, contacting in person or by telephone call an
on-duty peace officer, or transporting or presenting a person to a health care
facility.
         B.   Subject to division (b)(2)F. of this section, a qualified
individual shall not be arrested, charged, prosecuted, convicted, or penalized
pursuant to this chapter for a minor drug possession offense if all of the
following apply:
            1.   The evidence of the obtaining, possession, or use of the
controlled substance or controlled substance analog that would be the basis of
the offense was obtained as a result of the qualified individual seeking the
medical assistance or experiencing an overdose and needing medical assistance.
            2.   Subject to division (b)(2)G. of this section, within 30 days
after seeking or obtaining the medical assistance, the qualified individual
seeks and obtains a screening and receives a referral for treatment from a
community addiction services provider or a properly credentialed addiction
treatment professional.
            3.   Subject to division (b)(2)G. of this section, the qualified
individual who obtains a screening and receives a referral for treatment under
division (b)(2)B.2. of this section, upon the request of any prosecuting
attorney, submits documentation to the prosecuting attorney that verifies that
the qualified individual satisfied the requirements of that division. The
documentation shall be limited to the date and time of the screening obtained
and referral received.
         C.   If a person is found to be in violation of any community control
sanction and if the violation is a result of either of the following, the court
shall first consider ordering the person’s participation or continued
participation in a drug treatment program or mitigating the penalty specified
in R.C. § 2929.13, 2929.15, or 2929.25, or any substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, whichever is applicable, after which the court has the
discretion either to order the person’s participation or continued
participation in a drug treatment program or to impose the penalty with the
mitigating factor specified in any of those applicable sections:
            1.   Seeking or obtaining medical assistance in good faith for
another person who is experiencing a drug overdose;
            2.   Experiencing a drug overdose and seeking medical assistance
for that overdose or being the subject of another person seeking or obtaining
medical assistance for that overdose as described in division (b)(2)B. of this
section.
         D.   If a person is found to be in violation of any post-release
control sanction and if the violation is a result of either of the following,
the court or the parole board shall first consider ordering the person’s
participation or continued participation in a drug treatment program or
mitigating the penalty specified in R.C. § 2929.141 or 2967.28, whichever is
applicable, after which the court or the parole board has the discretion either
to order the person’s participation or continued participation in a drug
treatment program or to impose the penalty with the mitigating factor specified
in either of those applicable sections:
            1.   Seeking or obtaining medical assistance in good faith for
another person who is experiencing a drug overdose;
            2.   Experiencing a drug overdose and seeking medical assistance
for that emergency or being the subject of another person seeking or obtaining
medical assistance for that overdose as described in division (b)(2)B. of this
section.
         E.   Nothing in division (b)(2)B. of this section shall be construed
to do any of the following:
            1.   Limit the admissibility of any evidence in connection with the
investigation or prosecution of a crime with regards to a defendant who does
not qualify for the protections of division (b)(2)B. of this section or with
regards to any crime other than a minor drug possession offense committed by a
person who qualifies for protection pursuant to division (b)(2)B. of this
section for a minor drug possession offense;
            2.   Limit any seizure of evidence or contraband otherwise
permitted by law;
            3.   Limit or abridge the authority of a peace officer to detain or
take into custody a person in the course of an investigation or to effectuate
an arrest for any offense except as provided in that division;
            4.   Limit, modify, or remove any immunity from liability available
pursuant to law in effect prior to September 13, 2016 to any public agency or
to an employee of any public agency.
         F.   Division (b)(2)B. of this section does not apply to any person
who twice previously has been granted an immunity under division (b)(2)B. of
this section. No person shall be granted an immunity under division (b)(2)B. of
this section more than two times.
         G.   Nothing in this section shall compel any qualified individual to
disclose protected health information in a way that conflicts with the
requirements of the “Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of
1996,” 104 Pub. L. No. 191, 110 Stat. 2021, 42 U.S.C. §§ 1320d et seq., as
amended, and regulations promulgated by the United States Department of Health
and Human Services to implement the act or the requirements of 42 C.F.R. Part
2.
   (c)   Whoever violates subsection (a) of this section is guilty of one of
the following:
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in subsections (c)(2), (c)(3), (c)(4),
and (c)(5), if the drug involved in the violation is a compound, mixture,
preparation, or substance included in Schedule I or II of Ohio R.C. 3719.41, or
is cocaine, L.S.D., heroin, or a controlled substance analog, or a compound,
mixture or preparation containing such drugs, possession of drugs is a felony
to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   If the drug involved is a compound, mixture, preparation, or
substance included in Schedule III, IV, or V of Ohio R.C. 3719.41, whoever
violates subsection (a) of this section is guilty of possession of drugs. The
penalty for the offense shall be determined as follows:
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in the following subsection,
possession of drugs is a misdemeanor of the first degree or, if the offender
previously has been convicted of a drug abuse offense, it is a  felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate State law.
         B.   If the amount of the drug involved equals or exceeds the bulk
amount, possession of drugs is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
      (3)   If the drug involved in the violation is marihuana or a compound,
mixture, preparation or substance containing marihuana other than hashish,
whoever violates subsection (a) of this section is guilty of possession of
marihuana. The penalty for the offense shall be determined as follows:
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in the following subsections,
possession of marihuana is a minor misdemeanor.
         B.   If the amount of the drug involved equals or exceeds 100 grams
but is less than 200 grams, possession of marihuana is a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree.
         C.   If the amount of the drug involved equals or exceeds 200 grams,
possession of marihuana is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state
law.
      (4)   If the drug involved in the violation is hashish or a compound,
mixture, preparation or substance containing hashish, whoever violates
subsection (a) of this section is guilty of possession of hashish. The penalty
for the offense shall be determined as follows:
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in the following subsections,
possession of hashish is a minor misdemeanor.
         B.   If the amount of the drug involved equals or exceeds five grams
but is less than ten grams of hashish in a solid form or equals or exceeds one
gram but is less than two grams of hashish in a liquid concentrate, liquid
extract, or liquid distillate form, possession of hashish is a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree.
         C.   If the amount of the drug involved equals or exceeds ten grams of
hashish in a solid form or equals or exceeds two grams of hashish in a liquid
concentrate, liquid extract, or liquid distillate form, possession of hashish
is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (d)   Arrest or conviction for a minor misdemeanor violation of this section
does not constitute a criminal record and need not be reported by the person so
arrested or convicted in response to any inquiries about the person’s criminal
record, including any inquiries contained in any application for employment,
license, or other right or privilege, or made in connection with the person’s
appearance as a witness.
   (e)   In addition to any prison term or jail term authorized or required by
subsection (c) of this section and Ohio R.C. 2929.13, 2929.14, 2929.22,
2929.24, and 2929.25, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, and
in addition to any other sanction that is imposed for the offense under this
section or Ohio R.C. 2929.11 through 2929.18, or Ohio R.C. 2929.21 to 2929.28,
or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the court that sentences
an offender who is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of subsection
(a) of this section may suspend the offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s
license or permit for not more than five years. However, if the offender
pleaded guilty to or was convicted of a violation of R.C. § 4511.19 or a
substantially similar municipal ordinance or the law of another state or the
United States arising out of the same set of circumstances as the violation,
the court shall suspend the offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license
or permit for not more than five years. If applicable, the court also shall do
the following:
      (1)   Notwithstanding any contrary provision of Ohio R.C. 3719.21, the
Clerk of Court shall pay a fine imposed for a violation of this section
pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2929.18(A) in accordance with and subject to the
requirements of Ohio R.C. 2925.03(F). The agency that receives the fine shall
use the fine as specified in Ohio R.C. 2925.03(F).
      (2)   If the offender is a professionally licensed person, in addition to
any other sanction imposed for a violation of this section, the court
immediately shall comply with Ohio R.C. 2925.38.
   (f)   (1)   Any offender who received a mandatory suspension of the
offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit under this section
prior to September 13, 2016 may file a motion with the sentencing court
requesting the termination of the suspension. However, an offender who pleaded
guilty to or was convicted of a violation of R.C. § 4511.19 or a substantially
similar municipal ordinance or law of another state or the United States that
arose out of the same set of circumstances as the violation for which the
offender’s license or permit was suspended under this section shall not file
such a motion.
      (2)   Upon the filing of a motion under division (f) of this section, the
sentencing court, in its discretion, may terminate the suspension.
(ORC 2925.11)
Statutory reference:
   Felony drug possession offenses, see Ohio R.C. 2925.11(C)
§ 624.04  POSSESSION OF DRUG ABUSE INSTRUMENTS.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly make, obtain, possess, or use any
instrument, article, or thing the customary and primary purpose of which is for
the administration or use of a dangerous drug, other than marihuana, when the
instrument involved is a hypodermic or syringe, whether or not of crude or
extemporized manufacture or assembly, and the instrument, article, or thing
involved has been used by the offender to unlawfully administer or use a
dangerous drug, other than marihuana, or to prepare a dangerous drug, other
than marihuana, for unlawful administration or use.
   (b)   This section does not apply to manufacturers, licensed health
professionals authorized to prescribe drugs, pharmacists, owners of pharmacies,
and other persons whose conduct was in accordance with Ohio R.C. Chapters 3719,
4715, 4723, 4729, 4730, 4731, and 4741.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of possessing drug abuse
instruments, a misdemeanor of the second degree. If the offender previously has
been convicted of a drug abuse offense, violation of this section is a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
   (d)   (1)   In addition to any other sanction imposed upon an offender for a
violation of this section, the court may suspend for not more than five years
the offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit. However, if
the offender pleaded guilty to or was convicted of a violation of R.C. §
4511.19 or a substantially similar municipal ordinance or the law of another
state or the United States arising out of the same set of circumstances as the
violation, the court shall suspend the offender’s driver’s or commercial
driver’s license or permit for not more than five years. If the offender is a
professionally licensed person, in addition to any other sanction imposed for a
violation of this section, the court immediately shall comply with R.C. §
2925.38.
      (2)   A.   Any offender who received a mandatory suspension of the
offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit under this section
prior to September 13, 2016 may file a motion with the sentencing court
requesting the termination of the suspension. However, an offender who pleaded
guilty to or was convicted of a violation of R.C. § 4511.19 or a substantially
similar municipal ordinance or law of another state or the United States that
arose out of the same set of circumstances as the violation for which the
offender’s license or permit was suspended under this section shall not file
such a motion.
         B.   Upon the filing of a motion under division (d)(2) of this
section, the sentencing court, in its discretion, may terminate the suspension.
(ORC 2925.12)
§ 624.05  PERMITTING DRUG ABUSE.
   (a)   No person who is the owner, operator, or person in charge of a
locomotive, watercraft, aircraft, or other vehicle, as defined in Ohio R.C.
4501.01, shall knowingly permit the vehicle to be used for the commission of a
felony drug abuse offense.
   (b)   No person, who is the owner, lessee, or occupant, or who has custody,
control, or supervision of premises, or real estate, including vacant land,
shall knowingly permit his or her premises, or real estate, including vacant
land, to be used for the commission of a felony drug abuse offense by another
person.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of permitting drug abuse.
      (1)   Except as provided in subsection (c)(2) of this section, permitting
drug abuse is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (2)   Permitting drug abuse is a felony, and punishable under appropriate
state law, if the felony drug abuse offense in question is a violation of Ohio
R.C. 2925.02 or 2925.03.
   (d)   (1)   In addition to any prison term authorized or required by
division (c) of this section and R.C. §§ 2929.13 and 2929.14 and in addition to
any other sanction imposed for the offense under this section or R.C. §§
2929.11 to 2929.18, the court that sentences a person who is convicted of or
pleads guilty to a violation of division (a) of this section may suspend for
not more than five years the offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license
or permit. However, if the offender pleaded guilty to or was convicted of a
violation of R.C. § 4511.19 or a substantially similar municipal ordinance or
the law of another state or the United States arising out of the same set of
circumstances as the violation, the court shall suspend the offender’s driver’s
or commercial driver’s license or permit for not more than five years. If the
offender is a professionally licensed person, in addition to any other sanction
imposed for a violation of this section, the court immediately shall comply
with R.C. § 2925.38.
      (2)   A.   Any offender who received a mandatory suspension of the
offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit under this section
prior to September 13, 2016 may file a motion with the sentencing court
requesting the termination of the suspension. However, an offender who pleaded
guilty to or was convicted of a violation of R.C. § 4511.19 or a substantially
similar municipal ordinance or law of another state or the United States that
arose out of the same set of circumstances as the violation for which the
offender’s license or permit was suspended under this section shall not file
such a motion.
         B.   Upon the filing of a motion under division (d)(2) of this
section, the sentencing court, in its discretion, may terminate the suspension.
   (e)   Notwithstanding any contrary provision of Ohio R.C. 3719.21, the Clerk
of Court shall pay a fine imposed for a violation of this section pursuant to
Ohio R.C. 2929.18(A) in accordance with and subject to the requirements of Ohio
R.C. 2925.03(F). The agency that receives the fine shall use the fine as
specified in Ohio R.C. 2925.03(F).
   (f)   Any premises or real estate that is permitted to be used in violation
of subsection (b) of this section constitutes a nuisance subject to abatement
pursuant to Ohio R.C. Chapter 3767.
(ORC 2925.13)
§ 624.06  DECEPTION TO OBTAIN A DANGEROUS DRUG.(Repealed)
Editor's note:
   Section
624.06 was repealed as part of the 1992 updating and revision of these Codified
Ordinances because a violation of substantially identical state law (Ohio R.C.
2925.22) was made a felony by the Ohio General Assembly by Am. Sub. H.B. No.
615, effective March 27, 1991.
§ 624.07  ABUSING HARMFUL INTOXICANTS.
   (a)   Except for lawful research, clinical, medical, dental, or veterinary
purposes, no person, with purpose to induce intoxication or similar
physiological effects, shall obtain, possess, or use a harmful intoxicant.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of abusing harmful
intoxicants, a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously has
been convicted of a drug abuse offense, abusing harmful intoxicants is a felony
to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (c)   (1)   In addition to any other sanction imposed upon an offender for a
violation of this section, the court may suspend for not more than five years
the offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit. However, if
the offender pleaded guilty to or was convicted of a violation of R.C. §
4511.19 or a substantially similar municipal ordinance or the law of another
state or the United States arising out of the same set of circumstances as the
violation, the court shall suspend the offender’s driver’s or commercial
driver’s license or permit for not more than five years. If the offender is a
professionally licensed person, in addition to any other sanction imposed for a
violation of this section, the court immediately shall comply with R.C. §
2925.38.
      (2)   A.   Any offender who received a mandatory suspension of the
offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit under this section
prior to the September 13, 2016 may file a motion with the sentencing court
requesting the termination of the suspension. However, an offender who pleaded
guilty to or was convicted of a violation of R.C. § 4511.19 or a substantially
similar municipal ordinance or law of another state or the United States that
arose out of the same set of circumstances as the violation for which the
offender’s license or permit was suspended under this section shall not file
such a motion.
         B.   Upon the filing of a motion under division (c)(2) of this
section, the sentencing court, in its discretion, may terminate the suspension.
(ORC 2925.31)
§ 624.073  IMPROPERLY DISPENSING OR DISTRIBUTING NITROUS OXIDE.
   (a)   No person who dispenses or distributes nitrous oxide in cartridges
shall fail to comply with either of the following:
      (1)   The record-keeping requirements established under subsection (c) of
this section.
      (2)   The labeling and transaction identification requirements
established under subsection (d) of this section.
   (b)   Whoever violates subsection (a)(1) or (a)(2) of this section is guilty
of improperly dispensing or distributing nitrous oxide, a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree.
   (c)   Beginning July 1, 2001, a person who dispenses or distributes nitrous
oxide shall record each transaction involving the dispensing or distribution of
the nitrous oxide on a separate card. The person shall require the purchaser to
sign the card and provide a complete residence address. The person dispensing
or distributing the nitrous oxide shall sign and date the card. The person
shall retain the card recording a transaction for one year from the date of the
transaction. The person shall maintain the cards at the person's business
address and make them available during normal business hours for inspection and
copying by officers or employees of the state Board of Pharmacy or of other law
enforcement agencies that are authorized to investigate violations of this
code, Ohio R.C. Chapters 2925, 3719, or 4729, or federal drug abuse control
laws. The cards used to record each transaction shall inform the purchaser of
the following:
      (1)   That nitrous oxide cartridges are to be used only for purposes of
preparing food;
      (2)   That inhalation of nitrous oxide can have dangerous health effects;
and
      (3)   That it is a violation of state law to distribute or dispense
cartridges of nitrous oxide to any person under age 21, punishable as a felony
of the fifth degree.
   (d)   (1)   Each cartridge of nitrous oxide dispensed or distributed in this
municipality shall bear the following printed warning:  "Nitrous oxide
cartridges are to be used only for purposes of preparing food. Nitrous oxide
cartridges may not be sold to persons under age 21. Do not inhale contents.
Misuse can be dangerous to your health."
      (2)   Each time a person dispenses or distributes one or more cartridges
of nitrous oxide, the person shall mark the packaging containing the cartridges
with a label or other device that identifies the person who dispensed or
distributed the nitrous oxide and the person's business address.
(ORC 2925.32(B)(4), (D)(2), (F), (G))
Statutory reference:
   Trafficking in harmful intoxicants, felony offenses, see Ohio R.C. 2925.32
§ 624.076  POSSESSING NITROUS OXIDE IN MOTOR VEHICLES.
   (a)   As used in this section, "motor vehicle", "street", and "highway" have
the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 4511.01.
   (b)   Unless authorized by these Codified Ordinances or by state law, no
person shall possess an open cartridge of nitrous oxide in either of the
following circumstances:
      (1)   While operating or being a passenger in or on a motor vehicle on a
street, highway, or other public or private property open to the public for
purposes of vehicular traffic or parking.
      (2)   While being in or on a stationary motor vehicle on a street,
highway, or other public or private property open to the public for purposes of
vehicular traffic or parking.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of possessing nitrous oxide in
a motor vehicle, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
   (d)   In addition to any other sanction imposed upon an offender for
possessing nitrous oxide in a motor vehicle, the court may suspend for not more
than five years the offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or
permit.
(ORC 2925.33)
§ 624.08  ILLEGAL DISPENSING OF DRUG SAMPLES.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly furnish a sample drug to another person.
   (b)   Division (a) of this section does not apply to manufacturers,
wholesalers, pharmacists, owners of pharmacies, licensed health professionals
authorized to prescribe drugs, and other persons whose conduct is in accordance
with Ohio R.C. Chapters 3719, 4715, 4723, 4725, 4729, 4730, 4731, and 4741.
   (c)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of illegal dispensing of
drug samples.
      (2)   If the drug involved in the offense is a compound, mixture,
preparation, or substance included in Schedule I or II of Ohio R.C. 3719.41
with the exception of marihuana, illegal dispensing of drug samples is a felony
to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (3)   If the drug involved in the offense is a dangerous drug or a
compound, mixture, preparation, or substance included in Schedule III, IV or V
of Ohio R.C. 3719.41, or is marihuana, the penalty for the offense shall be
determined as follows:
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in the following subsection, illegal
dispensing of drug samples is a misdemeanor of the second degree.
         B.   If the offense was committed in the vicinity of a school or in
the vicinity of a juvenile, illegal dispensing of drug samples is a misdemeanor
of the first degree.
   (d)   (1)   In addition to any prison term authorized or required by
division (c) of this section and R.C. §§ 2929.13 and 2929.14 and in addition to
any other sanction imposed for the offense under this section or R.C. §§
2929.11 to 2929.18, the court that sentences an offender who is convicted of or
pleads guilty to a violation of division (a) of this section may suspend for
not more than five years the offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license
or permit. However, if the offender pleaded guilty to or was convicted of a
violation of R.C. § 4511.19 or a substantially similar municipal ordinance or
the law of another state or the United States arising out of the same set of
circumstances as the violation, the court shall suspend the offender’s driver’s
or commercial driver’s license or permit for not more than five years. If the
offender is a professionally licensed person, in addition to any other sanction
imposed for a violation of this section, the court immediately shall comply
with R.C. § 2925.38.
      (2)   A.   Any offender who received a mandatory suspension of the
offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit under this section
prior to September 13, 2016 may file a motion with the sentencing court
requesting the termination of the suspension. However, an offender who pleaded
guilty to or was convicted of a violation of R.C. § 4511.19 or a substantially
similar municipal ordinance or law of another state or the United States that
arose out of the same set of circumstances as the violation for which the
offender’s license or permit was suspended under this section shall not file
such a motion.
         B.   Upon the filing of a motion under division (d)(2) of this
section, the sentencing court, in its discretion, may terminate the suspension.
   (e)   Notwithstanding any contrary provision of Ohio R.C. 3719.21, the Clerk
of Court shall pay a fine imposed for a violation of this section pursuant to
Ohio R.C. 2929.18(A) in accordance with and subject to the requirements of Ohio
R.C. 2925.03(F). The agency that receives the fine shall use the fine as
specified in Ohio R.C. 2925.03(F).
(ORC 2925.36)
Statutory reference:
   Felony offenses, see Ohio R.C. 2925.36(C)(2)
§ 624.09  POSSESSION, SALE AND DISPOSAL OF HYPODERMICS.
   (a)   Possession of a hypodermic is authorized for the following:
      (1)   A manufacturer or distributor of, or dealer in hypodermics, or
medication packaged in hypodermics, and any authorized agent of employee of
that manufacturer, distributor or dealer, in the regular course of business;
      (2)   A terminal distributor of dangerous drugs, in the regular course of
business;
      (3)   A person authorized to administer injections, in the regular course
of the person's profession or employment;
      (4)   A person, when the hypodermic in his possession was lawfully
obtained and is kept and used for the purpose of self-administration of insulin
or other drug prescribed for the treatment of disease by a licensed health
professional authorized to prescribe drugs;
      (5)   A person whose use of a hypodermic is for legal research, clinical,
educational or medicinal purposes;
      (6)   A farmer, for the lawful administration of a drug to an animal;
      (7)   A person whose use of a hypodermic is for lawful professional,
mechanical, trade or craft purposes.
   (b)   No manufacturer or distributor of, or dealer in, hypodermics or
medication packaged in hypodermics, or their authorized agents or employees,
and no terminal distributor of dangerous drugs, shall display any hypodermic
for sale. No person authorized to possess a hypodermic pursuant to subsection
(a) of this section shall negligently fail to take reasonable precautions to
prevent any hypodermic in the person's possession from theft or acquisition by
any unauthorized person.
(ORC 3719.172(A), (B))
   (c)   Whoever violates subsection (b) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree. If the offender previously has been convicted
of a violation of subsection (b) of this section, Ohio R.C. 3719.05, 3719.06,
3719.13, 3719.172(B), or 3719.31, or a drug abuse offense, a violation of
subsection (b) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(ORC 3719.99(E))
Statutory reference:
   Felony offenses, see Ohio R.C. 3719.172(C), (D)
§ 624.10  EVIDENCE.
   (a)   (1)   In any criminal prosecution for a violation of this chapter or
Ohio R.C. Chapters 2925 or 3719, a laboratory report from the Bureau of
Criminal Identification and Investigation or a laboratory operated by another
law enforcement agency, or a laboratory established by or under the authority
of an institution of higher education that has its main campus in this state
and that is accredited by the Association of American Universities or the North
Central Association of Colleges and Secondary Schools, primarily for the
purpose of providing scientific service to law enforcement agencies, and signed
by the person performing the analysis, stating that the substance that is the
basis of the alleged offense has been weighed and analyzed and stating the
findings as to the content, weight, and identity of the substance and that it
contains any amount of a controlled substance and the number and description of
unit dosages, is prima facie evidence of the content, identity, and weight or
the existence and number of unit dosages of the substance. In any criminal
prosecution for a violation of Ohio R.C. 2925.041 or a violation of this
chapter, Ohio R.C. Chapter 2925 or Ohio R.C. Chapter 3719 that is based on the
possession of chemicals sufficient to produce a compound, mixture, preparation,
or substance included in Schedule I, II, III, IV, or V, a laboratory report
from the Bureau or from any laboratory that is operated or established as
described in this subsection that is signed by the person performing the
analysis, stating that the substances that are the basis of the alleged offense
have been weighed and analyzed and stating the findings as to the content,
weight, and identity of each of the substances, is prima facie evidence of the
content, identity, and weight of the substances.
      (2)   Attached to that report shall be a copy of a notarized statement by
the signer of the report giving the name of the signer and stating that the
signer is an employee of the laboratory issuing the report and that performing
the analysis is a part of the signer's regular duties, and giving an outline of
the signer's education, training, and experience for performing an analysis of
materials included under this section. The signer shall attest that
scientifically accepted tests were performed with due caution, and that the
evidence was handled in accordance with established and accepted procedures
while in the custody of the laboratory.
   (b)   The prosecuting attorney shall serve a copy of the report on the
attorney of record for the accused, or on the accused if the accused has no
attorney, prior to any proceeding in which the report is to be used against the
accused other than at a preliminary hearing or grand jury proceeding where the
report may be used without having been previously served upon the accused.
   (c)   The report shall not be prima facie evidence of the contents,
identity, and weight or the existence and number of unit dosages of the
substance if the accused or the accused's attorney demands the testimony of the
person signing the report, by serving the demand upon the prosecuting attorney,
within seven days from the accused or the accused's attorney's receipt of the
report. The time may be extended by a trial judge in the interests of justice.
   (d)   Any report issued for use under this section shall contain notice of
the right of the accused to demand, and the manner in which the accused shall
demand, the testimony of the person signing the report.
   (e)   Any person who is accused of a violation of this chapter or Ohio R.C.
Chapters 2925 or 3719 is entitled, upon written request made to the prosecuting
attorney, to have a portion of the substance that is, or of each of the
substances that are, the basis of the alleged violation preserved for the
benefit of independent analysis performed by a laboratory analyst employed by
the accused person, or, if the accused is indigent, by a qualified laboratory
analyst appointed by the court. Such portion shall be a representative sample
of the entire substance that is, or of each of the substances that are, the
basis of the alleged violation and shall be of sufficient size, in the opinion
of the court, to permit the accused's analyst to make a thorough scientific
analysis concerning the identity of the substance or substances. The
prosecuting attorney shall provide the accused's analyst with the sample
portion at least 14 days prior to trial, unless the trial is to be held in a
court not of record or unless the accused person is charged with a minor
misdemeanor, in which case the prosecuting attorney shall provide the accused's
analyst with the sample portion at least three days prior to trial. If the
prosecuting attorney determines that such a sample portion cannot be preserved
and given to the accused's analyst, the prosecuting attorney shall so inform
the accused person, or the accused's attorney. In such a circumstance, the
accused person is entitled, upon written request made to the prosecuting
attorney, to have the accused's privately employed or court appointed analyst
present at an analysis of the substance that is, or the substances that are,
the basis of the alleged violation, and, upon further written request, to
receive copies of all recorded scientific data that result from the analysis
and that can be used by an analyst in arriving at conclusions, findings, or
opinions concerning the identity of the substance or substances subject to the
analysis.
   (f)   In addition to the rights provided under subsection (e) of this
section, any person who is accused of a violation of this chapter or Ohio R.C.
Chapters 2925 or 3719 that involves a bulk amount of a controlled substance, or
any multiple thereof, or who is accused of a violation of Ohio R.C. 2925.11 or
a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, other than a minor misdemeanor
violation, that involves marihuana, is entitled, upon written request made to
the prosecuting attorney, to have a laboratory analyst of the accused's choice,
or, if the accused is indigent, a qualified laboratory analyst appointed by the
court, present at a measurement or weighing of the substance that is the basis
of the alleged violation. Also, the accused person is entitled, upon further
written request, to receive copies of all recorded scientific data that result
from the measurement or weighing and that can be used by an analyst in arriving
at conclusions, findings, or opinions concerning the weight, volume, or number
of unit doses of the substance subject to the measurement or weighing.
(ORC 2925.51)
   (g)   In addition to the financial sanctions authorized or required under
Ohio R.C. 2929.18 and 2929.28 and to any costs otherwise authorized or required
under any provision of law, the court imposing sentence upon an offender who is
convicted of or pleads guilty to a drug abuse offense may order the offender to
pay to the state, municipal, or county law enforcement agencies that handled
the investigation and prosecution all of the costs that the state, municipal
corporation, or county reasonably incurred in having tests performed under this
section or Ohio R.C. 2925.51 or in any other manner on any substance that was
the basis of, or involved in, the offense to determine whether the substance
contained any amount of a controlled substance if the results of the tests
indicate that the substance tested contained any controlled substance. No court
shall order an offender under this section to pay the costs of tests performed
on a substance if the results of the tests do not indicate that the substance
tested contained any controlled substance. The court shall hold a hearing to
determine the amount of costs to be imposed under this section. The court may
hold the hearing as part of the sentencing hearing for the offender.
(ORC 2925.511)
§ 624.11  DOUBLE JEOPARDY.
   No person shall be prosecuted for a violation of this chapter if the person
has been acquitted or convicted under the federal drug abuse control laws of
the same act or omission which, it is alleged, constitutes a violation of this
chapter.
(ORC 2925.50, 3719.19)
§ 624.12  CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE SCHEDULES.
   Controlled Substance Schedules I, II, III, IV, and V, as established in Ohio
R.C. 3719.41 and amended by Ohio R.C. 3719.43 and 3719.44, are hereby adopted
by reference, and shall be treated as if set forth in full herein.
Statutory reference:
   For comprehensive lists of drugs identified under each of the following
Schedules, see Ohio R.C. 3719.41, as amended by Ohio R.C. 3719.43 and 3719.44:
   Schedule I
   (a)   Narcotics - opiates
   (b)   Narcotics - opium derivatives
   (c)   Hallucinogens
   (d)   Depressants
   (e)   Stimulants
   Schedule II
   (a)   Narcotics - opium and opium derivatives
   (b)   Narcotics - opiates
   (c)   Stimulants
   (d)   Depressants
   (e)   Hallucinogenic substances
   (f)   Immediate precursors
   Schedule III
   (a)   Stimulants
   (b)   Depressants
   (c)   Narcotic antidotes
   (d)   Narcotics - narcotic preparations
   (e)   Anabolic steroids
   (f)   Hallucinogenic substances
   Schedule IV
   (a)   Narcotic drugs
   (b)   Depressants
   (c)   Fenfluramine
   (d)   Stimulants
   (e)   Other substances
   Schedule V
   (a)   Narcotic drugs
   (b)   Narcotics - narcotic preparations
   (c)   Stimulants
§ 624.13  CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE OR PRESCRIPTION LABELS.
   (a)   Whenever a manufacturer sells a controlled substance, and whenever a
wholesaler, repackager, or outsourcing facility sells a controlled substance in
a package the wholesaler, repackager, or outsourcing facility has prepared, the
manufacturer or the wholesaler, repackager, or outsourcing facility, as the
case may be, shall securely affix to each package in which the controlled
substance is contained a label showing in legible English the name and address
of the vendor and the quantity, kind, and form of controlled substance
contained therein. No person, except a pharmacist for the purpose of dispensing
a controlled substance upon a prescription shall alter, deface, or remove any
label so affixed. As used in this division, “repackager” and “outsourcing
facility” have the same meanings as in R.C. § 4729.01.
   (b)   No person shall alter, deface or remove any label affixed pursuant to
Ohio R.C. 3719.08 as long as any of the original contents remain.
(ORC 3719.08(A), (E))
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of this
section, or Ohio R.C. 3719.07 or 3719.08, or a drug abuse offense, a violation
of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. If
the violation involves the sale, offer to sell, or possession of a Schedule I
or II controlled substance, with the exception of marihuana, and if the
offender, as a result of the violation, is a major drug offender, then Ohio
R.C. 3719.99(D) applies.
(ORC 3719.99(C))
§ 624.14  USE OR POSSESSION OF PARAPHERNALIA.
   (a)   As used in this section, "drug paraphernalia" means any equipment,
product, or material of any kind that is used by the offender, intended by the
offender for use, or designed for use, in propagating, cultivating, growing,
harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing,
preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing,
concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing into the
human body, a controlled substance in violation of this chapter. "Drug
paraphernalia" includes, but is not limited to, any of the following equipment,
products, or materials that are used by the offender, intended by the offender
for use, or designed by the offender for use, in any of the following manners:
      (1)   A kit for propagating, cultivating, growing, or harvesting any
species of a plant that is a controlled substance or from which a controlled
substance can be derived.
      (2)   A kit for manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing,
processing, or preparing a controlled substance.
      (3)   Any object, instrument, or device for manufacturing, compounding,
converting, producing, processing, or preparing methamphetamine.
      (4)   An isomerization device for increasing the potency of any species
of a plant that is a controlled substance.
      (5)   Testing equipment for identifying, or analyzing the strength,
effectiveness, or purity of, a controlled substance.
      (6)   A scale or balance for weighing or measuring a controlled
substance.
      (7)   A diluent or adulterant, such as quinine hydrochloride, mannitol,
mannite, dextrose, or lactose, for cutting a controlled substance.
      (8)   A separation gin or sifter for removing twigs and seeds from, or
otherwise cleaning or refining, marihuana.
      (9)   A blender, bowl, container, spoon, or mixing device for compounding
a controlled substance.
      (10)   A capsule, balloon, envelope, or container for packaging small
quantities of a controlled substance.
      (11)   A container or device for storing or concealing a controlled
substance.
      (12)   A hypodermic syringe, needle, or instrument for parenterally
injecting a controlled substance into the human body.
      (13)   An object, instrument, or device for ingesting, inhaling, or
otherwise introducing into the human body, marihuana, cocaine, hashish, or
hashish oil, such as a metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic, or
ceramic pipe, with or without a screen, permanent screen, hashish head, or
punctured metal bowl; water pipe; carburetion tube or device; smoking or
carburetion mask; roach clip or similar object used to hold burning material,
such as a marihuana cigarette, that has become too small or too short to be
held in the hand; miniature cocaine spoon, or cocaine vial; chamber pipe;
carburetor pipe; electric pipe; air driver pipe; chillum; bong; or ice pipe or
chiller.
   (b)   In determining if any equipment, product, or material is drug
paraphernalia, a court or law enforcement officer shall consider, in addition
to other relevant factors, the following:
      (1)   Any statement by the owner or by anyone in control of the
equipment, product, or material, concerning its use.
      (2)   The proximity in time or space of the equipment, product, or
material, or of the act relating to the equipment, product, or material, to a
violation of any provision of this chapter or Ohio R.C. Chapter 2925.
      (3)   The proximity of the equipment, product, or material to any
controlled substance.
      (4)   The existence of any residue of a controlled substance on the
equipment, product, or material.
      (5)   Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of the owner, or of
anyone in control, of the equipment, product, or material, to deliver it to any
person whom he or she knows intends to use the equipment, product, or material
to facilitate a violation of any provision of this chapter or Ohio R.C. Chapter
2925. A finding that the owner or anyone in control of the equipment, product,
or material is not guilty of a violation of any other provision of this chapter
or Ohio R.C. Chapter 2925 does not prevent a finding that the equipment,
product, or material was intended or designed by the offender for use as drug
paraphernalia.
      (6)   Any oral or written instruction provided with the equipment,
product, or material concerning its use.
      (7)   Any descriptive material accompanying the equipment, product, or
material and explaining or depicting its use.
      (8)   National or local advertising concerning the use of the equipment,
product, or material.
      (9)   The manner and circumstances in which the equipment, product, or
material is displayed for sale.
      (10)   Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of the sales of the
equipment, product, or material to the total sales of the business enterprise.
      (11)   The existence and scope of legitimate uses of the equipment,
product, or material in the community.
      (12)   Expert testimony concerning the use of the equipment, product, or
material.
   (c)   (1)   Subject to subsection (d)(2) of this section, no person shall
knowingly use, or possess with purpose to use, drug paraphernalia.
      (2)   No person shall knowingly sell, or possess or manufacture with
purpose to sell, drug paraphernalia, if he or she knows or reasonably should
know that the equipment, product, or material will be used as drug
paraphernalia.
      (3)   No person shall place an advertisement in any newspaper, magazine,
handbill, or other publication that is published and printed and circulates
primarily within this state, if he or she knows that the purpose of the
advertisement is to promote the illegal sale in this municipality or in this
state of the equipment, product, or material that the offender intended or
designed for use as drug paraphernalia.
   (d)   (1)   This section does not apply to manufacturers, licensed health
professionals authorized to prescribe drugs, pharmacists, owners of pharmacies,
and other persons whose conduct is in accordance with Ohio R.C. Chapters 3719,
4715, 4723, 4729, 4730, 4731, and 4741. This section shall not be construed to
prohibit the possession or use of a hypodermic as authorized by Ohio R.C.
3719.172.
      (2)   Subsection (c)(1) of this section does not apply to a person’s use,
or possession with purpose to use, any drug paraphernalia that is equipment, a
product, or material of any kind that is used by the person, intended by the
person for use, or designed for use in storing, containing, concealing,
injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing into the human body
marihuana.
   (e)   Notwithstanding Ohio R.C. Chapter 2981, any drug paraphernalia that
was used, possessed, sold, or manufactured in violation of this section shall
be seized, after a conviction for that violation, shall be forfeited, and upon
forfeiture shall be disposed of pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2981.12(B).
   (f)   (1)   Whoever violates subsection (c)(1) of this section is guilty of
illegal use or possession of drug paraphernalia, a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.
      (2)   Except as provided in subsection (f)(3) of this section, whoever
violates subsection (c)(2) of this section is guilty of dealing in drug
paraphernalia, a misdemeanor of the second degree.
      (3)   Whoever violates subsection (c)(2) of this section by selling drug
paraphernalia to a juvenile is guilty of selling drug paraphernalia to
juveniles, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (4)   Whoever violates subsection (c)(3) of this section is guilty of
illegal advertising of drug paraphernalia, a misdemeanor of the second degree.
   (g)   (1)   In addition to any other sanction imposed upon an offender for a
violation of this section, the court may suspend for not more than five years
the offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit. However, if
the offender pleaded guilty to or was convicted of a violation of R.C. §
4511.19 or a substantially similar municipal ordinance or the law of another
state or the United States arising out of the same set of circumstances as the
violation, the court shall suspend the offender’s driver’s or commercial
driver’s license or permit for not more than five years. If the offender is a
professionally licensed person, in addition to any other sanction imposed for a
violation of this section, the court immediately shall comply with R.C. §
2925.38.
      (2)   A.   Any offender who received a mandatory suspension of the
offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit under this section
prior to September 13, 2016 may file a motion with the sentencing court
requesting the termination of the suspension. However, an offender who pleaded
guilty to or was convicted of a violation of R.C. § 4511.19 or a substantially
similar municipal ordinance or law of another state or the United States that
arose out of the same set of circumstances as the violation for which the
offender’s license or permit was suspended under this section shall not file
such a motion.
         B.   Upon the filing of a motion under division (g)(2) of this
section, the sentencing court, in its discretion, may terminate the suspension.
(ORC 2925.14)
   (h)   Illegal use or possession of marihuana drug paraphernalia.
      (1)   As used in this subsection (h), “drug paraphernalia” has the same
meaning as in subsection (a) of this section.
      (2)   In determining if any equipment, product, or material is drug
paraphernalia, a court or law enforcement officer shall consider, in addition
to other relevant factors, all factors identified in subsection (b) of this
section.
      (3)   No person shall knowingly use, or possess with purpose to use, any
drug paraphernalia that is equipment, a product, or material of any kind that
is used by the person, intended by the person for use, or designed for use in
storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise
introducing into the human body marihuana.
      (4)   This subsection (h) does not apply to any person identified in
subsection (d)(1) of this section, and it shall not be construed to prohibit
the possession or use of a hypodermic as authorized by Ohio R.C. 3719.172.
      (5)   Subsection (e) of this section applies with respect to any drug
paraphernalia that was used or possessed in violation of this section.
      (6)   Whoever violates subsection (h)(3) of this section is guilty of
illegal use or possession of marihuana drug paraphernalia, a minor misdemeanor.
      (7)   A.   In addition to any other sanction imposed upon an offender for
a violation division (h) of this section, the court may suspend for not more
than five years the offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or
permit. However, if the offender pleaded guilty to or was convicted of a
violation of R.C. § 4511.19 or a substantially similar municipal ordinance or
the law of another state or the United States arising out of the same set of
circumstances as the violation, the court shall suspend the offender’s driver’s
or commercial driver’s license or permit for not more than five years. If the
offender is a professionally licensed person, in addition to any other sanction
imposed for a violation of division (h) of this section, the court immediately
shall comply with R.C. § 2925.38.
         B.   1.   Any offender who received a mandatory suspension of the
offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit under division (h)
of this section prior to September 13, 2016 may file a motion with the
sentencing court requesting the termination of the suspension. However, an
offender who pleaded guilty to or was convicted of a violation of R.C. §
4511.19 or a substantially similar municipal ordinance or law of another state
or the United States that arose out of the same set of circumstances as the
violation for which the offender’s license or permit was suspended under
division (h) of this section shall not file such a motion.
            2.   Upon the filing of a motion under division (h)(7)B. of this
section, the sentencing court, in its discretion, may terminate the suspension.
(ORC 2925.141)
§ 624.15  COUNTERFEIT CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly possess any counterfeit controlled
substance.
   (b)   Whoever violates subsection (a) of this section shall be guilty of
possession of counterfeit controlled substances, a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
   (c)   Notwithstanding any contrary provision of Ohio R.C. 3719.21, the Clerk
of Court shall pay a fine imposed for a violation of this section pursuant to
Ohio R.C. 2929.18(A) in accordance with and subject to the requirements of Ohio
R.C. 2925.03(F). The agency that receives the fine shall use the fine as
specified in Ohio R.C. 2925.03(F).
(ORC 2925.37(A), (G), (M))
Statutory reference:
   Trafficking, other felony counterfeit controlled substance offenses, see
Ohio R.C. 2925.37(H) - (K)
§ 624.16  PSEUDOEPHEDRINE SALES.
   (a)   Unlawful purchases.
      (1)   As used in divisions (a), (b), (c) and (d) of this section:
         A.   “Consumer product.” Any food or drink that is consumed or used by
humans and any drug, including a drug that may be provided legally only
pursuant to a prescription, that is intended to be consumed or used by humans.
         B.   “Ephedrine.” Any material, compound, mixture, or preparation that
contains any quantity of ephedrine, any of its salts, optical isomers, or salts
of optical isomers.
         C.   “Ephedrine product.” A consumer product that contains ephedrine.
         D.   “Pseudoephedrine.” Any material, compound, mixture, or
preparation that contains any quantity of pseudoephedrine, any of its salts,
optical isomers, or salts of optical isomers.
         E.   “Pseudoephedrine product.” A consumer product that contains
pseudoephedrine.
         F.   “Retailer.” A place of business that offers consumer products for
sale to the general public.
         G.   “Single-ingredient preparation.” A compound, mixture,
preparation, or substance that contains a single active ingredient.
         H.   “Terminal distributor of dangerous drugs.” Has the same meaning
as in R.C. § 4729.01.
      (2)   A.   1.   No individual shall knowingly purchase, receive, or
otherwise acquire an amount of pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product
that is greater than either of the following unless the pseudoephedrine product
or ephedrine product is dispensed by a pharmacist pursuant to a valid
prescription issued by a licensed health professional authorized to prescribe
drugs and the conduct of the pharmacist and the licensed health professional
authorized to prescribe drugs is in accordance with R.C. Chapter 3719, 4715,
4723, 4729, 4730, 4731, or 4741:
               a.   Three and six tenths grams within a period of a single day;
               b.   Nine grams within a period of 30 consecutive days.
            2.   The limits specified in divisions (a)(2)A.1.a. and (a)
(2)A.1.b. of this section apply to the total amount of base pseudoephedrine or
base ephedrine in the pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product,
respectively. The limits do not apply to the product’s overall weight.
         B.   It is not a violation of division (b)(1) of this section for an
individual to receive or accept more than an amount of pseudoephedrine product
or ephedrine product specified in division (a)(2)A.1.a. or (a)(2)A.1.b. of this
section if the individual is an employee of a retailer or terminal distributor
of dangerous drugs, and the employee receives or accepts from the retailer or
terminal distributor of dangerous drugs the pseudoephedrine product or
ephedrine product in a sealed container in connection with manufacturing,
warehousing, placement, stocking, bagging, loading, or unloading of the
product.
      (3)   A.   No individual under 18 years of age shall knowingly purchase,
receive, or otherwise acquire a pseudoephedrine product, or ephedrine product
unless the pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product is dispensed by a
pharmacist pursuant to a valid prescription issued by a licensed health
professional authorized to prescribe drugs and the conduct of the pharmacist
and the licensed health professional authorized to prescribe drugs is in
accordance with R.C. Chapter 3719, 4715, 4723, 4729, 4730, 4731, or 4741.
         B.   Division (a)(3)A. of this section does not apply to an individual
under 18 years of age who purchases, receives, or otherwise acquires a
pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product from any of the following:
            1.   A licensed health professional authorized to prescribe drugs
or pharmacist who dispenses, sells, or otherwise provides the pseudoephedrine
product or ephedrine product to that individual and whose conduct is in
accordance with R.C. Chapter 3719, 4715, 4723, 4729, 4730, 4731, or 4741;
            2.   A parent or guardian of that individual who provides the
pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product to the individual;
            3.   A person, as authorized by that individual’s parent or
guardian, who dispenses, sells, or otherwise provides the pseudoephedrine
product or ephedrine product to the individual;
            4.   A retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs who
provides the pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product to that individual if
the individual is an employee of the retailer or terminal distributor of
dangerous drugs and the individual receives or accepts from the retailer or
terminal distributor of dangerous drugs the pseudoephedrine product or
ephedrine product in a sealed container in connection with manufacturing,
warehousing, placement, stocking, bagging, loading, or unloading of the
product.
      (4)   No individual under 18 years of age shall knowingly show or give
false information concerning the individual’s name, age, or other
identification for the purpose of purchasing, receiving, or otherwise acquiring
a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product.
      (5)   No individual shall knowingly fail to comply with the requirements
of R.C. § 3715.051(B).
      (6)   Whoever violates division (a)(2)A. of this section is guilty of
unlawful purchase of a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product, a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (7)   Whoever violates division (a)(3)A. of this section is guilty of
underage purchase of a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product, a
delinquent act that would be a misdemeanor of the fourth degree if it could be
committed by an adult.
      (8)   Whoever violates division (a)(4) of this section is guilty of using
false information to purchase a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product, a
delinquent act that would be a misdemeanor of the first degree if it could be
committed by an adult.
      (9)   Whoever violates division (a)(5) of this section is guilty of
improper purchase of a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product, a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 2925.55)
   (b)   Unlawful retail sales.
      (1)   A.   1.   Except as provided in division (b)(1)B. of this section,
no retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs or an employee of a
retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs shall knowingly sell, offer
to sell, hold for sale, deliver, or otherwise provide to any individual an
amount of pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product that is greater than
either of the following:
               a.   Three and six tenths grams within a period of a single day;
               b.   Nine grams within a period of 30 consecutive days.
            2.   The maximum amounts specified in divisions (b)(1)A.1.a. and
(b)(1)A.1.b. of this section apply to the total amount of base pseudoephedrine
or base ephedrine in the pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product,
respectively. The maximum amounts do not apply to the product’s overall weight.
         B.   1.   Division (b)(1)A. of this section does not apply to any
quantity of pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product dispensed by a
pharmacist pursuant to a valid prescription issued by a licensed health
professional authorized to prescribe drugs if the conduct of the pharmacist and
the licensed health professional authorized to prescribe drugs is in accordance
with R.C. Chapter 3719, 4715, 4723, 4729, 4730, 4731, or 4741.
            2.   It is not a violation of division (b)(1)A. of this section for
a retailer, terminal distributor of dangerous drugs, or employee of either to
provide to an individual more than an amount of pseudoephedrine product or
ephedrine product specified in division (b)(1)A.1.a. or (b)(1)A.1.b. of this
section under either of the following circumstances:
               a.   The individual is an employee of the retailer or terminal
distributor of dangerous drugs, and the employee receives or accepts from the
retailer, terminal distributor of dangerous drugs, or employee the
pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product in a sealed container in
connection with manufacturing, warehousing, placement, stocking, bagging,
loading, or unloading of the product;
               b.   A stop-sale alert is generated after the submission of
information to the national precursor log exchange under the conditions
described in R.C. § 3715.052(A)(2).
      (2)   A.   Except as provided in division (b)(2)B. of this section, no
retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs or an employee of a
retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs shall sell, offer to sell,
hold for sale, deliver, or otherwise provide a pseudoephedrine product or
ephedrine product to an individual who is under 18 years of age.
         B.   Division (b)(2)A. of this section does not apply to any of the
following:
            1.   A licensed health professional authorized to prescribe drugs
or pharmacist who dispenses, sells, or otherwise provides a pseudoephedrine
product or ephedrine product to an individual under 18 years of age and whose
conduct is in accordance with R.C. Chapter 3719, 4715, 4723, 4729, 4730, 4731,
or 4741;
            2.   A parent or guardian of an individual under 18 years of age
who provides a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product to the individual;
            3.   A person who, as authorized by the individual’s parent or
guardian, dispenses, sells, or otherwise provides a pseudoephedrine product or
ephedrine product to an individual under 18 years of age;
            4.   The provision by a retailer, terminal distributor of dangerous
drugs, or employee of either of a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product
in a sealed container to an employee of the retailer or terminal distributor of
dangerous drugs who is under 18 years of age in connection with manufacturing,
warehousing, placement, stocking, bagging, loading, or unloading of the
product.
      (3)   No retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs shall fail
to comply with the requirements of R.C. § 3715.051(A) or R.C. § 3715.052(A)(2).
      (4)   No retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs shall fail
to comply with the requirements of R.C. § 3715.052(A)(1).
      (5)   Whoever violates division (b)(1)A. of this section is guilty of
unlawfully selling a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product, a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (6)   Whoever violates division (b)(2)A. of this section is guilty of
unlawfully selling a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product to a minor, a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
      (7)   Whoever violates division (b)(3) of this section is guilty of
improper sale of a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product, a misdemeanor
of the second degree.
      (8)   Whoever violates division (b)(4) of this section is guilty of
failing to submit information to the national precursor log exchange, a
misdemeanor for which the offender shall be fined not more than $1,000 per
violation.
(R.C. § 2925.56)
   (c)   Transaction scans.
      (1)   For the purpose of this division and division (d) of this section,
the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning.
         A.   “Card holder.” Any person who presents a driver’s or commercial
driver’s license or an identification card to a seller, or an agent or employee
of a seller, to purchase or receive any pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine
product from the seller, agent or employee.
         B.   Identification card” has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2927.021.
         C.   “Seller.” A retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs.
         D.   “Transaction scan.” The process by which a seller or an agent or
employee of a seller checks by means of a transaction scan device the validity
of a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or an identification card that is
presented as a condition for purchasing or receiving any pseudoephedrine
product or ephedrine product.
         E.   “Transaction scan device.” Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
2927.021.
      (2)   A.   A seller or an agent or employee of a seller may perform a
transaction scan by means of a transaction scan device to check the validity of
a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or identification card presented by a
card holder as a condition for selling, giving away or otherwise distributing
to the card holder a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product.
         B.   If the information deciphered by the transaction scan performed
under division (c)(2)A. of this section fails to match the information printed
on the driver’s or commercial driver’s license or identification card presented
by the card holder, or if the transaction scan indicates that the information
so printed is false or fraudulent, neither the seller nor any agent or employee
of the seller shall sell, give away or otherwise distribute any pseudoephedrine
product or ephedrine product to the card holder.
         C.   Division (c)(2)A. of this section does not preclude a seller or
an agent or employee of a seller as a condition for selling, giving away or
otherwise distributing a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product to the
person presenting the document from using a transaction scan device to check
the validity of a document other than a driver’s or commercial driver’s license
or an identification card if the document includes a bar code or magnetic strip
that may be scanned by the device.
      (3)   Rules adopted by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles under R.C. §
4301.61(C) apply to the use of transaction scan devices for purposes of this
division (c) and division (d) of this section.
      (4)   A.   No seller or agent or employee of a seller shall
electronically or mechanically record or maintain any information derived from
a transaction scan, except the following:
            1.   The name, address, and date of birth of the person listed on
the driver’s or commercial driver’s license or identification card presented by
a card holder;
            2.   The expiration date, identification number, and issuing agency
of the driver’s or commercial driver’s license or identification card presented
by a card holder.
         B.   No seller or agent or employee of a seller shall use the
information that is derived from a transaction scan or that is permitted to be
recorded and maintained under division (c)(4)A. of this section except for
purposes of division (d) of this section, R.C. § 2925.58, or R.C. § 3715.052(A)
(1).
         C.   No seller or agent or employee of a seller shall use a
transaction scan device for a purpose other than the purpose specified in
division (c)(2)A. of this section.
         D.   No seller or agent or employee of a seller shall sell or
otherwise disseminate the information derived from a transaction scan to any
third party, including but not limited to selling or otherwise disseminating
that information for any marketing, advertising or promotional activities, but
a seller or agent or employee of a seller may release that information pursuant
to a court order or as specifically authorized by division (d) of this section
or any other section of the Ohio Revised Code.
      (5)   Nothing in this division (c) or division (d) of this section
relieves a seller or an agent or employee of a seller of any responsibility to
comply with any other applicable state or federal laws or rules governing the
sale, giving away or other distribution of pseudoephedrine products or
ephedrine products.
      (6)   Whoever violates division (c)(2)B. or (c)(4) of this section is
guilty of engaging in an illegal pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product
transaction scan, and the court may impose upon the offender a civil penalty of
up to $1,000 for each violation. The Clerk of the Court shall pay each
collected civil penalty to the County Treasurer for deposit into the County
Treasury.
(R.C. § 2925.57)
   (d)   Affirmative defenses.
      (1)   A seller or an agent or employee of a seller may not be found
guilty of a charge of a violation of division (b) of this section in which the
age of the purchaser or other recipient of a pseudoephedrine product is an
element of the alleged violation if the seller, agent or employee raises and
proves as an affirmative defense that all of the following occurred:
         A.   A card holder attempting to purchase or receive a pseudoephedrine
product presented a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or an
identification card.
         B.   A transaction scan of the driver’s or commercial driver’s license
or identification card that the card holder presented indicated that the
license or card was valid.
         C.   The pseudoephedrine product was sold, given away or otherwise
distributed to the card holder in reasonable reliance upon the identification
presented and the completed transaction scan.
      (2)   In determining whether a seller or an agent or employee of a seller
has proven the affirmative defense provided by division (d)(1) of this section,
the trier of fact in the action for the alleged violation of division (b) of
this section shall consider any written policy that the seller has adopted and
implemented and that is intended to prevent violations of division (b) of this
section. For purposes of division (d)(1)C. of this section, the trier of fact
shall consider that reasonable reliance upon the identification presented and
the completed transaction scan may require a seller or an agent or employee of
a seller to exercise reasonable diligence to determine, and that the use of a
transaction scan device does not excuse a seller or an agent or employee of a
seller from exercising reasonable diligence to determine, the following:
         A.   Whether a person to whom the seller or agent or employee of a
seller sells, gives away or otherwise distributes a pseudoephedrine product is
18 years of age or older;
         B.   Whether the description and picture appearing on the driver’s or
commercial driver’s license or identification card presented by a card holder
is that of the card holder.
      (3)   In any criminal action in which the affirmative defense provided by
division (d)(1) of this section is raised, the Registrar of Motor Vehicles or a
Deputy Registrar who issued an identification card under R.C. §§ 4507.50
through 4507.52 shall be permitted to submit certified copies of the records of
that issuance in lieu of the testimony of the personnel of or contractors with
the Bureau of Motor Vehicles in the action.
(R.C. § 2925.58)
   (e)   Retailer’s duties.
      (1)   As used in divisions (e) and (f) of this section:
         A.   “Consumer product.” Any food or drink that is consumed or used by
humans and any drug, including a drug that may be provided legally only
pursuant to a prescription, that is intended to be consumed or used by humans.
         B.   “Drug.” Has the same meanings as in R.C. § 4729.01.
         C.   “Ephedrine.” Any material, compound, mixture, or preparation that
contains any quantity of ephedrine, any of its salts, optical isomers, or salts
of optical isomers.
         D.   “Ephedrine product.” A consumer product that contains ephedrine.
         E.   “Law enforcement official.” An officer or employee of any agency
or authority of the United States, a state, a territory, a political
subdivision of a state or territory, or an Indian tribe, who is empowered by
the law to investigate or conduct an official inquiry into a potential
violation of law or prosecute or otherwise conduct a criminal, civil, or
administrative proceeding arising from an alleged violation of law.
         F.   “Licensed health professional authorized to prescribe drugs.” Has
the same meanings as in R.C. § 4729.01.
         G.   “National Precursor Log Exchange” or “Exchange.” The electronic
system for tracking sales of pseudoephedrine products and ephedrine products on
a national basis that is administered by the National Association of Drug
Diversion Investigators or a successor organization.
         H.   “Pharmacist.” A person licensed under R.C. Chapter 4729 to engage
in the practice of pharmacy.
         I.   “Pharmacy.” Has the same meanings as in R.C. § 4729.01.
         J.   “Prescriber.” Has the same meanings as in R.C. § 4729.01.
         K.   “Prescription.” Has the same meanings as in R.C. § 4729.01.
         L.   “Proof of age.” A driver’s license, a commercial driver’s
license, a military identification card, a passport, or an identification card
issued under R.C. §§ 4507.50 to 4507.52 that shows a person is 18 years of age
or older.
         M.   “Pseudoephedrine.” Any material, compound, mixture, or
preparation that contains any quantity of pseudoephedrine, any of its salts,
optical isomers, or salts of optical isomers.
         N.   “Pseudoephedrine product.” A consumer product that contains
pseudoephedrine.
         O.   “Retailer.” A place of business that offers consumer products for
sale to the general public.
         P.   “Single-ingredient preparation.” A compound, mixture,
preparation, or substance that contains a single active ingredient.
         Q.   “Stop-sale alert.” A notification sent from the national
precursor log exchange to a retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs
indicating that the completion of a sale of a pseudoephedrine product or
ephedrine product would result in a violation of R.C. § 2925.56(A)(1) or
federal law.
         R.   “Terminal distributor of dangerous drugs.” Has the same meanings
as in R.C. § 4729.01.
         S.   “Wholesaler.” Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
      (2)   A retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs that sells,
offers to sell, holds for sale, delivers, or otherwise provides a
pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product to the public shall do all of the
following:
         A.   Segregate pseudoephedrine products or ephedrine products from
other merchandise so that no member of the public may procure or purchase such
products without the direct assistance of a pharmacist or other authorized
employee of the retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs;
         B.   With regard to each time a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine
product is sold or otherwise provided without a valid prescription:
            1.   Determine, by examination of a valid proof of age, that the
purchaser or recipient is at least 18 years of age;
            2.   a.   Using any information available, including information
from the national precursor log exchange if the information is accessible, make
a reasonable attempt to ensure that no individual purchases or receives an
amount of pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product that is greater than
either of the following:
                  i.   Three and six tenths grams within a period of a single
day;
                  ii.   Nine grams within a period of 30 consecutive days.
               b.   The maximum amounts specified in divisions (e)(2)B.2.a.i.
and (e)(2)B.2.a.ii. of this section apply to the total amount of base
pseudoephedrine or base ephedrine in the pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine
product, respectively. The maximum amounts do not apply to the product’s
overall weight.
         C.   Maintain a log book of pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine
product purchases, in accordance with R.C. § 3715.051;
         D.   If required to comply with section R.C. § 3715.052, submit the
information specified in divisions (A)(1)(a) to (A)(1)(d) of that section to
the national precursor log exchange.
      (3)   Prescriptions, orders, and records maintained pursuant to this
section and stocks of pseudoephedrine products and ephedrine products shall be
open for inspection to federal, state, county, and municipal officers, and
employees of the State Board of Pharmacy whose duty it is to enforce the laws
of this state or of the United States relating to controlled substances. Such
prescriptions, orders, records, and stocks shall be open for inspection by the
State Medical Board and its employees for purposes of enforcing R.C. Chapter
4731.
(R.C. § 3715.05)
   (f)   Theft or loss; reporting requirements.
      (1)   Each retailer, terminal distributor of dangerous drugs, pharmacy,
prescriber or wholesaler that sells, offers to sell, holds for sale, delivers
or otherwise provides any pseudoephedrine product and that discovers the theft
or loss of any pseudoephedrine product in an amount of more than nine grams per
incident of theft or loss shall notify all of the following upon discovery of
the theft or loss:
         A.   The State Board of Pharmacy, by telephone immediately upon
discovery of the theft or loss;
         B.   Law enforcement authorities. If the incident is a theft and the
theft constitutes a felony, the retailer, terminal distributor of dangerous
drugs, pharmacy, prescriber or wholesaler shall report the theft to the law
enforcement authorities in accordance with R.C. § 2921.22.
      (2)   Within 30 days after making a report by telephone to the State
Board of Pharmacy pursuant to division (f)(1)A. of this section, a retailer,
terminal distributor of dangerous drugs, pharmacy, prescriber or wholesaler
shall send a written report to the State Board of Pharmacy.
      (3)   The reports required under this section shall identify the product
that was stolen or lost, the amount of the product stolen or lost, and the date
and time of discovery of the theft or loss.
(R.C. § 3715.06)
§ 624.17  PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES RELATING TO MEDICAL MARIJUANA.
   The following prohibitions apply to all property within the boundaries of
the City of Kirtland, regardless of the zone, adopted specific plan, overlay
zone, or any other development or use classification or other designation of
property:
   (a)   It is unlawful for any person to engage in the indoor or outdoor
cultivation of medical marijuana or to establish or operate, or to allow,
cause, create, suffer, or permit the establishment or operation of a medical
marijuana cultivation facility.
   (b)   It is unlawful for any person to engage in the processing of medical
marijuana or to establish or operate, or to allow, cause, create, suffer, or
permit the establishment or operation of a medical marijuana processing
facility.
   (c)   It is unlawful for any person to establish or operate, or to allow,
cause, create, suffer, or permit the establishment or operation of a medical
marijuana dispensary.
   (d)   It is unlawful for any person to deliver medical marijuana, or to
allow, cause, create, suffer, or permit the delivery of medical marijuana,
except that a patient or caregiver as registered by the State Board of Pharmacy
under R.C. § 3796.08 may engage in all activities allowed pursuant to R.C. §§
3796.22 and 3796.23.
   (e)   No zoning permit, building permit, certificate of occupancy or any
other permit shall be granted to a business for opening, using any land or
devoting any floor area of the business for the purposes of operating a medical
marijuana cultivation facility, processing facility, or dispensary.
(Ord. 16-O-42, passed 11-21-2016)
§ 624.18  PUBLIC NUISANCE; VIOLATION; REMEDIES NOT EXCLUSIVE; PENALTY.
   (a)   Engaging in any activity or using property to engage in any activity,
prohibited under this chapter constitutes a public nuisance subject to
abatement.
   (b)   Notwithstanding any other provision of the zoning ordinances of the
city, any person who violates this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of
the first degree. Each day or any portion thereof that a person violates any
provision of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense.
   (c)   Any enforcement action taken pursuant to this chapter shall not
prejudice or adversely affect any other action, whether administrative, civil
or criminal, that may be brought to abate the public nuisance or violation or
to seek compensation for damages suffered. An administrative, civil, or
criminal action may be brought concurrently with any other process regarding
the same public nuisance or violation.
(Ord. 16-O-42, passed 11-21-2016)
CHAPTER 630:  GAMBLING
Section
630.01   Definitions.
630.02   Gambling in general.
630.03   Operating a gambling house.
630.04   Public gaming.
630.05   Cheating.
630.06   Responsibility of charitable organization conducting bingo game.
630.07   Maintenance of records by charitable organizations.
630.08   Qualifications of bingo game operator.
630.09   Exemption for bingo games conducted for amusement.
630.10   Prohibitions where instant bingo game is conducted.
630.11   Raffle drawings.
630.12   Instant bingo other than at bingo sessions.
630.13   Restrictions on owner or lessor of location at instant bingo.
630.14   Skill-based amusement machines; prohibited conduct.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Definitions generally - see GEN. OFF.
606.01
   Disposition of property held by Police Division - see GEN. OFF.
606.24
   Power to destroy devices - see Ohio R.C. 715.51
   Power to prohibit gambling - see Ohio R.C. 715.49
   See section histories for similar state law
§ 630.01  DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this chapter:
   (a)   “Bet” means the hazarding of anything of value upon the result of an
event, undertaking, or contingency, but does not include a bona fide business
risk.
   (b)   “Bingo” means either of the following:
      (1)   A game with all of the following characteristics:
         A.   The participants use bingo cards or sheets, including paper
formats and electronic representation or image formats, that are divided into
25 spaces arranged in 5 horizontal and 5 vertical rows of spaces, with each
space, except the central space, being designated by a combination of a letter
and a number and with the central space being designated as a free space;
         B.   The participants cover the spaces on the bingo cards or sheets
that correspond to combinations of letters and numbers that are announced by a
bingo game operator;
         C.   A bingo game operator announces combinations of letters and
numbers that appear on objects that a bingo game operator selects by chance,
either manually or mechanically, from a receptacle that contains 75 objects at
the beginning of each game, each object marked by a different combination of a
letter and a number that corresponds to one of the 75 possible combinations of
a letter and a number that can appear on the bingo cards or sheets;
         D.   The winner of the bingo game includes any participant who
properly announces during the interval between the announcements of letters and
numbers, as described in subsection (1)C. of this definition, that a
predetermined and pre-announced pattern of spaces has been covered on a bingo
card or sheet being used by the participant.
      (2)   Instant bingo, punch boards, and raffles.
   (c)   “Bingo game operator” means any person, except security personnel, who
performs work or labor at the site of bingo including but not limited to
collecting money from participants, handing out bingo cards or sheets or
objects to cover spaces on bingo cards or sheets, selecting from a receptacle
the objects that contain the combination of letters and numbers that appear on
bingo cards or sheets, calling out the combinations of letters and numbers,
distributing prizes, selling or redeeming instant bingo tickets or cards,
supervising the operation of a punch board, selling raffle tickets, selecting
raffle tickets from a receptacle and announcing the winning numbers in a
raffle, and preparing, selling, and serving food or beverages.
   (d)   “Bingo session” means a period that includes both of the following:
      (1)   Not to exceed five continuous hours for the conduct of one or more
games described in subsection (1) of the definition of “bingo” in this section,
instant bingo, and seal cards;
      (2)   A period for the conduct of instant bingo and seal cards for not
more than two hours before and not more than two hours after the period
described in subsection (1) of this definition.
   (e)   “Bingo supplies” means bingo cards or sheets; instant bingo tickets or
cards; electronic bingo aids; raffle tickets; punch boards; seal cards; instant
bingo ticket dispensers; and devices for selecting or displaying the
combination of bingo letters and numbers or raffle tickets. Items that are
“bingo supplies” are not gambling devices if sold or otherwise provided, and
used, in accordance with this chapter or Ohio R.C. Chapter 2915. For purposes
of this chapter, “bingo supplies” are not to be considered equipment used to
conduct a bingo game.
   (f)   “Bookmaking” means the business of receiving or paying off bets.
   (g)   “Chamber of commerce” means any organization of individuals,
professionals, and businesses that has the purpose to advance the commercial,
financial, industrial, and civic interests of the community and that is, and
has received from the Internal Revenue Service a determination letter that
currently is in effect stating that the organization is, exempt from Federal
income taxation under IRC 501(a) and described in IRC 501(c)(6).
   (h)   “Charitable bingo game” means any bingo game described in subsections
(1) or (2) of the definition of “bingo” in this section that is conducted by a
charitable organization that has obtained a license pursuant to Ohio R.C.
2915.08 and the proceeds of which are used for a charitable purpose.
   (i)   “Charitable instant bingo organization” means an organization that is
exempt from Federal income taxation under IRC 501(a) and described in IRC 501
(c)(3) and is a charitable organization as defined in this section. A
“charitable instant bingo organization” does not include a charitable
organization that is exempt from Federal income taxation under IRC 501(a) and
described in IRC 501(c)(3) and that is created by a veteran’s organization, a
fraternal organization, or a sporting organization in regards to bingo
conducted or assisted by a veteran’s organization, a fraternal organization, or
a sporting organization pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2915.13, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (j)   “Charitable organization”.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, “charitable
organization” means either of the following:
         A.   An organization that is and has received from the Internal
Revenue Service a determination letter that is currently in effect, stating
that the organization is exempt from federal income taxation under IRC § 501(a)
and described in IRC § 501(c)(3);
         B.   A volunteer rescue service organization, volunteer firefighter’s
organization, veteran’s organization, fraternal organization, or sporting
organization that is exempt from federal income taxation under IRC §§ 501(c)
(4), 501(c)(7), 501(c)(8), 501(c)(10) or 501(c)(19).
      (2)   To qualify as a charitable organization, an organization shall have
been in continuous existence as such in this state for a period of two years
immediately preceding either the making of an application for a bingo license
under Ohio R.C. 2915.08 or the conducting of any game of chance as provided in
Ohio R.C. 2915.02(D), or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (k)   “Charitable purpose” means that the net profit of bingo, other than
instant bingo, is used by, or is given, donated, or otherwise transferred to,
any of the following:
      (1)   Any organization that is described in IRC 509(a)(1), 509(a)(2), or
509(a)(3) and is either a governmental unit or an organization that is tax
exempt under IRC 501(a) and described in IRC 501(c)(3);
      (2)   A veteran’s organization that is a post, chapter, or organization
of veterans, or an auxiliary unit or society of, or a trust or foundation for,
any such post, chapter, or organization organized in the United States or any
of its possessions, at least 75 percent of the members of which are veterans
and substantially all of the other members of which are individuals who are
spouses, widows, or widowers of veterans, or such individuals, provided that no
part of the net earnings of such post, chapter, or organization inures to the
benefit of any private shareholder or individual, and further provided that the
net profit is used by the post, chapter, or organization for the charitable
purposes set forth in Ohio R.C. 5739.02(B)(12), is used for awarding
scholarships to or for attendance at an institution mentioned in that
subsection of the Revised Code, is donated to a governmental agency, or is used
for nonprofit youth activities, the purchase of United States or Ohio flags
that are donated to schools, youth groups, or other bona fide nonprofit
organizations, promotion of patriotism, or disaster relief;
      (3)   A fraternal organization that has been in continuous existence in
this state for 15 years and that uses the net profit exclusively for religious,
charitable, scientific, literary, or educational purposes, or for the
prevention of cruelty to children or animals, if contributions for such use
would qualify as a deductible charitable contribution under IRC 170;
      (4)   A volunteer firefighter’s organization that uses the net profit for
the purposes set forth in the definition of “volunteer firefighter’s
organization” in this section.
   (l)   “Community action agency” has the same  meaning as in Ohio R.C.
122.66.
   (m)   “Conduct” means to back, promote, organize, manage, carry on, sponsor,
or prepare for the operation of bingo or a game of chance, a scheme of chance,
or a sweepstakes.
   (n)   “Deal of instant bingo tickets” means a single game of instant bingo
tickets all with the same serial number.
   (o)   “Distributor” means any person who purchases or obtains bingo supplies
and who does either of the following:
      (1)   Sells, offers for sale, or otherwise provides or offers to provide
the bingo supplies to another person for use in this state;
      (2)   Modifies, converts, adds to, or removes parts from the bingo
supplies to further their promotion or sale for use in this state.
   (p)   “Electronic bingo aid.”
      (1)   “Electronic bingo aid” means an electronic device used by a
participant to monitor bingo cards or sheets purchased at the time and place of
a bingo session and that does all of the following:
         A.   It provides a means for a participant to input numbers and
letters announced by a bingo caller.
         B.   It compares the numbers and letters entered by the participant to
the bingo faces previously stored in the memory of the device.
         C.   It identifies a winning bingo pattern.
      (2)   “Electronic bingo aid” does not include any device into which a
coin, currency, token, or an equivalent is inserted to activate play.
   (q)   “Expenses” means the reasonable amount of gross profit actually
expended for all of the following:
      (1)   The purchase or lease of bingo supplies;
      (2)   The annual license fee required under Ohio R.C. 2915.08;
      (3)   Bank fees and service charges for a bingo session or game account
described in Ohio R.C. 2915.10;
      (4)   Audits and accounting services;
      (5)   Safes;
      (6)   Cash registers;
      (7)   Hiring security personnel;
      (8)   Advertising bingo;
      (9)   Renting premises in which to conduct a bingo session;
      (10)   Tables and chairs;
      (11)   Expenses for maintaining and operating a charitable organization’s
facilities, including, but not limited to, a post home, club house, lounge,
tavern, or canteen and any grounds attached to the post home, club house,
lounge, tavern, or canteen;
      (12)   Payment of real property taxes and assessments that are levied on
a premises on which bingo is conducted;
      (13)   Any other product or service directly related to the conduct of
bingo that is authorized in rules adopted by the Attorney General under Ohio
R.C. 2915.08(B)(1).
   (r)   “Fraternal organization” means any society, order, state headquarters,
or association within this state, except a college or high school fraternity,
that is not organized for profit, that is a branch, lodge, or chapter of a
national or state organization, that exists exclusively for the common business
or sodality of its members.
   (s)   “Gambling device” means any of the following:
      (1)   A book, totalizer, or other equipment used for recording bets;
      (2)   A ticket, token, or other device representing a chance, share, or
interest in a scheme of chance or evidencing a bet;
      (3)   A deck of cards, dice, gaming table, roulette wheel, slot machine,
or other apparatus designed for use in connection with a game of chance;
      (4)   Any equipment, device, apparatus, or paraphernalia specially
designed for gambling purposes;
      (5)   Bingo supplies sold or otherwise provided, or used, in violation of
this chapter or Ohio R.C. Chapter 2915.
   (t)   “Gambling offense” means any of the following:
      (1)   A violation of Ohio R.C. 2915.02, 2915.03, 2915.04, 2915.05,
2915.06, 2915.07, 2915.08, 2915.081, 2915.082, 2915.09, 2915.091, 2915.092,
2915.10, or 2915.11;
      (2)   A violation of an existing or former municipal ordinance or law of
this or any other state or of the United States substantially equivalent to any
section listed in subsection (1) of this definition or a violation of Ohio R.C.
2915.06 as it existed prior to July 1, 1996;
      (3)   An offense under an existing or former municipal ordinance or law
of this or any other state or of the United States, of which gambling is an
element;
      (4)   A conspiracy or attempt to commit, or complicity in committing, any
offense under subsection (1), (2), or (3) of this definition.
   (u)   “Game flare” means the board or placard that accompanies each deal of
instant bingo tickets and that has printed on or affixed to it the following
information for the game:
      (1)   The name of the game;
      (2)   The manufacturer’s name or distinctive logo;
      (3)   The form number;
      (4)   The ticket count;
      (5)   The prize structure, including the number of winning instant bingo
tickers by denomination and the respective winning symbol or number
combinations for the winning instant bingo tickets;
      (6)   The cost per play;
      (7)   The serial number of the game.
   (v)   “Game of chance” means poker, craps, roulette, or other game in which
a player gives anything of value in the hope of gain, the outcome of which is
determined largely by chance, but does not include bingo.
   (w)   “Game of chance conducted for profit” means any game of chance
designed to produce income for the person who conducts or operates the game of
chance, but does not include bingo.
   (x)   “Gross annual revenues” means the annual gross receipts derived from
the conduct of bingo described in subsection (1) of the definition of “bingo”
in this section plus the annual net profit derived from the conduct of bingo
described in subsection (2) of the definition of “bingo” in this section.
   (y)   “Gross profit” means gross receipts minus the amount actually expended
for the payment of prize awards.
   (z)   “Gross receipts” means all money or assets, including admission fees,
that a person receives from bingo without the deduction of any amounts for
prizes paid out or for the expenses of conducting bingo. “Gross receipts” does
not include any money directly taken in from the sale of food or beverages by a
charitable organization conducting bingo, or by a bona fide auxiliary unit or
society of a charitable organization conducting bingo, provided all of the
following apply:
      (1)   The auxiliary unit or society has been in existence as a bona fide
auxiliary unit or society of the charitable organization for at least two years
prior to conducting bingo.
      (2)   The person who purchases the food or beverage receives nothing of
value except the food or beverage and items customarily received with the
purchase of that food or beverage.
      (3)   The food and beverages are sold at customary and reasonable prices.
   (aa)   “Historic railroad” means all or a portion of the tracks and right-
of-way of a railroad that was owned and operated by a for profit common carrier
in this state at any time prior to January 1, 1950.
   (bb)   “Instant bingo” means a  form of bingo that shall use folded or
banded tickets or paper cards with perforated break-open tabs, a face of which
is covered or otherwise hidden from view to conceal a number, letter, or
symbol, or set of numbers, letters, or symbols, some of which have been
designated in advance as prize winners, and may also include games in which
some winners are determined by the random selection of one or more bingo
numbers by the use of a seal card or bingo blower. In all “instant bingo” the
prize amount and structure shall be predetermined. The term does not include
any device that is activated by the insertion of a coin, currency, token, or an
equivalent, and that contains as one of its components a video display monitor
that is capable of displaying numbers, letters, symbols, or characters in
winning or losing combinations.
   (cc)   “Instant bingo ticket dispenser” means a mechanical device that
dispenses an instant bingo ticket or card as the sole item of value dispensed
and that has the following characteristics:
      (1)   It is activated upon the insertion of United States currency.
      (2)   It performs no gaming functions.
      (3)   It does not contain a video display monitor or generate noise.
      (4)   It is not capable of displaying any numbers, letters, symbols, or
characters in winning or losing combinations.
      (5)   It does not simulate or display rolling or spinning reels.
      (6)   It is incapable of determining whether a dispensed bingo ticket or
card is a winning or non-winning ticket or card and requires a winning ticket
or card to be paid by a bingo game operator.
      (7)   It may provide accounting and security features to aid in
accounting for the instant bingo tickets or cards it dispenses.
      (8)   It is not part of an electronic network and is not interactive.
   (dd)   “IRC” or “Internal Revenue Code” means the Internal Revenue Code of
1986, 100 Stat. 2085, 26 U.S.C. §§ 1 et seq., as now or hereafter amended.
   (ee)   “Manufacturer” means any person who assembles completed bingo
supplies from raw materials, other items, or subparts or who modifies,
converts, adds to, or removes parts from bingo supplies to further their
promotion or sale.
   (ff)   “Merchandise prize” means any item of value, but shall not include
any of the following:
      (1)   Cash, gift cards, or any equivalent thereof;
      (2)   Plays on games of chance, state lottery tickets, bingo, or instant
bingo;
      (3)   Firearms, tobacco, or alcoholic beverages; or
      (4)   A redeemable voucher that is redeemable for any of the items listed
in subsection (1), (2), or (3) of this definition.
   (gg)   “Net profit” means gross profit minus expenses.
   (hh)   “Net profit from the proceeds of the sale of instant bingo” means
gross profit minus the ordinary, necessary, and reasonable expense expended for
the purchase of instant bingo supplies, and, in the case of instant bingo
conducted by a veteran’s, fraternal, or sporting organization, minus the
payment by that organization of real property taxes and assessments levied on a
premises on which instant bingo is conducted.
   (ii)   “Participant” means any person who plays bingo.
   (jj)   “Person” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 1.59 and includes any
firm or any other legal entity, however organized.
   (kk)   “Pool not conducted for profit” means a scheme in which a participant
gives a valuable consideration for a chance to win a prize and the total amount
of consideration wagered is distributed to a participant or participants.
   (ll)   “Punch board” means a board containing a number of holes or
receptacles of uniform size in which are placed, mechanically and randomly,
serially numbered slips of paper that may be punched or drawn from the hole or
receptacle when used in conjunction with instant bingo. A player may punch or
draw the numbered slips of paper from the holes or receptacles and obtain the
prize established for the game if the number drawn corresponds to a winning
number or, if the punch board includes the use of a seal card, a potential
winning number.
   (mm)   “Raffle” means a form of bingo in which the one or more prizes are
won by one or more persons who have purchased a raffle ticket. The one or more
winners of the raffle are determined by drawing a ticket stub or other
detachable section from a receptacle containing ticket stubs or detachable
sections corresponding to all tickets sold for the raffle.  The term does not
include the drawing of a ticket stub or other detachable section of a ticket
purchased to attend a professional sporting event if both of the following
apply:
      (1)   The ticket stub or other detachable section is used to select the
winner of a free prize given away at the professional sporting event; and
      (2)   The cost of the ticket is the same as the cost of a ticket to the
professional sporting event on days when no free prize is given away.
   (nn)   “Redeemable voucher” means any ticket, token, coupon, receipt, or
other noncash representation of value.
   (oo)   “Religious organization” means any church, body of communicants, or
group that is not organized or operated for profit and that gathers in common
membership for regular worship and religious observances.
   (pp)   “Revoke” means to void permanently all rights and privileges of the
holder of a license issued under Ohio R.C. 2915.08, 2915.081, or 2915.082 or a
charitable gaming license issued by another jurisdiction.
   (qq)   “Scheme of chance.”
      (1)   A slot machine unless authorized under R.C. Chapter 3772, lottery
unless authorized under R.C. Chapter 3770, numbers game, pool conducted for
profit, or other scheme in which a participant gives a valuable consideration
for a chance to win a prize, but does not include bingo, a skill-based
amusement machine, or a pool not conducted for profit. “Scheme of chance”
includes the use of an electronic device to reveal the results of a game entry
if valuable consideration is paid, directly or indirectly, for a chance to win
a prize. Valuable consideration is deemed to be paid for a chance to win a
prize in the following instances:
         A.   Less than 50% of the goods or services sold by a scheme of chance
operator in exchange for game entries are used or redeemed by participants at
any one location;
         B.   Less than 50% of participants who purchase goods or services at
any one location do not accept, use, or redeem the goods or services sold or
purportedly sold;
         C.   More than 50% of prizes at any one location are revealed to
participants through an electronic device simulating a game of chance or a
“casino game” as defined in R.C. § 3772.01;
         D.   The good or service sold by a scheme of chance operator in
exchange for a game entry cannot be used or redeemed in the manner advertised;
         E.   A participant pays more than fair market value for goods or
services offered by a scheme of chance operator in order to receive one or more
game entries;
         F.   A participant may use the electronic device to purchase
additional game entries;
         G.   A participant may purchase additional game entries by using
points or credits won as prizes while using the electronic device;
         H.   A scheme of chance operator pays out in prize money more than 20%
of the gross revenue received at one location; or
         I.   A participant makes a purchase or exchange in order to obtain any
good or service that may be used to facilitate play on the electronic device.
      (2)   As used in this division, “electronic device” means a mechanical,
video, digital, or electronic machine or device that is capable of displaying
information on a screen or other mechanism and that is owned, leased, or
otherwise possessed by any person conducting a scheme of chance, or by that
person’s partners, affiliates, subsidiaries, or contractors.
   (rr)   “Seal card” means a form of instant bingo that uses instant bingo
tickets in conjunction with a board or placard that contains one or more seals
that, when removed or opened, reveal predesignated winning numbers, letters, or
symbols.
   (ss)   “Security personnel” includes any person who either is a sheriff,
deputy sheriff, marshal, deputy marshal, township constable, or member of an
organized police department of a municipal corporation or has successfully
completed a peace officer’s training course pursuant to Ohio R.C. 109.71 to
109.79 and who is hired to provide security for the premises on which bingo is
conducted.
   (tt)   “Skill-based amusement machine.”
      (1)   A.   A mechanical, video, digital, or electronic device that
rewards the player or players, if at all, only with merchandise prizes or with
redeemable vouchers redeemable only for merchandise prizes, provided that with
respect to rewards for playing the game all of the following apply:
            1.   The wholesale value of a merchandise prize awarded as a result
of the single play of a machine does not exceed ten dollars ($10.00);
            2.   Redeemable vouchers awarded for any single play of a machine
are not redeemable for a merchandise prize with a wholesale value of more than
ten dollars ($10.00);
            3.   Redeemable vouchers are not redeemable for a merchandise prize
that has a wholesale value of more than ten dollars ($10.00) times the fewest
number of single plays necessary to accrue the redeemable vouchers required to
obtain that prize; and
            4.   Any redeemable vouchers or merchandise prizes are distributed
at the site of the skill-based amusement machine at the time of play.
         B.   A card for the purchase of gasoline is a redeemable voucher for
purposes of subsection (1) of this definition even if the skill-based amusement
machine for the play of which the card is awarded is located at a place where
gasoline may not be legally distributed to the public or the card is not
redeemable at the location of, or at the time of playing, the skill-based
amusement machine.
      (2)   A device shall not be considered a skill-based amusement machine
and shall be considered a slot machine if it pays cash or one or more of the
following apply:
         A.   The ability of a player to succeed at the game is impacted by the
number or ratio of prior wins to prior losses of players playing the game;
         B.   Any reward of redeemable vouchers is not based solely on the
player achieving the object of the game or the players score;
         C.   The outcome of the game, or the value of the redeemable voucher
or merchandise prize awarded for winning the game, can be controlled by a
source other than any player playing the game;
         D.   The success of any player is or may be determined by a chance
event that cannot be altered by player actions;
         E.   The ability of any player to succeed at the game is determined by
game features not visible or known to the player;
         F.   The ability of the player to succeed at the game is impacted by
the exercise of a skill that no reasonable player could exercise.
      (3)   All of the following apply to any machine that is operated as
described in subsection (1) of this definition:
         A.   As used in this definition of “skill-based amusement machine”, 
“game” and “play” mean one event from the initial activation of the machine
until the results of play are determined without payment of additional
consideration. An individual utilizing a machine that involves a single game,
play, contest, competition, or tournament may be awarded redeemable vouchers or
merchandise prizes based on the results of play.
         B.   Advance play for a single game, play, contest, competition, or
tournament participation may be purchased. The cost of the contest,
competition, or tournament participation may be greater than a single non-
contest, competition, or tournament play.
         C.   To the extent that the machine is used in a contest, competition,
or tournament, that contest, competition, or tournament has a defined starting
and ending date and is open to participants in competition for scoring and
ranking results toward the awarding of redeemable vouchers or merchandise
prizes that are stated prior to the start of the contest, competition, or
tournament.
      (4)   For purposes of subsection (1) of this definition, the mere
presence of a device, such as a pin-setting, ball-releasing, or scoring
mechanism, that does not contribute to or affect the outcome of the play of the
game does not make the device a skill-based amusement machine.
   (uu)   “Slot machine”.
      (1)   Means either of the following:
         A.   Any mechanical, electronic, video, or digital device that is
capable of accepting anything of value, directly or indirectly, from or on
behalf of a player who gives the thing of value in the hope of gain;
         B.   Any mechanical, electronic, video, or digital device that is
capable of accepting anything of value, directly or indirectly, from or on
behalf of a player to conduct bingo or a scheme or game of chance.
      (2)   “Slot machine” does not include a skill-based amusement machine or
an instant bingo ticket dispenser.
   (vv)   “Sporting organization” means a hunting, fishing, or trapping
organization, other than a college or high school fraternity or sorority, that
is not organized for profit, that is affiliated with a state or national
sporting organization, including but not limited to, the League of Ohio
Sportsmen, and that has been in continuous existence in this state for a period
of three years.
   (ww)   “Suspend” means to interrupt temporarily all rights and privileges of
the holder of a license issued under Ohio R.C. 2915.08, 2915.081, or 2915.082
or a charitable gaming license issued by another jurisdiction.
   (xx)   “Sweepstakes.” Any game, contest, advertising scheme or plan, or
other promotion where consideration is not required for a person to enter to
win or become eligible to receive any prize, the determination of which is
based upon chance. “Sweepstakes” does not include bingo as authorized under
R.C. Chapter 2915, pari-mutuel wagering as authorized by R.C. Chapter 3769,
lotteries conducted by the State Lottery Commission as authorized by R.C.
Chapter 3770, and casino gaming as authorized by R.C. Chapter 3772.
   (yy)   “Sweepstakes terminal device.”
      (1)   A mechanical, video, digital, or electronic machine or device that
is owned, leased, or otherwise possessed by any person conducting a
sweepstakes, or by that person’s partners, affiliates, subsidiaries, or
contractors, that is intended to be used by a sweepstakes participant, and that
is capable of displaying information on a screen or other mechanism. A device
is a sweepstakes terminal device if any of the following apply:
         A.   The device uses a simulated game terminal as a representation of
the prizes associated with the results of the sweepstakes entries.
         B.   The device utilizes software such that the simulated game
influences or determines the winning of or value of the prize.
         C.   The device selects prizes from a predetermined finite pool of
entries.
         D.   The device utilizes a mechanism that reveals the content of a
predetermined sweepstakes entry.
         E.   The device predetermines the prize results and stores those
results for delivery at the time the sweepstakes entry results are revealed.
         F.   The device utilizes software to create a game result.
         G.   The device reveals the prize incrementally, even though the
device does not influence the awarding of the prize or the value of any prize
awarded.
         H.   The device determines and associates the prize with an entry or
entries at the time the sweepstakes is entered.
      (2)   As used in this definition and in § 630.02:
         A.   “Enter.” The act by which a person becomes eligible to receive
any prize offered in a sweepstakes.
         B.   “Entry.” One event from the initial activation of the sweepstakes
terminal device until all the sweepstakes prize results from that activation
are revealed.
         C.   “Prize.” Any gift, award, gratuity, good, service, credit,
reward, or any other thing of value that may be transferred to a person,
whether possession of the prize is actually transferred, or placed on an
account or other record as evidence of the intent to transfer the prize.
         D.   “Sweepstakes terminal device facility.” Any location in this
state where a sweepstakes terminal device is provided to a sweepstakes
participant, except as provided in § 630.02(g) and R.C. § 2915.02(G).
   (zz)   “Veteran’s organization” means any individual post or state
headquarters of a national veteran’s association or an auxiliary unit of any
individual post of a national veteran’s association, which post, state
headquarters, or auxiliary unit is incorporated as a nonprofit corporation and
either has received a letter from the state headquarters of the national
veteran’s association indicating that the individual post or auxiliary unit is
in good standing with the national veteran’s association or has received a
letter from the national veteran’s association indicating that the state
headquarters is in good standing with the national veteran’s association. As
used in this subsection, “national veteran’s association” means any veteran’s
association that has been in continuous existence as such for a period of at
least five years and either is incorporated by an act of the United States
Congress or has a national dues-paying membership of at least 5,000 persons.
   (aaa)   “Volunteer firefighter’s organization” means any organization of
volunteer firefighters, as defined in Ohio R.C. 146.01, that is organized and
operated exclusively to provide financial support for a volunteer fire
department or a volunteer fire company and that is recognized or ratified by a
county, municipal corporation, or township.
   (bbb)   “Volunteer rescue service organization” means any organization of
volunteers organized to function as an emergency medical service organization,
as defined in Ohio R.C. 4765.01.
   (ccc)   “Youth athletic organization” means any organization, not organized
for profit, that is organized and operated exclusively to provide financial
support to, or to operate, athletic activities for persons who are 21 years of
age or younger by means of sponsoring, organizing, operating, or contributing
to the support of an athletic team, club, league, or association.
   (ddd)   “Youth athletic park organization” means any organization, not
organized for profit, that satisfies both of the following:
      (1)   It owns, operates, and maintains playing fields that satisfy both
of the following:
         A.   The playing fields are used at least 100 days per year for
athletic activities by one or more organizations, not organized for profit,
each of which is organized and operated exclusively to provide financial
support to, or to operate, athletic activities for persons who are 18 years of
age or younger by means of sponsoring, organizing, operating, or contributing
to the support of an athletic team, club, league, or association.
         B.   The playing fields are not used for any profit-making activity at
any time during the year.
      (2)   It uses the proceeds of bingo it conducts exclusively for the
operation, maintenance, and improvement of its playing fields of the type
described in subsection (1) of this definition.
(ORC 2915.01)
§ 630.02  GAMBLING IN GENERAL.
   (a)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Engage in bookmaking, or knowingly engage in conduct that
facilitates bookmaking.
      (2)   Establish, promote, or operate or knowingly engage in conduct that
facilitates any game of chance conducted for profit or any scheme of chance.
      (3)   Knowingly procure, transmit, exchange, or engage in conduct that
facilitates the procurement, transmission, or exchange of information for use
in establishing odds or determining winners in connection with bookmaking or
with any game of chance conducted for profit or any scheme of chance.
      (4)   Engage in betting or in playing any scheme or game of chance as a
substantial source of income or livelihood.
      (5)   Conduct, or participate in the conduct of, a sweepstakes with the
use of a sweepstakes terminal device at a sweepstakes terminal device facility
and either:
         A.   Give to another person any item described in R.C. § 2915.01(VV)
(1), (VV)(2), (VV)(3), or (VV)(4) as a prize for playing or participating in a
sweepstakes; or
         B.   Give to another person any merchandise prize, or a redeemable
voucher for a merchandise prize, the wholesale value of which is in excess of
$10 and which is awarded as a single entry for playing or participating in a
sweepstakes. Redeemable vouchers shall not be redeemable for a merchandise
prize that has a wholesale value of more than $10.
      (6)   Conduct, or participate in the conduct of, a sweepstakes with the
use of a sweepstakes terminal device at a sweepstakes terminal device facility
without first obtaining a current annual “certificate of registration” from the
Attorney General as required by R.C. § 2915.02(F).
      (7)   With purpose to violate subsection (a)(1), (2), (3),(a)(4), (a)(5),
or (a)(6) of this section, acquire, possess, control, or operate any gambling
device.
   (b)   For purposes of subsection (a)(1) of this section, a person
facilitates bookmaking if the person in any way knowingly aids an illegal
bookmaking operation, including, without limitation, placing a bet with a
person engaged in or facilitating illegal bookmaking. For purposes of
subsection (a)(2) of this section, a person facilitates a game of chance
conducted for profit or a scheme of chance if the person in any way knowingly
aids in the conduct or operation of any such game or scheme, including, without
limitation, playing any such game or scheme.
   (c)   This section does not prohibit conduct in connection with gambling
expressly permitted by law.
   (d)   This section does not apply to any of the following:
      (1)   Games of chance, if all of the following apply:
         A.   The games of chance are not craps for money or roulette for
money.
         B.   The games of chance are conducted by a charitable organization
that is and has received from the Internal Revenue Service a determination
letter that is currently in effect, stating that the organization is exempt
from Federal income taxation under IRC 501(a) and described in IRC 501(c)(3).
         C.   The games of chance are conducted at festivals of the charitable
organization that are conducted not more than a total of five days a calendar
year, and are conducted on premises owned by the charitable organization for a
period of no less than one year immediately preceding the conducting of the
games of chance, on premises leased from a governmental unit, or on premises
that are leased from a veteran’s or fraternal organization and that have been
owned by the lessor veteran’s or fraternal organization for a period of no less
than one year immediately preceding the conducting of the games of chance. A
charitable organization shall not lease premises from a veteran’s or fraternal
organization to conduct a festival described in this subsection, if the
veteran’s or fraternal organization already has leased the premises twelve
times during the preceding year to charitable organizations for that purpose.
If a charitable organization leases premises from a veteran’s or fraternal
organization to conduct a festival described in this subsection, the charitable
organization shall not pay a rental rate for the premises per day of the
festival that exceeds the rental rate per bingo session that a charitable
organization may pay under Ohio R.C. 2915.09(B)(1) or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance when it leases premises from another charitable
organization to conduct bingo games.
         D.   All of the money or assets received from the games of chance
after deduction only of prizes paid out during the conduct of the games of
chance are used by, given, donated or otherwise transferred to any organization
that is described in IRC 509(a)(1), (a)(2), or (a)(3) and is either a
governmental unit or an organization that is tax exempt under IRC 501(a) and
described in IRC 501(c)(3).
         E.   The games of chance are not conducted during or within ten hours
of a bingo game conducted for amusement purposes only pursuant to Ohio R.C.
2915.12 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance. No person shall
receive any commission, wage, salary, reward, tip, donation, gratuity, or other
form of compensation, directly or indirectly, for operating or assisting in the
operation of any game of chance.
      (2)   Any tag fishing tournament, as defined in Ohio R.C. 1531.01,
operated under a permit issued under Ohio R.C. 1533.92.
      (3)   Bingo conducted by a charitable organization that holds a license
issued under Ohio R.C. 2915.08.
   (e)   Division (d) of this section shall not be construed to authorize the
sale, lease, or other temporary or permanent transfer of the right to conduct
games of chance, as granted by that subsection, by any charitable organization
that is granted that right.
   (f)   Any person desiring to conduct, or participate in the conduct of, a
sweepstakes with the use of a sweepstakes terminal device at a sweepstakes
terminal device facility shall first register with the Office of the Attorney
General and obtain an annual certificate of registration by providing a filing
fee as stated in the Fee Schedule in § 236.07 of the City of Kirtland Codified
Ordinances and all information as required by rule adopted under R.C. § 2915.02
(H). Not later than the tenth day of each month, each sweepstakes terminal
device operator shall file a sweepstakes terminal device monthly report with
the Attorney General and provide a filing fee as stated in the Fee Schedule in
§ 236.07 of the City of Kirtland Codified Ordinances and all information
required by rule adopted under R.C. § 2915.02(H). All information provided to
the Attorney General under this division shall be available to law enforcement
upon request.  (Ord. 17-O-20, passed 7-3-2017)
   (g)   (1)   A person may apply to the Attorney General, on a form prescribed
by the Attorney General, for a certificate of compliance that the person is not
operating a sweepstakes terminal device facility. The form shall require the
person to include the address of the business location where sweepstakes
terminal devices will be used and to make the following certifications:
         A.   That the person will not use more than two sweepstakes terminal
devices at the business location;
         B.   That the retail value of sweepstakes prizes to be awarded at the
business location using sweepstakes terminal devices during a reporting period
will be less than 3% of the gross revenue received at the business location
during the reporting period;
         C.   That no other form of gaming except lottery ticket sales as
authorized under R.C. Chapter 3770 will be conducted at the business location
or in an adjoining area of the business location;
         D.   That any sweepstakes terminal device at the business location
will not allow any deposit of any money, coin, or token, or the use of any
credit card, debit card, prepaid card, or any other method of similar payment
to be used, directly or indirectly, to participate in a sweepstakes;
         E.   That notification of any prize will not take place on the same
day as a participant’s sweepstakes entry; and
         F.   That the person consents to provide any other information to the
Attorney General as required by rule adopted under R.C. § 2915.02(H).
      (2)   The filing fee for a certificate of compliance is stated in the Fee
Schedule in § 236.07 of the City of Kirtland Codified Ordinances. The Attorney
General may charge up to an additional fee as stated in the Fee Schedule in §
236.07 of the City of Kirtland Codified Ordinances for reasonable expenses
resulting from any investigation related to an application for a certificate of
compliance.  (Ord. 17-O-20, passed 7-3-2017)
      (3)   A certificate of compliance is effective for one year. The
certificate holder may reapply for a certificate of compliance. A person issued
a certificate of compliance shall file semiannual reports with the Attorney
General stating the number of sweepstakes terminal devices at the business
location and that the retail value of prizes awarded at the business location
using sweepstakes terminal devices is less than 3% of the gross revenue
received at the business location.
   (h)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of gambling, a misdemeanor of
the first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of any gambling
offense, gambling is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
Notwithstanding this division, failing to file a sweepstakes terminal device
monthly report as required by division (f) of this section or the semiannual
report required by division (g) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(ORC 2915.02(A) - (G), (K))
§ 630.03  OPERATING A GAMBLING HOUSE.
   (a)   No person, being the owner or lessee, or having custody, control, or
supervision of premises, shall:
      (1)   Use or occupy the premises for gambling in violation of Ohio R.C.
2915.02 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
      (2)   Recklessly permit the premises to be used or occupied for gambling
in violation of Ohio R.C. 2915.02 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance.
   (b)   Whoever violates subsection (a) of this section is guilty of operating
a gambling house, a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously
has been convicted of a gambling offense, operating a gambling house is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (c)   Premises used or occupied in violation of this section constitute a
nuisance subject to abatement under Ohio R.C. Chapter 3767.
(ORC 2915.03)
§ 630.04  PUBLIC GAMING.
   (a)   No person, while at a hotel, restaurant, tavern, store, arena, hall,
or other place of public accommodation, business, amusement, or resort shall
make a bet or play any game of chance or scheme of chance.
   (b)   No person, being the owner or lessee, or having custody, control, or
supervision of a hotel, restaurant, tavern, store, arena, hall, or other place
of public accommodation, business, amusement, or resort shall recklessly permit
those premises to be used or occupied in violation of subsection (a) of this
section.
   (c)   Divisions (a) and (b) of this section do not prohibit conduct in
connection with gambling expressly permitted by law.
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of public gaming. Except as
otherwise provided in this subsection, public gaming is a minor misdemeanor. If
the offender previously has been convicted of any gambling offense, public
gaming is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
   (e)   Premises used or occupied in violation of subsection (b) of this
section constitute a nuisance subject to abatement under R.C. Chapter 3767.
(ORC 2915.04)
§ 630.05  CHEATING.
   (a)   No person, with purpose to defraud or knowing that the person is
facilitating a fraud, shall engage in conduct designed to corrupt the outcome
of any of the following:
      (1)   The subject of a bet.
      (2)   A contest of knowledge, skill, or endurance that is not an athletic
or sporting event.
      (3)   A scheme or game of chance.
      (4)   Bingo.
   (b)   No person shall knowingly do any of the following:
      (1)   Offer, give, solicit, or accept anything of value to corrupt the
outcome of an athletic or sporting event.
      (2)   Engage in conduct designed to corrupt the outcome of an athletic or
sporting event.
   (c)   (1)   Whoever violates subsection (a) of this section is guilty of
cheating. Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, cheating is a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If the potential gain from the cheating is one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or more or if the offender previously has been
convicted of any gambling offense or of any theft offense as defined in Ohio
R.C. 2913.01, cheating is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state
law.
      (2)   Whoever violates subsection (b) of this section is guilty of
corrupting sports. Corrupting sports is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
(ORC 2915.05)
§ 630.06  RESPONSIBILITY OF CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION CONDUCTING BINGO GAME.
   (a)   No charitable organization that conducts bingo shall fail to do any of
the following:
      (1)   Own all of the equipment used to conduct bingo or lease that
equipment from a charitable organization that is licensed to conduct bingo, or
from the landlord of a premises where bingo is conducted, for a rental rate
that is not more than is customary and reasonable for that equipment;
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in subsection (a)(3) of this section,
use all of the gross receipts from bingo for paying prizes, for reimbursement
of expenses for or for renting premises in which to conduct bingo, for
reimbursement of expenses for or for purchasing or leasing bingo supplies used
in conducting bingo, for reimbursement of expenses for or for hiring security
personnel, for reimbursement of expenses for or for advertising bingo, or for
reimbursement of other expenses or for other expenses listed in the definition
for "expenses" in Ohio R.C. 2915.01, provided that the amount of the receipts
so spent is not more than is customary and reasonable for a similar purchase,
lease, hiring, advertising, or expense. If the building in which bingo is
conducted is owned by the charitable organization conducting bingo and the
bingo conducted includes a form of bingo described in subsection (1) of the
definition of "bingo" in Ohio R.C. 2915.01, the charitable organization may
deduct from the total amount of the gross receipts from each session a sum
equal to the lesser of six hundred dollars ($600.00) or 45 percent of the gross
receipts from the bingo described in that subsection as consideration for the
use of the premises;
      (3)   Use, or give, donate, or otherwise transfer, all of the net profit
derived from bingo, other than instant bingo, for a charitable purpose listed
in its license application and described in the definition for "charitable
purpose" in Ohio R.C. 2915.01, or distribute all of the net profit from the
proceeds of the sale of instant bingo as stated in its license application and
in accordance with Ohio R.C. 2915.101.
   (b)   No charitable organization that conducts a bingo game described in
subsection (1) of the definition of "bingo" in Ohio R.C. 2915.01 shall fail to
do any of the following:
      (1)   Conduct the bingo game on premises that are owned by the charitable
organization, on premises that are owned by another charitable organization and
leased from that charitable organization for a rental rate not in excess of the
lesser of six hundred fifty dollars ($650.00) per bingo session or 45 percent
of the gross receipts of the bingo session, on premises that are leased from a
person other than a charitable organization for a rental rate that is not more
than is customary and reasonable for premises that are similar in location,
size, and quality but not in excess of four hundred fifty dollars ($450.00) per
bingo session, or on premises that are owned by a person other than a
charitable organization, that are leased from that person by another charitable
organization, and that are subleased from that other charitable organization by
the charitable organization for a rental rate not in excess of four hundred
fifty dollars ($450.00) per bingo session. No charitable organization is
required to pay property taxes or assessments on premises that the charitable
organization leases from another person to conduct bingo sessions. If the
charitable organization leases from a person other than a charitable
organization the premises on which it conducts bingo sessions, the lessor of
the premises shall provide only the premises to the organization and shall not
provide the organization with bingo game operators, security personnel,
concessions or concession operators, bingo supplies, or any other type of
service. A charitable organization shall not lease or sublease premises that it
owns or leases to more than three other charitable organizations per calendar
week for the purpose of conducting bingo sessions on the premises. A person
that is not a charitable organization shall not lease premises that it owns,
leases, or otherwise is empowered to lease to more than three charitable
organizations per calendar week for conducting bingo sessions on the premises.
In no case shall more than nine bingo sessions be conducted on any premises in
any calendar week;
      (2)   Display its license conspicuously at the premises where the bingo
session is conducted;
      (3)   Conduct the bingo session in accordance with subsection (1) of the
definition of "bingo" in Ohio R.C. 2915.01.
   (c)   No charitable organization that conducts a bingo game described in
subsection (1) of the definition of "bingo" in Ohio R.C. 2915.01 shall not do
any of the following:
      (1)   Pay any compensation to a bingo game operator for operating a bingo
session that is conducted by the charitable organization or for preparing,
selling, or serving food or beverages at the site of the bingo session, permit
any auxiliary unit or society of the charitable organization to pay
compensation to any bingo game operator who prepares, sells, or serves food or
beverages at a bingo session conducted by the charitable organization, or
permit any auxiliary unit or society of the charitable organization to prepare,
sell, or serve food or beverages at a bingo session conducted by the charitable
organization, if the auxiliary unit or society pays any compensation to the
bingo game operators who prepare, sell, or serve the food or beverages;
      (2)   Pay consulting fees to any person for any services performed in
relation to the bingo session;
      (3)   Pay concession fees to any person who provides refreshments to the
participants in the bingo session;
      (4)   Except as otherwise provided in subsection (c)(4) of this section,
conduct more than three bingo sessions in any seven-day period. A volunteer
firefighter’s organization or a volunteer rescue service organization that
conducts not more than five bingo sessions in a calendar year may conduct more
than three bingo sessions in a seven-day period after notifying the Attorney
General when it will conduct the sessions;
      (5)   Pay out more than six thousand dollars ($6,000) in prizes for bingo
games described in Ohio R.C. 2915.01(S)(1) during any bingo session that is
conducted by the charitable organization. “Prizes” does not include awards from
the conduct of instant bingo;
      (6)   Conduct a bingo session at any time during the eight-hour period
between 2:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m., at any time during, or within ten hours of, a
bingo game conducted for amusement only pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2915.12 or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, at any premises not specified on
its license, or on any day of the week or during any time period not specified
on its license. This subsection does not prohibit the sale of instant bingo
tickets beginning at 9:00 a.m. for a bingo session that begins at 10:00 a.m. If
circumstances make it impractical for the charitable organization to conduct a
bingo session at the premises, or on the day of the week or at the time
specified on its license or if a charitable organization wants to conduct bingo
sessions on a day of the week or at a time other than the day or time specified
on its license, the charitable organization may apply in writing to the
Attorney General for an amended license pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2915.08(F). A
charitable organization may apply twice in each calendar year for an amended
license to conduct bingo sessions on a day of the week or at a time other than
the day or time specified on its license. If the amended license is granted,
the organization may conduct bingo sessions at the premises, on the day of the
week, and at the time specified on its amended license;
      (7)   Permit any person whom the charitable organization knows, or should
have known, is under the age of 18 to work as a bingo game operator;
      (8)   Permit any person whom the charitable organization knows, or should
have known, has been convicted of a felony or gambling offense in any
jurisdiction to be a bingo game operator;
      (9)   Permit the lessor of the premises on which the bingo session is
conducted, if the lessor is not a charitable organization, to provide the
charitable organization with bingo game operators, security personnel,
concessions, bingo  supplies, or any other type of service;
      (10)   Purchase or lease bingo supplies from any person except a
distributor issued a license under Ohio R.C. 2915.081;
      (11)   A.   Use or permit the use of electronic bingo aids except under
the following circumstances:
            1.   For any single participant, not more than 90 bingo faces can
be played using an electronic bingo aid or aids.
            2.   The charitable organization shall provide a participant using
an electronic bingo aid with corresponding paper bingo cards or sheets.
            3.   The total price of bingo faces played with an electronic bingo
aid shall be equal to the total price of the same number of bingo faces played
with a paper bingo card or sheet sold at the same bingo session but without an
electronic bingo aid.
            4.   An electronic bingo aid cannot be part of an electronic
network other than a network that includes only bingo aids and devices that are
located on the premises at which the bingo is being conducted or be interactive
with any device not located on the premises at which the bingo is being
conducted.
            5.   An electronic bingo aid cannot be used to participate in bingo
that is conducted at a location other than the location at which the bingo
session is conducted and at which the electronic bingo aid is used.
            6.   An electronic bingo aid cannot be used to provide for the
input of numbers and letters announced by a bingo caller other than the bingo
caller who physically calls the numbers and letters at the location at which
the bingo session is conducted and at which the electronic bingo aid is used.
         B.   The Attorney General may adopt rules in accordance with Ohio R.C.
Chapter 119 that govern the use of electronic bingo aids. The rules may include
a requirement that an electronic bingo aid be capable of being audited by the
Attorney General to verify the number of bingo cards or sheets played during
each bingo session.
      (12)   Permit any person the charitable organization knows, or should
have known, to be under 18 years of age to play bingo described in subsection
(1) of the definition of "bingo" in Ohio R.C. 2915.01.
   (d)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in subsection (d)(3) of this
section, no charitable organization shall provide to a bingo game operator, and
no bingo game operator shall receive or accept, any commission, wage, salary,
reward, tip, donation, gratuity, or other form of compensation, directly or
indirectly, regardless of the source, for conducting bingo or providing other
work or labor at the site of bingo during a bingo session.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in subsection (d)(3) of this section,
no charitable organization shall provide to a bingo game operator any
commission, wage, salary, reward, tip, donation, gratuity, or other form of
compensation, directly or indirectly regardless of the source, for conducting
instant bingo other than at a bingo session at the site of instant bingo other
than at a bingo session.
      (3)   Nothing in this subsection (d) of this section prohibits an
employee of a fraternal organization, veteran's organization, or sporting
organization from selling instant bingo tickets or cards to the organization's
members or invited guests, as long as no portion of the employee's compensation
is paid from any receipts of bingo.
   (e)   Notwithstanding subsection (b)(1) of this section, a charitable
organization that, prior to December 6, 1977, has entered into written
agreements for the lease of premises it owns to another charitable organization
or other charitable organizations for the conducting of bingo sessions so that
more than two bingo sessions are conducted per calendar week on the premises,
and a person that is not a charitable organization and that, prior to December
6, 1977, has entered into written agreements for the lease of premises it owns
to charitable organizations for the conducting of more than two bingo sessions
per calendar week on the premises, may continue to lease the premises to those
charitable organizations, provided that no more than four sessions are
conducted per calendar week, that the lessor organization or person has
notified the Attorney General in writing of the organizations that will conduct
the sessions and the days of the week and the times of the day on which the
sessions will be conducted, that the initial lease entered into with each
organization that will conduct the sessions was filed with the Attorney General
prior to December 6, 1977, and that each organization that will conduct the
sessions was issued a license to conduct bingo games by the Attorney General
prior to December 6, 1977.
   (f)   This section does not prohibit a bingo licensed charitable
organization or a game operator from giving any person an instant bingo ticket
as a prize.
   (g)   Whoever violates subsection (a)(2) of this section is guilty of
illegally conducting a bingo game, a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law. Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever violates
subsection (a)(1), (a)(3), (b)(1), (b)(2), (b)(3), (c)(1) to (c)(11), or (d) of
this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If the offender previously has
been convicted of a violation of subsection (a)(1), (a)(3), (b)(1), (b)(2), (b)
(3), (c)(1) to (c)(11), or (d) of this section, a violation of subsection (a)
(1), (a)(3), (b)(1), (b)(2), (b)(3), (c)(1) to (c)(11), or (d) of this section
is a misdemeanor of the first degree. Whoever violates subsection (c)(12) of
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender
previously has been convicted of a violation of subsection (c)(12) of this
section, a violation of subsection (c)(12) of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(ORC 2915.09)
§ 630.07  MAINTENANCE OF RECORDS BY CHARITABLE ORGANIZATIONS.
   (a)   No charitable organization that conducts bingo or a game of chance
pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2915.02(D), or any substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, shall fail to maintain the following records for at least three
years from the date on which the bingo or game of chance is conducted:
      (1)   An itemized list of the gross receipts of each bingo session, each
game of instant bingo by serial number, each raffle, each punch board game, and
each game of chance, and an itemized list of the gross profits of each game of
instant bingo by serial number;
      (2)   An itemized list of all expenses, other than prizes, that are
incurred in conducting bingo or instant bingo, the name of each person to whom
the expenses are paid, and a receipt for all of the expenses;
      (3)   A list of all prizes awarded during each bingo session, each
raffle, each punch board game, and each game of chance conducted by the
charitable organization, the total prizes awarded from each game of instant
bingo by serial number, and the name, address, and Social Security number of
all persons who are winners of prizes of six hundred dollars ($600.00) or more
in value;
      (4)   An itemized list of the recipients of the net profit of bingo or
game of chance, including the name and address of each recipient to whom the
money is distributed, and if the organization uses the net profit of bingo, or
the money or assets received from a game of chance, for any charitable or other
purpose set forth in Ohio R.C. 2915.01(V), Ohio R.C. 2915.02(D), or Ohio R.C.
2915.101, a list of each purpose and an itemized list of each expenditure for
each purpose;
      (5)   The number of persons who participate in any bingo session or game
of chance that is conducted by the charitable organization;
      (6)   A list of receipts from the sale of food and beverages by the
charitable organization or one of its auxiliary units or societies, if the
receipts were excluded from “gross receipts” under Ohio R.C. 2915.01(T);
      (7)   An itemized list of all expenses incurred at each bingo session,
each raffle, each punch board game, or each game of instant bingo conducted by
the charitable organization in the sale of food and beverages by the charitable
organization or by an auxiliary unit or society of the charitable organization,
the name of each person to whom the expenses are paid, and a receipt for all of
the expenses.
   (b)   A charitable organization shall keep the records that it is required
to maintain pursuant to subsection (a) of this section at its principal place
of business in this state or at its headquarters in this state and shall notify
the Attorney General of the location at which those records are kept.
   (c)   The gross profit from each bingo session or game described in
subsection (1) or (2) of the definition of “bingo” in Ohio R.C. 2915.01 shall
be deposited into a checking account devoted exclusively to the bingo session
or game. Payments for allowable expenses incurred in conducting the bingo
session or game and payments to recipients of some or all of the net profit of
the bingo session or game shall be made only by checks or electronic fund
transfers drawn on the bingo session or game account.
   (d)   Each charitable organization shall conduct and record an inventory of
all of its bingo supplies as of the first day of November of each year.
   (e)   The Attorney General may adopt rules in accordance with Ohio R.C.
Chapter 119 that establish standards of accounting, record keeping, and
reporting to ensure that gross receipts from bingo or games of chance are
properly accounted for.
   (f)   A distributor shall maintain, for a period of three years after the
date of its sale or other provision, a record of each instance of its selling
or otherwise providing to another person bingo supplies for use in this state.
The record shall include all of the following for each instance:
      (1)   The name of the manufacturer from which the distributor purchased
the bingo supplies and the date of the purchase;
      (2)   The name and address of the charitable organization or other
distributor to which the bingo supplies were sold or otherwise provided;
      (3)   A description that clearly identifies the bingo supplies;
      (4)   Invoices that include the nonrepeating serial numbers of all paper
bingo cards and sheets and all instant bingo deals sold or otherwise provided
to each charitable organization.
   (g)   A manufacturer shall maintain, for a period of three years after the
date of its sale or other provision, a record of each instance of its selling
or otherwise providing bingo supplies for use in this state. The record shall
include all of the following for each instance:
      (1)   The name and address of the distributor to whom the bingo supplies
were sold or otherwise provided;
      (2)   A description that clearly identifies the bingo supplies, including
serial numbers;
      (3)   Invoices that include the nonrepeating serial numbers of all paper
bingo cards and sheets and all instant bingo deals sold or otherwise provided
to each distributor.
   (h)   (1)   The Attorney General or any law enforcement agency may do all of
the following:
         A.   Investigate any charitable organization or any officer, agent,
trustee, member, or employee of the organization;
         B.   Examine the accounts and records of the organization;
         C.   Conduct inspections, audits, and observations of bingo or games
of chance;
         D.   Conduct inspections of the premises where bingo or games of
chance are conducted;
         E.   Take any other necessary and reasonable action to determine if a
violation of any provision of this chapter or Ohio R.C. Chapter 2915 has
occurred and to determine whether Ohio R.C. 2915.11, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, has been complied with.
      (2)   If any law enforcement agency has reasonable grounds to believe
that a charitable organization or an officer, agent, trustee, member, or
employee of the organization has violated any provision of this chapter or Ohio
R.C. Chapter 2915, the law enforcement agency may proceed by action in the
proper court to enforce this chapter or Ohio R.C. Chapter 2915, provided that
the law enforcement agency shall give written notice to the Attorney General
when commencing an action as described in this subsection.
   (i)   No person shall destroy, alter, conceal, withhold, or deny access to
any accounts or records of a charitable organization that have been requested
for examination, or obstruct, impede, or interfere with any inspection, audit,
or observation of bingo or a game of chance or premises where bingo or a game
of chance is conducted, or refuse to comply with any reasonable request of, or
obstruct, impede, or interfere with any other reasonable action undertaken by,
the Attorney General or a law enforcement agency pursuant to subsection (h) of
this section.
   (j)   Whoever violates subsection (a) or (i) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(ORC 2915.10)
§ 630.08  QUALIFICATIONS OF BINGO GAME OPERATOR.
   (a)   No person shall be a bingo game operator unless the person is 18 years
of age or older.
   (b)   No person who has been convicted of a felony or a gambling offense in
any jurisdiction shall be a bingo game operator.
   (c)   Whoever violates subsection (a) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree. Whoever violates subsection (b) of this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(ORC 2915.11)
§ 630.09  EXEMPTION FOR BINGO GAMES CONDUCTED FOR AMUSEMENT.
   (a)   Sections
630.06 to
630.13 do not apply to bingo games that are conducted for the purpose of
amusement only. A bingo game is conducted for the purpose of amusement only if
it complies with all of the requirements specified in either subsection (a)(1)
or (a)(2) of this section.
      (1)   A.   The participants do not pay any money or any other thing of
value, including an admission fee or any fee, for bingo cards or sheets,
objects to cover the spaces, or other devices used in playing bingo, for the
privilege of participating in the bingo game, or to defray any costs of the
game, or pay tips or make donations during or immediately before or after the
bingo game.
         B.   All prizes awarded during the course of the game are non-
monetary, and in the form of merchandise, goods, or entitlement to goods or
services only, and the total value of all prizes awarded during the game is
less than one hundred dollars ($100.00).
         C.   No commission, wages, salary, reward, tip, donation, gratuity, or
other form of compensation, either directly or indirectly, and regardless of
the source, is paid to any bingo game operator for work or labor performed at
the site of the bingo game.
         D.   The bingo game is not conducted either during or within ten hours
of any of the following:
            1.   A bingo session during which a charitable bingo game is
conducted pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2915.07 through 2915.11 or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance.
            2.   A scheme or game of chance, or bingo described in Ohio R.C.
2915.01(O)(2).
         E.   The number of players participating in the bingo game does not
exceed 50.
      (2)   A.   The participants do not pay money or any other thing of value
as an admission fee, and no participant is charged more than twenty-five cents
($0.25) to purchase a bingo card or sheet, objects to cover the spaces, or
other devices used in playing bingo.
         B.   The total amount of money paid by all of the participants for
bingo cards or sheets, objects to cover the spaces, or other devices used in
playing bingo does not exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00).
         C.   All of the money paid for bingo cards or sheets, objects to cover
spaces, or other devices used in playing bingo is used only to pay winners
monetary and nonmonetary prizes and to provide refreshments.
         D.   The total value of all prizes awarded during the game does not
exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00).
         E.   No commission, wages, salary, reward, tip, donation, gratuity, or
other form of compensation, either directly or indirectly, and regardless of
the source, is paid to any bingo game operator for work or labor performed at
the site of the bingo game.
         F.   The bingo game is not conducted during or within ten hours of
either of the following:
            1.   A bingo session during which a charitable bingo game is
conducted pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2915.07 through 2915.11 or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance;
            2.   A scheme of chance or a game of chance, or bingo described in
Ohio R.C. 2915.01(O)(2).
         G.   All of the participants reside at the premises where the bingo
game is conducted.
         H.   The bingo games are conducted on different days of the week and
not more than twice in a calendar week.
   (b)   The Attorney General or any local law enforcement agency may
investigate the conduct of a bingo game that purportedly is conducted for
purposes of amusement only if there is reason to believe that the purported
amusement bingo game does not comply with the requirements of either subsection
(a)(1) or (a)(2) of this section. A local law enforcement agency may proceed by
action in the proper court to enforce this section if the local law enforcement
agency gives written notice to the Attorney General when commencing the action.
(ORC 2915.12)
§ 630.10  PROHIBITIONS WHERE INSTANT BINGO GAME IS CONDUCTED.
   (a)   No charitable organization that conducts instant bingo shall do any of
the following:
      (1)   Fail to comply with the requirements of Ohio R.C. 2915.09(A)(1),
(A)(2), and (A)(3), or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance;
      (2)   Conduct instant bingo unless either of the following apply:
         A.   That organization is, and has received from the Internal Revenue
Service a determination letter that is currently in effect stating that the
organization is, exempt from Federal income taxation under IRC 501(a), is
described in IRC 501(c)(3), is a charitable organization as defined in Ohio
R.C. 2915.01, is in good standing in the state pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2915.08,
and is in compliance with Ohio R.C. Chapter 1716;
         B.   That organization is, and has received from the Internal Revenue
Service a determination letter that is currently in effect stating that the
organization is, exempt from Federal income taxation under IRC 501(a), is
described in IRC 501(c)(7), (c)(8), (c)(10), or (c)(19) or is a veteran's
organization described in IRC 501(c)(4), and conducts instant bingo under Ohio
R.C. 2915.13.
      (3)   Conduct instant bingo on any day, at any time, or at any premises
not specified on the organization's license issued pursuant to Ohio R.C.
2915.08;
      (4)   Permit any person whom the organization knows or should have known
has been convicted of a felony or gambling offense in any jurisdiction to be a
bingo game operator in the conduct of instant bingo;
      (5)   Purchase or lease supplies used to conduct instant bingo or punch
board games from any person except a distributor licensed under Ohio R.C.
2915.081;
      (6)   Sell or provide any instant bingo ticket or card for a price
different from the price printed on it by the manufacturer on either the
instant bingo ticket or card or on the game flare;
      (7)   Sell an instant bingo ticket or card to a person under 18 years of
age;
      (8)   Fail to keep unsold instant bingo tickets or cards for less than
three years;
      (9)   Pay any compensation to a bingo game operator for conducting
instant bingo that is conducted by the organization or for preparing, selling,
or serving food or beverages at the site of the instant bingo game, permit any
auxiliary unit or society of the organization to pay compensation to any bingo
game operator who prepares, sells, or serves food or beverages at an instant
bingo game conducted by the organization, or permit any auxiliary unit or
society of the organization to prepare, sell, or serve food or beverages at an
instant bingo game conducted by the organization, if the auxiliary unit or
society pays any compensation to the bingo game operators who prepare, sell, or
serve the food or beverages;
      (10)   Pay fees to any person for any services performed in relation to
an instant bingo game, except as provided in Ohio R.C. 2915.093(D);
      (11)   Pay fees to any person who provides refreshments to the
participants in an instant bingo game;
      (12)   A.   Allow instant bingo tickets or cards to be sold to bingo game
operators at a premises at which the organization sells instant bingo tickets
or cards or to be sold to employees of a D permit holder who are working at a
premises at which instant bingo tickets or cards are sold;
         B.   Division (a)(12)A. of this section does not prohibit a licensed
charitable organization or a bingo game operator from giving any person an
instant bingo ticket as a prize in place of a cash prize won by a participant
in an instant bingo game. In no case shall an instant bingo ticket or card be
sold or provided for a price different from the price printed on it by the
manufacturer on either the instant bingo ticket or card or on the game flare.
      (13)   Fail to display its bingo license, and the serial numbers of the
deal of instant bingo tickets or cards to be sold, conspicuously at each
premises at which it sells instant bingo tickets or cards;
      (14)   Possess a deal of instant bingo tickets or cards that was not
purchased from a distributor licensed under Ohio R.C. 2915.081 as reflected on
an invoice issued by the distributor that contains all of the information
required by Ohio R.C. 2915.10(E);
      (15)   Fail, once it opens a deal of instant bingo tickets or cards, to
continue to sell the tickets or cards in that deal until the tickets or cards
with the top two highest tiers of prizes in that deal are sold;
      (16)   Possess bingo supplies that were not obtained in accordance with
Ohio R.C. Chapter 2915.
   (b)   A charitable organization may purchase, lease, or use instant bingo
ticket dispensers to sell instant bingo tickets or cards.
   (c)   Pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2915.091(C), the Attorney General may adopt
rules in accordance with Ohio R.C. Chapter 119 that govern the conduct of
instant bingo by charitable organizations.
   (d)   Whoever violates subsection (a) of this section or a rule adopted
under subsection (c) of this section is guilty of illegal instant bingo
conduct. Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, illegal instant bingo
conduct is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously has
been convicted of a violation of subsection (a) of this section or of such a
rule adopted under subsection (c) of this section, illegal instant bingo
conduct is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(ORC 2915.091)
§ 630.11  RAFFLE DRAWINGS.
   (a)   (1)   Subject to subsection (a)(2) of this section, a charitable
organization, a public school, a chartered nonpublic school, a community
school, or a veteran's organization, fraternal organization, or sporting
organization that is exempt from Federal income taxation under IRC 501(a) and
is described in IRC 501(c)(3), 501(c)(4), 501(c)(7), 501(c)(8), 501(c)(10), or
501(c)(19) may conduct a raffle to raise money for the organization or school
and does not need a license to conduct bingo in order to conduct a raffle
drawing that is not for profit.
      (2)   If a charitable organization that is described in subsection (a)(1)
of this section, but that is not also described in IRC 501(c)(3), conducts a
raffle, the charitable organization shall distribute at least 50 percent of the
net profit from the raffle to a charitable purpose described in Ohio R.C.
2915.01(V) or to a department or agency of the Federal government, the state,
or any political subsubsection.
   (b)   A chamber of commerce may conduct not more than one raffle per year to
raise money for the chamber of commerce.
   (c)   Except as provided in subsection (a) or (b) of this section, no person
shall conduct a raffle drawing that is for profit or a raffle drawing that is
not for profit.
   (d)   Whoever violates subsection (c) of this section is guilty of illegal
conduct of a raffle. Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, illegal
conduct of a raffle is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender
previously has been convicted of a violation of subsection (c) of this section,
illegal conduct of a raffle is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
(ORC 2915.092)
§ 630.12  INSTANT BINGO OTHER THAN AT BINGO SESSIONS.
   (a)   As used in this section, “retail income from all commercial activity”
means the income that a person receives from the provision of goods, services,
or activities that are provided at the location where instant bingo other than
at a bingo session is conducted, including the sale of instant bingo tickets. A
religious organization that is exempt from Federal income taxation under IRC
501(a) and described in IRC 501(c)(3), at not more than one location at which
it conducts its charitable programs, may include donations from its members and
guests as retail income.
   (b)   (1)   If a charitable instant bingo organization conducts instant
bingo other than at a bingo session, the charitable instant bingo organization
shall enter into a written contract with the owner or lessor of the location at
which the instant bingo is conducted to allow the owner or lessor to assist in
the conduct of instant bingo other than at a bingo session, identify each
location where the instant bingo other than at a bingo session is being
conducted, and identify the owner or lessor of each location.
      (2)   A charitable instant bingo organization that conducts instant bingo
other than at a bingo session is not required to enter into a written contract
with the owner or lessor of the location at which the instant bingo is
conducted provided that the owner or lessor is not assisting in the conduct of
the instant bingo other than at a bingo session and provided that the conduct
of the instant bingo other than at a bingo session at that location is not more
than five days per calendar year and not more than ten hours per day.
   (c)   Except as provided in subsection (f) of this section, no charitable
instant bingo organization shall conduct instant bingo other than at a bingo
session at a location where the primary source of retail income from all
commercial activity at that location is the sale of instant bingo tickets.
   (d)   (1)   The owner or lessor of a location that enters into a contract
pursuant to subsection (b) of this section shall pay the full gross profit to
the charitable instant bingo organization, in return for the deal of instant
bingo tickets. The owner or lessor may retain the money that the owner or
lessor receives for selling the instant bingo tickets; provided, however, that,
after the deal has been sold, the owner or lessor shall pay to the charitable
instant bingo organization the value of any unredeemed instant bingo prizes
remaining in the deal of instant bingo tickets. As used in this subsection,
“full gross profit” means the amount by which the total receipts of all instant
bingo tickets, if the deal has been sold in full, exceeds the amount that would
be paid out if all prizes were redeemed.
      (2)   The charitable instant bingo organization shall pay six percent of
the total gross receipts of any deal of instant bingo tickets for the purpose
of reimbursing the owner or lessor for expenses described in this division.
      (3)   As used in this division, “expenses” means those items provided for
in Ohio R.C. 2915.01(GG)(4), (GG)(5), (GG)(6), (GG)(7), (GG)(8), (GG)(12), and
(GG)(13) and that percentage of the owner’s or lessor’s rent for the location
where instant bingo is conducted. Expenses, in the aggregate, shall not exceed
six percent of the total gross receipts of any deal of instant bingo tickets.
   (e)   A charitable instant bingo organization shall provide the Attorney
General with all of the following information:
      (1)   That the charitable instant bingo organization has terminated a
contract entered into pursuant to subsection (b) of this section with an owner
or lessor of a location;
      (2)   That the charitable instant bingo organization has entered into a
written contract pursuant to subsection (b) of this section with a new owner or
lessor of a location;
      (3)   That the charitable instant bingo organization is aware of conduct
by the owner or lessor of a location at which instant bingo is conducted that
is in violation of Ohio R.C. Chapter 2915.
   (f)   Division (c) of this section does not apply to a volunteer
firefighter’s organization that is exempt from Federal income taxation under
IRC 501(a) and described in IRC 501(c)(3), that conducts instant bingo other
than at a bingo session on the premises where the organization conducts
firefighter training, that has conducted instant bingo continuously for at
least five years prior to July 1, 2003, and that, during each of those five
years, had gross receipts of at least one million five hundred thousand dollars
($1,500,000).
(ORC 2915.093)
   (g)   (1)   A veteran’s organization, a fraternal organization, or a
sporting organization authorized to conduct a bingo session pursuant to Ohio
R.C. Chapter 2915 may conduct instant bingo other than at a bingo session if
all of the following apply:
         A.   The veteran’s organization, fraternal organization, or sporting
organization limits the sale of instant bingo to 12 hours during any day,
provided that the sale does not begin earlier than 10:00 a.m. and ends not
later than 2:00 a.m.
         B.   The veteran’s organization, fraternal organization, or sporting
organization limits the sale of instant bingo to its own premises and to its
own members and invited guests.
         C.   The veteran’s organization, fraternal organization, or sporting
organization is raising money for an organization that is described in IRC 509
(a)(1), (a)(2), or (a)(3) and is either a governmental unit or an organization
that maintains its principal place of business in this state, that is exempt
from federal income taxation under IRC 501(a) and described in IRC 501(c)(3),
and that is in good standing in this state and executes a written contract with
that organization as required in subsection (g)(2) of this section.
      (2)   If a veteran’s organization, fraternal organization, or sporting
organization authorized to conduct instant bingo pursuant to subsection (g)(1)
of this section is raising money for another organization that is described in
IRC 509(a)(1), (a)(2), or (a)(3) and is either a governmental unit or an
organization that maintains its principal place of business in this state, that
is exempt from Federal income taxation under IRC 501(a) and described in IRC
501(c), and that is in good standing in this state, the veteran’s organization,
fraternal organization, or sporting organization shall execute a written
contract with the organization that is described in IRC 509(a)(1), (a)(2), or
(a)(3) and is either a governmental unit or an organization that maintains its
principal place of business in this state, that is exempt from federal income
taxation under IRC 501(a) and described in IRC 501(c), and that is in good
standing in this state in order to conduct instant bingo. That contract shall
include a statement of the percentage of the net proceeds that the veteran’s,
fraternal, or sporting organization will be distributing to the charitable
organization that is described in IRC 509(a)(1), (a)(2), or (a)(3) and is
either a governmental unit or an organization that maintains its principal
place of business in this state, that is exempt from federal income taxation
under IRC 501(a) and described in IRC 501(c), and that is in good standing in
this state.
      (3)   A.   If a veteran’s organization, fraternal organization, or
sporting organization authorized to conduct instant bingo pursuant to
subsection (g)(1) of this section has been issued a liquor permit under Ohio
R.C. Chapter 4303, that permit may be subject to suspension, revocation, or
cancellation if the veteran’s organization, fraternal organization, or sporting
organization violates a provision of this chapter or Ohio R.C. Chapter 2915.
         B.   No veteran’s organization, fraternal organization, or sporting
organization that enters into a written contract pursuant to subsection (g)(2)
of this section shall violate any provision of this chapter or Ohio R.C.
Chapter 2915, or permit, aid, or abet any other person in violating any
provision of this chapter or Ohio R.C. Chapter 2915.
      (4)   A veteran’s organization, fraternal organization, or sporting
organization shall give all required proceeds earned from the conduct of
instant bingo to the organization with which the veteran’s organization,
fraternal organization, or sporting organization has entered into a written
contract.
      (5)   Whoever violates subsection (g) of this section is guilty of
illegal instant bingo conduct. Except as otherwise provided in this subsection,
illegal instant bingo conduct is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the
offender previously has been convicted of a violation of subsection (g) of this
section, illegal instant bingo conduct is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
(ORC 2915.13)
§ 630.13  RESTRICTIONS ON OWNER OR LESSOR OF LOCATION AT INSTANT BINGO.
   (a)   No owner or lessor of a location shall assist a charitable instant
bingo organization in the conduct of instant bingo other than at a bingo
session at that location unless the owner or lessor has entered into a written
contract, as described in Ohio R.C. 2915.093, with the charitable instant bingo
organization to assist in the conduct of instant bingo other than at a bingo
session.
   (b)   The location of the lessor or owner shall be designated as a location
where the charitable instant bingo organization conducts instant bingo other
than at a bingo session.
   (c)   No owner or lessor of a location that enters into a written contract
as prescribed in subsection (a) of this section shall violate any provision of
this chapter or Ohio R.C. Chapter 2915, or permit, aid, or abet any other
person in violating any provision of this chapter or Ohio R.C. Chapter 2915.
   (d)   No owner or lessor of a location that enters into a written contract
as prescribed in subsection (a) of this section shall violate the terms of the
contract.
   (e)   (1)   Whoever violates subsection (c) or (d) of this section is guilty
of illegal instant bingo conduct. Except as otherwise provided in this
subsection, illegal instant bingo conduct is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
If the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of subsection (c)
or (d) of this section, illegal instant bingo conduct is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   If an owner or lessor of a location knowingly, intentionally, or
recklessly violates subsection (c) or (d) of this section, any license that the
owner or lessor holds for the retail sale of any goods on the owner's or
lessor's premises that is issued by the state or a political subsubsection is
subject to suspension, revocation, or payment of a monetary penalty at the
request of the Attorney General.
(ORC 2915.094)
§ 630.14  SKILL-BASED AMUSEMENT MACHINES; PROHIBITED CONDUCT.
   (a)   No person shall give to another person any item described in division
(ff)(1), (ff)(2), (ff)(3) or (ff)(4) of § 630.01 in exchange for a noncash
prize, toy or novelty received as a reward for playing or operating a skill-
based amusement machine or for a free or reduced-price game won on a skill-
based amusement machine.
   (b)   Whoever violates subsection (a) of this section is guilty of skill-
based amusement machine prohibited conduct. A violation of subsection (a) of
this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree for each redemption of a
prize that is involved in the violation. If the offender previously has been
convicted of a violation of subsection (a) of this section, a violation of that
subsection is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(ORC 2915.06)
CHAPTER 636:  OFFENSES RELATING TO PERSONS
Section
636.001   Definitions.
636.01   Negligent homicide.
636.02   Assault.
636.03   Negligent assault.
636.04   Aggravated menacing.
636.045   Menacing by stalking.
636.05   Menacing.
636.06   Unlawful restraint.
636.07   Child stealing. (Repealed)
636.075   Criminal child enticement.
636.08   Coercion.
636.09   Nonsupport of dependents.
636.10   Suspension of sentence on posting bond. (Repealed)
636.11   Endangering children.
636.12   Interference with custody.
636.125   Contributing to the unruliness or delinquency of a child.
636.13   Consensual abortion. (Repealed)
636.14   Party lines to be yielded in emergencies. (Repealed)
636.15   Threatening or harassing telecommunications.
636.16   Placing harmful substance or objects in food or confection.
636.17   Domestic violence.
636.18   Safety of crowds attending  live entertainment performances.
636.19   Hazing.
636.20   Illegal distribution of cigarettes, other tobacco products, or
alternative nicotine products; transaction scans.
636.21   Ethnic intimidation.
636.22   Intimidation in connection with housing.
636.23   Failing to provide for a functionally impaired person.
636.24   Failure to perform viability testing.
636.25   Unlawful collection of bodily substances.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Definitions generally - see GEN. OFF.
606.01
   Disorderly conduct - see GEN. OFF.
648.04
   Drugs - see GEN. OFF.
Ch. 624
   False report of child abuse or neglect - see GEN. OFF.
606.105
   Improperly furnishing firearms to a minor - see GEN. OFF.
672.08
   Juvenile Court - see Ohio R.C. Ch. 2151
   Parents' liability for destructive acts of their children - see Ohio R.C.
3109.09
   Personal accountability for organizational conduct - see GEN. OFF.
606.09
   "Physical harm to persons" defined - see GEN. OFF.
606.01
   Sales of alcohol to underage persons; prohibitions and misrepresentations -
see GEN. OFF.
612.02,
612.11
   See section histories for similar state law
   "Serious physical harm to persons" defined - see GEN. OFF.
606.01
   Sex related offenses - see GEN. OFF.
Ch. 666
   Shelters for victims of domestic violence - see Ohio R.C. 3113.33 et seq.
   Vehicular homicide and vehicular manslaughter - see TRAF.
434.08
§ 636.001  DEFINITIONS.
   (a)   As used in this chapter and any other provision of these Codified
Ordinances:
      (1)   "Another's unborn" or "other person's unborn."  A member of the
species Homo sapiens who is or was carried in the womb of another during a
period that begins with fertilization and that continues unless and until live
birth occurs.
      (2)   "Unlawful termination of another's pregnancy."  Causing the death
of an unborn member of the species Homo sapiens who is or was carried in the
womb of another, as a result of injuries inflicted during the period that
begins with fertilization and that continues unless and until live birth
occurs.
   (b)   Notwithstanding subsection (a) of this section, in no case shall the
definitions of the terms "another's unborn", "other person's unborn" and
"unlawful termination of another's pregnancy" that are set forth in subsection
(a) of this section be applied or construed in any of the following manners:
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in subsection (b)(1) of this section,
in a manner so that the offense prohibits or is construed as prohibiting any
pregnant woman or her physician from performing an abortion with the consent of
the pregnant woman, with the consent of the pregnant woman implied by law in a
medical emergency, or with the approval of one otherwise authorized by law to
consent to medical treatment on behalf of the pregnant woman. An abortion that
violates the conditions described in the immediately preceding sentence may be
punished as any violation of Ohio R.C. 2903.01, 2903.02, 2903.03, 2903.04,
2903.05, 2903.06, 2903.08, 2903.11, 2903.12, 2903.13, 2903.14, 2903.21 or
2903.22, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, as applicable. An
abortion that does not violate the conditions described in the second
immediately preceding sentence but that does violate Ohio R.C. 2919.12, 2919.13
(B), 2919.151, 2919.17 or 2919.18, or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, may be punished as a violation of such section, as applicable.
      (2)   In a manner so that the offense is applied or is construed as
applying to a woman based on an act or omission of the woman that occurs while
she is or was pregnant and that results in any of the following:
         A.   Her delivery of a stillborn baby.
         B.   Her causing, in any other manner, the death in utero of a viable,
unborn human that she is carrying.
         C.   Her causing the death of her child who is born alive but who dies
from one or more injuries that are sustained while the child is a viable,
unborn human.
         D.   Her causing her child who is born alive to sustain one or more
injuries while the child is a viable, unborn human.
         E.   Her causing, threatening to cause, or attempting to cause, in any
other manner, an injury, illness, or other psychological illness or condition,
regardless of its duration or gravity, to a viable, unborn human that she is
carrying.
(ORC 2903.09)
§ 636.01  NEGLIGENT HOMICIDE.
   (a)   No person shall negligently cause the death of another or the unlawful
termination of another's pregnancy by means of a deadly weapon or dangerous
ordnance, as defined in Ohio R.C. 2923.11.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of negligent homicide, a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(ORC 2903.05)
Statutory reference:
   Reckless homicide, felony offense, see Ohio R.C. 2903.041
§ 636.02  ASSAULT.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly cause or attempt to cause physical harm to
another or to another's unborn.
   (b)   No person shall recklessly cause serious physical harm to another or
to another's unborn.
   (c)   Whoever violates subsection (a) or (b) of this section is guilty of
assault. Except as provided in Ohio R.C. 2903.13(C), assault is a misdemeanor
of the first degree.
   (d)   If an offender who is convicted of or pleads guilty to assault when it
is a misdemeanor also is convicted of or pleads guilty to a specification as
described in Ohio R.C. 2941.1423 (victim of the offense was a woman whom the
defendant knew was pregnant at the time of the offense) that was included in
the indictment, count in the indictment or information charging the offense,
the court shall sentence the offender to a mandatory jail term as provided in
Ohio R.C. 2929.24(G).
(ORC 2903.13)
Statutory reference:
   Aggravated and felonious assault, see Ohio R.C. 2903.11 and 2903.12
   Aggravated vehicular assault, felony, see Ohio R.C. 2903.08
   Felony offenses: assaulting functionally impaired person, peace officer,
investigator of the Bureau of Criminal Identification and Investigation,
firefighter, person performing emergency medical service, officer or employee
of a public children services agency or private child placing agency; assault
at a correctional institution; assault on school officials and school bus
drivers; health care professional, worker or security guard at a hospital under
certain circumstances; judge, magistrate,  prosecutor or court official or
employee under certain circumstances, see Ohio R.C. 2903.13(C)
   Permitting child abuse, felony offense, see Ohio R.C. 2903.15
   Persons who may seek relief under anti-stalking  protection order; ex parte
orders, see Ohio R.C. 2903.214
   Protection order as pretrial condition of release, see Ohio R.C. 2903.213
§ 636.03  NEGLIGENT ASSAULT.
   (a)   No person shall negligently, by means of a deadly weapon or dangerous
ordnance as defined in Ohio R.C. 2923.11, cause physical harm to another or to
another's unborn.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of negligent assault, a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(ORC 2903.14)
§ 636.04  AGGRAVATED MENACING.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly cause another to believe that the offender
will cause serious physical harm to the person or property of the other person,
such other person’s unborn, or a member of such other person’s immediate
family. In addition to any other basis for the other person’s belief that the
offender will cause serious physical harm to the person or property of the
other person, the other person’s unborn, or a member of the other person’s
immediate family, the other person’s belief may be based on words or conduct of
the offender that are directed at or identify a corporation, association, or
other organization that employs the other person or to which the other person
belongs.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of aggravated menacing. Except
as otherwise provided in this subsection (b), aggravated menacing is a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If the victim of the offense is an officer or
employee of a public children services agency or a private child placing agency
and the offense relates to the officer’s or employee’s performance or
anticipated performance of official responsibilities or duties, aggravated
menacing is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law or, if the
offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to an offense of
violence, the victim of that prior offense was an officer or employee of a
public children services agency or private child placing agency, and that prior
offense related to the officer’s or employee’s performance or anticipated
performance of official responsibilities or duties, a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.
   (c)   As used in this section, “Organization” includes an entity that is a
governmental employer.
(R.C. §  2903.21)
§ 636.045  MENACING BY STALKING.
   (a)   Prohibited conduct.
      (1)   A.   No person by engaging in a pattern of conduct shall knowingly
cause another person to believe that the offender will cause physical harm to
the other person or a family or household member of the other person or cause
mental distress to the other person or a family or household member of the
other person. In addition to any other basis for the other person’s belief that
the offender will cause physical harm to the other person or the other person’s
family or household member or mental distress to the other person or the other
person’s family or household member, the other person’s belief or mental
distress may be based on words or conduct of the offender that are directed at
or identify a corporation, association, or other organization that employs the
other person or to which the other person belongs.
         B.   No person, through the use of any form of written communication
or any electronic method of remotely transferring information, including but
not limited to any computer, computer network, computer program, computer
system, or telecommunication device, shall post a message or use any
intentionally written or verbal graphic gesture with purpose to do either of
the following:
            1.   Violate subsection (a)(1)A. of this section;
            2.   Urge or incite another to commit a violation of subsection (a)
(1)A. of this section.
         C.   No person, with a sexual motivation, shall violate subsection (a)
(1)A. or (a)(1)B. of this section.
      (2)   Whoever violates subsection (a)(1) of this section is guilty of
menacing by stalking.
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in subsection (a)(2)B. of this
section, menacing by stalking is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
         B.   Menacing by stalking is a felony, to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law, if any of the following applies:
            1.   The offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of Ohio R.C. 2903.211 or a violation of Ohio R.C.
2911.211, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance to either of these
offenses.
            2.   In committing the offense under subsection (a)(1)A., (a)(1)B.
or (a)(1)C. of this section, the offender made a threat of physical harm to or
against the victim, or as a result of an offense committed under subsection (a)
(1)B. or (a)(1)C. of this section, a third person induced by the offender's
posted message made a threat of physical harm to or against the victim.
            3.   In committing the offense under subsection (a)(1)A., (a)(1)B.
or (a)(1)C. of this section, the offender trespassed on the land or premises
where the victim lives, is employed, or attends school, or as a result of an
offense committed under subsection (a)(1)B. or (a)(1)C. of this section, a
third person induced by the offender's posted message trespassed on the land or
premises where the victim lives, is employed, or attends school.
            4.   The victim of the offense is a minor.
            5.   The offender has a history of violence towards the victim or
any other person or a history of other violent acts towards the victim or any
other person.
            6.   While committing the offense under subsection (a)(1)A. of this
section or a violation of subsection (a)(1)C. of this section based on conduct
in violation of subsection (a)(1)A. of this section, the offender had a deadly
weapon on or about the offender's person or under the offender's control.
Division (a)(2)B.6. of this section does not apply in determining the penalty
for a violation of subsection (a)(1)B. of this section or a violation of
subsection (a)(1)C. of this section based on conduct in violation of subsection
(a)(1)B. of this section.
            7.   At the time of the commission of the offense, the offender was
the subject of a protection order issued under Ohio R.C. 2903.213 or Ohio R.C.
2903.214, regardless of whether or not the person to be protected under the
order is the victim of the offense or another person.
            8.   In committing the offense under subsection (a)(1)A. , (a)(1)B.
or (a)(1)C. of this section, the offender caused serious physical harm to the
premises at which the victim resides, to the real property on which that
premises is located, or to any personal property located on that premises, or
as a result of an offense committed under subsection (a)(1)B. of this section
or an offense committed under subsection (a)(1)C. of this section based on a
violation of subsection (a)(1)B. of this section, a third person induced by the
offender's posted message caused serious physical harm to that premises, that
real property, or any personal property on that premises.
            9.   Prior to committing the offense, the offender had been
determined to represent a substantial risk of physical harm to others as
manifested by evidence of then-recent homicidal or other violent behavior,
evidence of then-recent threats that placed another in reasonable fear of
violent behavior and serious harm, or other evidence of then-present
dangerousness.
            10.   The victim of the offense is an officer or employee of a
public children services agency or a private child placing agency and the
offense relates to the officer's or employee's performance or anticipated
performance of official responsibilities or duties.
            11.   The offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to an offense of violence, the victim of that prior offense was an
officer or employee of a public children services agency or private child
placing agency, and that prior offense related to the officer's or employee's
performance or anticipated performance of official responsibilities or duties.
      (3)   Ohio R.C. 2919.271 applies in relation to a defendant charged with
a violation of this section.
      (4)   As used in subsection (a) of this section:
         A.   "Computer", "computer network", "computer program", "computer
system", and "telecommunications device" have the same meanings as in Ohio R.C.
2913.01.
         B.   "Emergency facility person" is the singular of "emergency
facility personnel" as defined in Ohio R.C. 2909.04.
         C.   "Emergency medical services person" is the singular of "emergency
medical services personnel" as defined in Ohio R.C. 2133.21.
         D.   “Family or household member” means any of the following:
            1.   Any of the following who is residing or has resided with the
person against whom the act prohibited in subsection (a)(1) of this section is
committed:
               a.   A spouse, a person living as a spouse, or a former spouse
of the person;
               b.   A parent, a foster parent, or a child of the person, or
another person related by consanguinity or affinity to the person;
               c.   A parent or a child of a spouse, person living as a spouse,
or former spouse of the person, or another person related by consanguinity or
affinity to a spouse, person living as a spouse, or former spouse of the
person.
            2.   The natural parent of any child of whom the person against
whom the act prohibited in subsection (a)(1) of this section is committed is
the other natural parent or is the putative other natural parent.
         E.   “Mental distress” means any of the following:
            1.   Any mental illness or condition that involves some temporary
substantial incapacity;
            2.   Any mental illness or condition that would normally require
psychiatric treatment, psychological treatment, or other mental health
services, whether or not any person requested or received psychiatric
treatment, psychological treatment, or other mental health services.
         F.   “Organization.” Includes an entity that is a governmental
employer.
         G.   “Pattern of conduct” means two or more actions or incidents
closely related in time, whether or not there has been a prior conviction based
on any of those actions or incidents, or two or more actions or incidents
closely related in time, whether or not there has been a prior conviction based
on any of those actions or incidents, directed at one or more persons employed
by or belonging to the same corporation, association, or other organization.
Actions or incidents that prevent, obstruct, or delay the performance by a
public official, firefighter, rescuer, emergency medical services person, or
emergency facility person of any authorized act within the public official’s,
firefighter’s, rescuer’s, emergency medical services person’s, or emergency
facility person’s official capacity, or the posting of messages, use of
intentionally written or verbal graphic gestures, or receipt of information or
data through the use of any form of written communication or an electronic
method of remotely transferring information, including but not limited to a
computer, computer network, computer program, computer system, or
telecommunications device, may constitute a “pattern of conduct.”
         H.   “Post a message” means transferring, sending, posting,
publishing, disseminating or otherwise communicating, or attempting to
transfer, send, post, publish, disseminate or otherwise communicate, any
message or information, whether truthful or untruthful, about an individual,
and whether done under one’s own name, under the name of another or while
impersonating another.
         I.   “Post a message” means transferring, sending, posting,
publishing, disseminating, or otherwise communicating, or attempting to
transfer, send, post, publish, disseminate, or otherwise communicate, any
message or information, whether truthful or untruthful, about an individual,
and whether done under one’s own name, under the name of another, or while
impersonating another.
         J.   “Public official” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2921.01.
         K.   “Sexual motivation” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2971.01.
         L.   “Third person” means, in relation to conduct as described in
subsection (a)(1)B. of this section, an individual who is neither the offender
nor the victim of the conduct.
      (5)   The prosecution does not need to prove in a prosecution under
subsection (a) of this section that a person requested or received psychiatric
treatment, psychological treatment, or other mental health services in order to
show that the person was caused mental distress as described in subsection (a)
(4)D.2. of this  section.
      (6)   A.   Division (a) of this section does not apply to a person solely
because the person provided access or connection to or from an electronic
method of remotely transferring information not under that person's control,
including having provided capabilities that are incidental to providing access
or connection to or from the electronic method of remotely transferring the
information, and that do not include the creation of the content of the
material that is the subject of the access or connection. In addition, any
person providing access or connection to or from an electronic method of
remotely transferring information not under that person's control shall not be
liable for any action voluntarily taken in good faith to block the receipt or
transmission through its service of any information that it believes is or will
be sent in violation of subsection (a) of this section.
         B.   Division (a)(6)A. of this section does not create an affirmative
duty for any person providing access or connection to or from an electronic
method of remotely transferring information not under that person's control to
block the receipt or transmission through its service of any information that
it believes is or will be sent in violation of subsection (a) of this section
except as otherwise provided by law.
         C.   Division (a)(6)A. of this section does not apply to a person who
conspires with a person actively involved in the creation or knowing
distribution of material in violation of subsection (a) of this section or who
knowingly advertises the availability of material of that nature.
(ORC 2903.211)
   (b)   Protection order. Consult Ohio R.C. 2903.213 for current provisions
regarding protection orders, consent agreements, anti-stalking protection
orders and orders issued by a court of another state.
   (c)   Violating a protection order, consent agreement, anti-stalking
protection order or order issued by a court of another state.
      (1)   No person shall recklessly violate the terms of any of the
following:
         A.   A protection order issued or consent agreement approved pursuant
to Ohio R.C. 2919.26 or Ohio R.C. 3113.31;
         B.   A protection order issued pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2903.213 or Ohio
R.C. 2903.214;
         C.   A protection order issued by a court of another state.
      (2)   A.   Whoever violates subsection (c) of this section is guilty of
violating a protection order.
         B.   Except as otherwise provided in subsection (c)(2)C. or D. of this
section, violating a protection order is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
         C.   Violating a protection order is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law if the offender previously has been convicted of, pleaded
guilty to, or been adjudicated a delinquent child for any of the following:
            1.   A violation of a protection order issued or consent agreement
approved pursuant to R.C. § 2151.34, 2903.213, 2903.214, 2919.26, or 3113.31,
or any substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance;
            2.   Two or more violations of R.C. § 2903.21, 2903.211, 2903.22,
or 2911.211, or any substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance,
or any combination of those offenses, that involved the same person who is the
subject of the protection order or consent agreement;
            3.   One or more violations of this section, or any substantially
equivalent state law or municipal ordinance.
         D.   If the offender violates a protection order or consent agreement
while committing a felony offense, violating a protection order is a felony to
be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
         E.   If the protection order violated by the offender was an order
issued pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2151.34 or 2903.214 that required electronic
monitoring of the offender pursuant to that section, the court may require in
addition to any other sentence imposed upon the offender that the offender be
electronically monitored for a period not exceeding five years by a law
enforcement agency designated by the court. If the court requires under this
subsection that the offender be electronically monitored, unless the court
determines that the offender is indigent, the court shall order that the
offender pay the costs of the installation of the electronic monitoring device
and the cost of monitoring the electronic monitoring device. If the court
determines that the offender is indigent and subject to the maximum amount
allowable and the rules promulgated by the Attorney General under Ohio R.C.
2903.214, the costs of the installation of the electronic monitoring device and
the cost of monitoring the electronic monitoring device may be paid out of
funds from the reparations fund created pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2743.191.  The
total amount paid from the Reparations Fund created pursuant to Ohio R.C.
2743.191 for electronic monitoring under Ohio R.C. 2151.34, 2903.214 and
2919.27 shall not exceed three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000) per year.
      (3)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under subsection (c)(1)C.
of this section that the protection order issued by a court of another state
does not comply with the requirements specified in 18 U.S.C. § 2265(b) for a
protection order that must be accorded full faith a credit by a court of this
state or that it is not entitled to full faith and credit under 18 U.S.C. §
2265(c).
      (4)   In a prosecution for a violation of this section, it is not
necessary for the prosecution to prove that the protection order or consent
agreement was served on the defendant if the prosecution proves that the
defendant was shown the protection order or consent agreement or a copy of
either or a judge, magistrate, or law enforcement officer informed the
defendant that a protection order or consent agreement had been issued, and
proves that the defendant recklessly violated the terms of the order or
agreement.
      (5)   As used in this section, “protection order issued by a court of
another state” means an injunction or another order issued by a criminal court
of another state for the purpose of preventing violent or threatening acts or
harassment against, contact or communication with, or physical proximity to
another person including a temporary order, and means an injunction or order of
that nature issued by a civil court of another state, including a temporary
order and a final order issued in an independent action or as a pendente lite
order in a proceeding for other relief, if the court issued it in response to a
complaint, petition or motion filed by or on behalf of a person seeking
protection. The term does not include an order for support or for custody of a
child issued pursuant to the divorce and child custody laws of another state,
except to the extent that the order for support or for custody of a child is
entitled to full faith and credit under the laws of the United States.
(ORC 2919.27)
§ 636.05  MENACING.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly cause another to believe that the offender
will cause physical harm to the person or property of the other person, the
other person’s unborn,  or a member of the other person’s immediate family. In
addition to any other basis for the other person’s belief that the offender
will cause physical harm to the person or property of the other person, the
other person’s unborn, or a member of the other person’s immediate family, the
other person’s belief may be based on words or conduct of the offender that are
directed at or identify a corporation, association, or other organization that
employs the other person or to which the other person belongs.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of menacing. Except as
otherwise provided in this subsection (b), menacing is a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree. If the victim of the offense is an officer or employee of a
public children services agency or a private child placing agency and the
offense relates to the officer’s or employee’s performance or anticipated
performance of official responsibilities or duties, menacing is a misdemeanor
of the first degree or, if the offender previously has been convicted of or
pleaded guilty to an offense of violence, the victim of that prior offense was
an officer or employee of a public children services agency or private child
placing agency, and that prior offense related to the officer’s or employee’s
performance or anticipated performance of official responsibilities or duties,
a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (c)   As used in this section, “Organization” includes an entity that is a
governmental employer.
(R.C. § 2903.22)
§ 636.06  UNLAWFUL RESTRAINT.
   (a)   No person, without privilege to do so, shall knowingly restrain
another of the other person's liberty.
   (b)   No person, without privilege to do so and with a sexual motivation,
shall knowingly restrain another of the other person's liberty.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of unlawful restraint, a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (d)   As used in this section, "sexual motivation" has the same meaning as
in Ohio R.C. 2971.01.
(ORC 2905.03)
§ 636.07  CHILD STEALING. (REPEALED)
Editor's note:
   Section
636.07 was repealed as part of the 1998 updating and revision of this Model
Ohio Municipal Code because substantially equivalent state law (Ohio R.C.
2905.04) was repealed by the Ohio General Assembly.
§ 636.075  CRIMINAL CHILD ENTICEMENT.
   (a)   No person, by any means and without privilege to do so, shall
knowingly solicit, coax, entice, or lure any child under 14 years of age to
accompany the person in any manner, including entering into any vehicle or onto
any vessel, whether or not the offender knows the age of the child, if both of
the following apply:
      (1)   The actor does not have the express or implied permission of the
parent, guardian, or other legal custodian of the child in undertaking the
activity.
      (2)   The actor is not a law enforcement officer, medic, firefighter, or
other person who regularly provides emergency services, and is not an employee
or agent of, or a volunteer acting under the direction of, any board of
education, or the actor is any such person, but at the time the actor
undertakes the activity, the actor is not acting within the scope of the
actor's lawful duties in that capacity.
   (b)   No person, with a sexual motivation, shall violate subsection (a) of
this section.
   (c)   No person, for any unlawful purpose other than, or in addition to,
that proscribed by division (a) of this section, shall engage in any activity
described in division (a) of this section.
   (d)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under subsection (a) of this
section that the actor undertook the activity in response to a bona fide
emergency situation or that the actor undertook the activity in a reasonable
belief that it was necessary to preserve the health, safety, or welfare of the
child.
   (e)   Whoever violates division (a), (b) or (c) of this section is guilty of
criminal child enticement, a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender
previously has been convicted of a violation of this section, a substantially
equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, Ohio R.C. 2907.02 or 2907.03 or
former Ohio R.C. 2907.12, or Ohio R.C. 2905.01 or 2907.05 when the victim of
that prior offense was under 17 years of age at the time of the offense,
criminal child enticement is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state
law.
   (f)   As used in this section:
      (1)   “Sexual motivation” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2971.01.
      (2)   “Vehicle” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 4501.01.
      (3)   “Vessel” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 1546.01.
(ORC 2905.05)
§ 636.08  COERCION.
   (a)   No person, with purpose to coerce another into taking or refraining
from action concerning which he or she has a legal freedom of choice, shall do
any of the following:
      (1)   Threaten to commit any offense.
      (2)   Utter or threaten any slander against any person.
      (3)   Expose or threaten to expose any matter tending to subject any
person to hatred, contempt, or ridicule, or to damage his or her personal or
business repute, or to impair his or her credit.
      (4)   Institute or threaten criminal proceedings against any person.
      (5)   Take or withhold, or threaten to take or withhold official action,
or cause or threaten to cause official action to be taken or withheld.
   (b)   Divisions (a)(4) and (5) of this section shall not be construed to
prohibit a prosecutor or court from doing any of the following in good faith
and in the interests of justice:
      (1)   Offering or agreeing to grant, or granting immunity from
prosecution pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2945.44.
      (2)   In return for a plea of guilty to one or more offenses charged or
to one or more other or lesser offenses, or in return for the testimony of the
accused in a case to which he or she is not a party, offering or agreeing to
dismiss, or dismissing one or more charges pending against an accused, or
offering or agreeing to impose, or imposing a certain sentence or modification
of sentence.
      (3)   Imposing probation on certain conditions, including without
limitation requiring the offender to make restitution or redress to the victim
of his or her offense.
   (c)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under subsection (a)(3), (4),
or (5) of this section that the actor's conduct was a reasonable response to
the circumstances which occasioned it, and that his or her purpose was limited
to:
      (1)   Compelling another to refrain from misconduct or to desist from
further misconduct.
      (2)   Preventing or redressing a wrong or injustice.
      (3)   Preventing another from taking action for which the actor
reasonably believed the other person to be disqualified.
      (4)   Compelling another to take action which the actor reasonably
believed the other person to be under a duty to take.
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of coercion, a misdemeanor of
the second degree.
   (e)   As used in this section, "threat" includes a direct threat and a
threat by innuendo.
(ORC 2905.12)
§ 636.09  NONSUPPORT OF DEPENDENTS.
   (a)   No person shall abandon, or fail to provide adequate support to:
      (1)   His or her spouse, as required by law;
      (2)   His or her legitimate or illegitimate child who is under age 18, or
mentally or physically disabled child who is under age 21;
      (3)   His or her aged or infirm parent or adoptive parent, who from lack
of ability and means is unable to provide adequately for his or her own
support.
   (b)   (1)   No person shall abandon, or fail to provide support as
established by a court order to, another person whom, by court order or decree,
the person:
         A.   Is legally obligated to support; or
         B.   Was legally obligated to support, and an amount for support:
            1.   Was due and owing prior to the date the person’s duty to pay
current support terminated; and
            2.   Remains unpaid.
      (2)   The period of limitation under R.C. § 2901.13 applicable to
division (b)(1)B. of this section shall begin to run on the date the person’s
duty to pay current support terminates.
   (c)   No person shall aid, abet, induce, cause, encourage, or contribute to
a child or a ward of the juvenile court becoming a dependent child, as defined
in Ohio R.C. 2151.04, or a neglected child, as defined in Ohio R.C. 2151.03.
   (d)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge of failure to provide
adequate support under subsection (a) of this section or a charge of failure to
provide support established by a court order under subsection (b) of this
section that the accused was unable to provide adequate support or the
established support, but did provide the support that was within his or her
ability and means.
   (e)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under subsection (a)(3) of
this section that the parent abandoned the accused, or failed to support the
accused as required by law, while the accused was under age 18, or was mentally
or physically disabled and under age 21.
   (f)   It is not a defense to a charge under subsection (b) of this section
that the person whom a court has ordered the accused to support is being
adequately supported by someone other than the accused.
   (g)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, whoever
violates subsection (a) or (b) of this section is guilty of nonsupport of
dependents, a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of subsection (a)(2) or (b)
of this section or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance,
or if the offender has failed to provide support under subsection (a)(2) or (b)
of this section for a total accumulated period of 26 weeks out of 104
consecutive weeks, whether or not the 26 weeks were consecutive, then a
violation of subsection (a)(2) or (b) of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law. If the offender previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to a felony violation of this section or a
substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, a violation of
subsection (a)(2) or (b) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
      (2)   If the offender is guilty of nonsupport of dependents by reason of
failing to provide support to his or her child as required by a child support
order issued on or after April 15, 1985, pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2151.23,
2151.231, 2151.232, 2151.33, 3105.21, 3109.05, 3111.13, 3113.04, 3113.31,
3115.401, or former Ohio R.C. 3115.31, the court, in addition to any other
sentence imposed, shall assess all court costs arising out of the charge
against the person and require the person to pay any reasonable attorney’s fees
of any adverse party other than the state, as determined by the court, that
arose in relation to the charge.
      (3)   Whoever violates subsection (c) of this section is guilty of
contributing to the nonsupport of dependents, a misdemeanor of the first
degree. Each day of a violation of subsection (c) of this section is a separate
offense.
(ORC 2919.21)
§ 636.10  SUSPENSION OF SENTENCE ON POSTING BOND. (Repealed)
Editor's note:
   Section
636.10 was repealed as part of the 1987 updating and revisions of these
Codified Ordinances.
§ 636.11  ENDANGERING CHILDREN.
   (a)   No person, who is the parent, guardian, custodian, person having
custody or control, or person in loco parentis of a child under 18 years of age
or a mentally or physically disabled child under 21 years of age, shall create
a substantial risk to the health or safety of the child by violating a duty of
care, protection, or support. It is not a violation of a duty of care,
protection, or support under this subsection when the parent, guardian,
custodian, or person having custody or control of a child treats the physical
or mental illness or disability of the child by spiritual means through prayer
alone, in accordance with the tenets of a recognized religious body.
   (b)   No person shall do any of the following to a child under 18 years of
age or a mentally or physically disabled child under 21 years of age:
      (1)   Abuse the child.
      (2)   Torture or cruelly abuse the child.
      (3)   Administer corporal punishment or other physical disciplinary
measure, or physically restrain the child in a cruel manner or for a prolonged
period, which punishment, discipline or restraint is excessive under the
circumstances and creates a substantial risk of serious physical harm to the
child.
      (4)   Repeatedly administer unwarranted disciplinary measures to a child
when there is a substantial risk that such conduct, if continued, will
seriously impair or retard the child's mental health or development.
      (5)   Entice, coerce, permit, encourage, compel, hire, employ, use, or
allow the child to act, model, or in any other way participate in, or be
photographed for, the production, presentation, dissemination, or advertisement
of any material or performance that the offender knows or reasonably should
know is obscene, is sexually oriented matter, or is nudity-oriented matter.
      (6)   Allow the child to be on the same parcel of real property and
within 100 feet of, or, in the case of more than one housing unit on the same
parcel of real property, in the same housing unit and within 100 feet of, any
act in violation of Ohio R.C. 2925.04 or 2925.041 when the person knows that
the act is occurring, whether or not any person is prosecuted for or convicted
of the violation of Ohio R.C. 2925.04 or 2925.041 that is the basis of the
violation of this subsection.
   (c)   (1)   No person shall operate a vehicle, as defined by Ohio R.C.
4511.01, within the municipality and in violation of Ohio R.C. 4511.19(A), or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, when one or more children under
18 years of age are in the vehicle. Notwithstanding any other provision of law,
a person may be convicted at the same trial or proceeding of a violation of
this subsection and a violation of Ohio R.C. 4511.19(A), or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, that constitutes the basis of the charge of the
violation of this subsection. For purposes of Ohio R.C. 4511.191 to 4511.197
and all related provisions of law, a person arrested for a violation of this
subsection shall be considered to be under arrest for operating a vehicle while
under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, a combination of them or for
operating a vehicle with a prohibited concentration of alcohol, a controlled
substance, or a metabolite of a controlled substance in the whole blood, blood
serum or plasma, breath, or urine.
      (2)   As used in subsection (c)(1) of this section:
         A.   "Controlled substance" has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C.
3719.01.
         B.   "Vehicle" has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 4511.01.
   (d)   (1)   Division (b)(5) of this section does not apply to any material
or performance that is produced, presented, or disseminated for a bona fide
medical, scientific, educational, religious, governmental, judicial, or other
proper purpose, by or to a physician, psychologist, sociologist, scientist,
teacher, person pursing bona fide studies for research, librarian, member of
the clergy, prosecutor, judge, or other person having a proper interest in the
material or performance.
      (2)   Mistake of age is not a defense to a charge under subsection (b)(5)
of this section.
      (3)   In a prosecution under subsection (b)(5) of this section, the trier
of fact may infer that an actor, model, or participant in the material or
performance involved is a juvenile if the material or performance, through its
title, text, visual representation, or otherwise, represents or depicts the
actor, model, or participant as a juvenile.
      (4)   As used in this subsection and subsection (b)(5) of this section:
         A.   "Material", "performance", "obscene", and "sexual activity" have
the same meanings as in Ohio R.C. 2907.01.
         B.   "Nudity-oriented matter" means any material or performance that
shows a minor in a state of nudity and that, taken as a whole by the average
person applying contemporary community standards, appeals to the prurient
interest.
         C.   "Sexually oriented matter" means any material or performance that
shows a minor participating or engaging in sexual activity, masturbation, or
bestiality.
   (e)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of endangering children.
      (1)   If the offender violates subsection (a) or (b)(1) of this section,
endangering children is one of the following:
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in subsection (e)(1)B., C., or D., a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
         B.   If the offender previously has been convicted of an offense under
this section or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, or
of any offense involving neglect, abandonment, or contributing to the
delinquency of or physical abuse of a child, except as otherwise provided in
subsection (e)(1)C. or D. of this section, endangering children is a felony to
be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
         C.   If the violation is a violation of subsection (a) of this section
and results in serious physical harm to the child involved, endangering
children is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
         D.   If the violation is a violation of subsection (b)(1) of this
section and results in serious physical harm to the child involved, endangering
children is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   If the offender violates subsection (b)(2), (3), (4), (5) or (6) of
this section, endangering children is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
      (3)   If the offender violates subsection (c) of this section, the
offender shall be punished as follows:
         A.   Except as provided in (e)(3)B. or C., endangering children in
violation of subsection (c) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
         B.   If the violation results in serious physical harm to the child or
if the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of this section or
a substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, or of any offense
involving neglect, abandonment, or contributing to the delinquency of or
physical abuse of a child, except as otherwise provided in subsection (e)(3)C.
of this section, endangering children in violation of subsection (c) of this
section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
         C.   If the violation results in serious physical harm to the child
and if the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of this
section, Ohio R.C. 2903.06, 2903.08, 2919.22(C) or former Ohio R.C. 2903.07 as
it existed prior to March 23, 2000, or Ohio R.C. 2903.04, in a case in which
the offender was subject to the sanctions described in subsection (D) of that
section, endangering children in violation of subsection (c) of this section is
a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
         D.   In addition to any term of imprisonment, fine, or other sentence,
penalty or sanction it imposes upon the offender pursuant to subsections (e)
(3)A., B. or C. of this section or pursuant to any other provision of law and
in addition to any suspension of the offender's driver's license or commercial
driver's license or permit or nonresident operating privilege under Ohio R.C.
Chapter 4506, 4509, 4510, or 4511, or any other provision of law, the court
also may impose upon the offender a class seven suspension of the offender's
driver's or commercial driver's license or permit or nonresident operating
privilege from the range specified in Ohio R.C. 4510.02(A)(7).
         E.   In addition to any term of imprisonment, fine, or other sentence,
penalty or sanction imposed upon the offender pursuant to subsection (e)(3)A.,
B., C. or D. of this section or pursuant to any other provision of law for the
violation of subsection (c) of this section, if as a part of the same trial or
proceeding the offender also is convicted of or pleads guilty to a separate
charge charging the violation of Ohio R.C. 4511.19(A), or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, that was the basis of the charge of the
violation of subsection (c) of this section, the offender also shall be
sentenced in accordance with Ohio R.C. 4511.19, or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, for that violation of Ohio R.C. 4511.19(A), or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (f)   (1)   If a person violates subsection (c) of this section and if, at
the time of the violation, there were two or more children under 18 years of
age in the motor vehicle involved in the violation, the offender may be
convicted of a violation of subsection (c) of this section for each of the
children, but the court may sentence the offender for only one of the
violations.
      (2)   A.   If a person is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of
subsection (c) of this section but the person is not also convicted of and does
not also plead guilty to a separate charge of violating Ohio R.C. 4511.19(A),
or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, that was the basis of the
charge of the violation of subsection (c) of this section, both the following
apply:
            1.   For purposes of the provisions of Ohio R.C. 4511.19, or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, that set forth the penalties and
sanctions for a violation of Ohio R.C. 4511.19(A), or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, the conviction of or plea of guilty to the
violation of subsection (c) of this section shall not constitute a violation of
Ohio R.C. 4511.19(A), or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
            2.   For purposes of the provisions of law that refers to a
conviction of or plea of guilty to a violation of Ohio R.C. 4511.19(A), or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, and that is not described in
subsection (f)(2)A.1. of this section, the conviction of or plea of guilty to
the violation of subsection (c) of this section shall constitute a conviction
or plea of guilty to a violation of Ohio R.C. 4511.19(A), or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance.
         B.   If a person is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of
subsection (c) of this section and the person also is convicted of or pleads
guilty to a separate charge of violating Ohio R.C. 4511.19(A), or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, that was the basis of the charge
of the violation of subsection (c) of this section, the conviction of or plea
of guilty to the violation of subsection (c) of this section shall not
constitute, for the purposes of any provision of law that refers to a
conviction of or a plea of guilty to a violation of Ohio R.C. 4511.19(A) or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, a conviction of or a plea of
guilty to a violation of Ohio R.C. 4511.19(A) or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance.
(ORC 2919.22(A) - (E), (H))
Statutory reference:
   Community service, requirements, see Ohio R.C. 2919.22(F)
   License suspension, requirements, see Ohio R.C. 2919.22(G)
   Permitting child abuse, felony offense, see Ohio R.C. 2903.15
§ 636.12  INTERFERENCE WITH CUSTODY.
   (a)   No person, knowing that he or she is without privilege to do so or
being reckless in that regard, shall entice, take, keep, or harbor a person
identified in subsection (a)(1), (2) or (3) of this section from the parent,
guardian, or custodian of the person identified in subsection (a)(1), (2) or
(3) of this section:
      (1)   A child under the age of 18, or a mentally or physically disabled
child under the age of 21;
      (2)   A person committed by law to an institution for delinquent, unruly,
neglected, abused, or dependent children;
      (3)   A person committed by law to an institution for the mentally ill or
an institution for persons with intellectual disabilities.
   (b)   No person shall aid, abet, induce, cause, or encourage a child or a
ward of the juvenile court who has been committed to the custody of any person,
department, or public or private institution to leave the custody of that
person, department, or institution without legal consent.
   (c)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge of enticing or taking under
subsection (a)(1) of this section that the actor reasonably believed that his
or her conduct was necessary to preserve the child's health or safety. It is an
affirmative defense to a charge of keeping or harboring under subsection (a) of
this section that the actor in good faith gave notice to law enforcement or
judicial authorities within a reasonable time after the child or committed
person came under his or her shelter, protection, or influence.
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of interference with custody.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsubsection, a violation of
subsection (a)(1) above is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the child who
is the subject of a violation of subsection (a)(1) is removed from the state or
if the offender previously has been convicted of an offense under this section
or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, a violation of
subsection (a)(1) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law. If the child who is the subject of a violation of
subsection (a)(1) suffers physical harm as a result of the violation, a
violation of subsection (a)(1) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.
      (2)   A violation of subsection (a)(2) or (3) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (3)   A violation of subsection (b) of this section is a misdemeanor of
the first degree. Each day of a violation of subsection (b) is a separate
offense.
(ORC 2919.23)
§ 636.125  CONTRIBUTING TO THE UNRULINESS OR DELINQUENCY OF A CHILD.
   (a)   As used in this section:
      (1)   “Delinquent child” has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2152.02.
      (2)   “Unruly child” has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2151.022.
   (b)   No person, including a parent, guardian, or other custodian of a
child, shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Aid, abet, induce, cause, encourage, or contribute to a child or a
ward of the juvenile court becoming an unruly child or a delinquent child;
      (2)   Act in a way tending to cause a child or a ward of the juvenile
court to become an unruly child or a delinquent child;
      (3)   Act in a way that contributes to an adjudication of the child as a
delinquent child based on the child’s violation of a court order adjudicating
the child an unruly child for being an habitual truant;
      (4)   If the person is the parent, guardian, or custodian of a child who
has the duties under R.C. Chapters 2152 and 2950 to register, register a new
residence address, and periodically verify a residence address, and, if
applicable, to send a notice of intent to reside, and if the child is not
emancipated, as defined in R.C. § 2919.121, fail to ensure that the child
complies with those duties under R.C. Chapters 2152 and 2950.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of contributing to the
unruliness or delinquency of a child, a misdemeanor of the first degree. Each
day of violation of this section is a separate offense.
(ORC 2919.24)
§ 636.13  CONSENSUAL ABORTION. (REPEALED)
Editor's note:
   Section
636.13 was repealed as part of the 1989 updating and revision of these Codified
Ordinances.
§ 636.14  PARTY LINES TO BE YIELDED IN EMERGENCIES. (REPEALED)
Editor's note:
   Section
636.14, based on Ohio R.C. 4931.30, is obsolete and has been removed as part of
the 2007 updating and revision of this Model Ohio Municipal Code.
§ 636.15  THREATENING OR HARASSING TELECOMMUNICATIONS.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly make or cause to be made a
telecommunication, or knowingly permit a telecommunication to be made from a
telecommunications device under the person’s control, to another, if the caller
does any of the following:
      (1)   Makes the telecommunication with purpose to harass, intimidate, or
abuse any person at the premises to which the telecommunication is made,
whether or not actual communication takes place between the caller and a
recipient;
      (2)   Describes, suggests, requests, or proposes that the caller, the
recipient of the telecommunication, or any other person engage in sexual
activity, and the recipient or another person at the premises to which the
telecommunication is made has requested, in a previous telecommunication or in
the immediate telecommunication, that the caller not make a telecommunication
to the recipient or to the premises to which the telecommunication is made;
      (3)   During the telecommunication, violates Ohio R.C. 2903.21 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance;
      (4)   Knowingly states to the recipient of the telecommunication that the
caller intends to cause damage to or destroy public or private property, and
the recipient, any member of the recipient’s family, or any other person who
resides at the premises to which the telecommunication is made owns, leases,
resides, or works in, will at the time of the destruction or damaging be near
or in, has the responsibility of protecting, or insures the property that will
be destroyed or damaged;
      (5)   Knowingly makes the telecommunication to the recipient of the
telecommunication, to another person at the premises to which the
telecommunication is made, or to those premises, and the recipient or another
person at those premises previously has told the caller not to make a
telecommunication to those premises or to any persons at those premises;
      (6)   Knowingly makes any comment, request, suggestion, or proposal to
the recipient of the telecommunication that is threatening, intimidating,
menacing, coercive, or obscene with the intent to abuse, threaten, or harass
the recipient;
      (7)   Without a lawful business purpose, knowingly interrupts the
telecommunication service of any person;
      (8)   Without a lawful business purpose, knowingly transmits to any
person, regardless of whether the telecommunication is heard in its entirety,
any file, document, or other communication that prevents that person from using
the person’s telephone service or electronic communication device;
      (9)   Knowingly makes any false statement concerning the death, injury,
illness, disfigurement, reputation, indecent conduct, or criminal conduct of
the recipient of the telecommunication or family or household member of the
recipient with purpose to abuse, threaten, intimidate, or harass the recipient;
      (10)   Knowingly incites another person through a telecommunication or
other means to harass or participate in the harassment of a person;
      (11)   Knowingly alarms the recipient by making a telecommunication
without a lawful purpose at an hour or hours known to be inconvenient to the
recipient and in an offensive or repetitive manner.
   (b)   (1)   No person shall make or cause to be made a telecommunication or
permit a telecommunication to be made from a telecommunications device under
the person’s control, with purpose to abuse, threaten, or harass another
person.
      (2)   No person shall knowingly post a text or audio statement or an
image on an internet web site or web page for the purpose of abusing,
threatening, or harassing another person.
   (c)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of telecommunications
harassment.
      (2)   A violation of subsection (a)(1), (a)(2), (a)(3), (a)(5), (a)(6),
(a)(7), (a)(8), (a)(9), (a)(10), or (a)(11) or (b) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the first degree on a first offense and a felony on each
subsequent offense, which shall be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (3)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection (c)(3), a violation
of subsection (a)(4) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree on a
first offense and a felony on each subsequent offense, to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law. If a violation of subsection (a)(4) of this section
results in economic harm of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or more,
telecommunications harassment is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
   (d)   No cause of action may be asserted in any court of this municipality
against any provider of a telecommunications service, interactive computer
service as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 230, or information service, or against any
officer, employee, or agent of a telecommunications service, interactive
computer service as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 230, or information service, for any
injury, death, or loss to person or property that allegedly arises out of the
provider’s, officer’s, employee’s, or agent’s provision of information,
facilities, or assistance in accordance with the terms of a court order that is
issued in relation to the investigation or prosecution of an alleged violation
of this section. A provider of a telecommunications service, interactive
computer service as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 230, or information service, or an
officer, employee, or agent of a telecommunications service, interactive
computer service as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 230, or information service, is
immune from any civil or criminal liability for injury, death, or loss to
person or property that allegedly arises out of the provider’s, officer’s,
employee’s, or agent’s provision of information, facilities, or assistance in
accordance with the terms of a court order that is issued in relation to the
investigation or prosecution of an alleged violation of this section.
   (e)   (1)   This section does not apply to a person solely because the
person provided access or connection to or from an electronic method of
remotely transferring information not under that person’s control, including
having provided capabilities that are incidental to providing access or
connection to or from the electronic method of remotely transferring the
information, and that do not include the creation of the content of the
material that is the subject of the access or connection. In addition, any
person providing access or connection to or from an electronic method of
remotely transferring information not under that person’s control shall not be
liable for any action voluntarily taken in good faith to block the receipt or
transmission through its service of any information that the person believes
is, or will be sent, in violation of this section.
      (2)   Subsection (e)(1) of this section does not create an affirmative
duty for any person providing access or connection to or from an electronic
method of remotely transferring information not under that person’s control to
block the receipt or transmission through its service of any information that
it believes is, or will be sent, in violation of this section except as
otherwise provided by law.
      (3)   Subsection (e)(1) of this section does not apply to a person who
conspires with a person actively involved in the creation or knowing
distribution of material in violation of this section or who knowingly
advertises the availability of material of that nature.
      (4)   A provider or user of an interactive computer service, as defined
in 47 U.S.C. § 230, shall neither be treated as the publisher or speaker of any
information provided by another information content provider, as defined in 47
U.S.C. § 230, nor held civilly or criminally liable for the creation or
development of information provided by another information content provider, as
defined in 47 U.S.C. § 230. Nothing in this division shall be construed to
protect a person from liability to the extent that the person developed or
created any content in violation of this section.
   (f)   Subsections (a)(5) to (a)(11) and (b)(2) of this section do not apply
to a person who, while employed or contracted by a newspaper, magazine, press
association, news agency, news wire service, cable channel or cable operator,
or radio or television station, is gathering, processing, transmitting,
compiling, editing, or disseminating information for the general public within
the scope of the person’s employment in that capacity or the person’s
contractual authority in that capacity.
   (g)   As used in subsections (a) through (d) of this section:
      (1)   “Cable operator” has the same meaning as in R.C. § 1332.21.
      (2)   “Caller” means the person described in subsection (a) of this
section who makes or causes to be made a telecommunication or who permits a
telecommunication to be made from a telecommunications device under that
person’s control.
      (3)   “Economic harm” means all direct, incidental and consequential
pecuniary harm suffered by a victim as a result of the criminal conduct. The
term includes but is not limited to all of the following:
         A.   All wages, salaries or other compensation lost as a result of the
criminal conduct;
         B.   The cost of all wages, salaries or other compensation paid to
employees for time those employees are prevented from working as a result of
the criminal conduct;
         C.   The overhead costs incurred from the time that a business is shut
down as a result of the criminal conduct;
         D.   The loss of value to tangible or intangible property that was
damaged as a result of the criminal conduct.
      (4)   “Family or household member” means any of the following:
         A.   Any of the following who is residing or has resided with the
recipient of the telecommunication against whom the act prohibited in division
(a)(9) of this section is committed:
            1.   A spouse, a person living as a spouse, or a former spouse of
the recipient;
            2.   A parent, a foster parent, or a child of the recipient, or
another person related by consanguinity or affinity to the recipient;
            3.   A parent or a child of a spouse, person living as a spouse, or
former spouse of the recipient, or another person related by consanguinity or
affinity to a spouse, person living as a spouse, or former spouse of the
recipient.
         B.   The natural parent of any child of whom the recipient of the
telecommunication against whom the act prohibited in subsection (a)(9) of this
section is committed is the other natural parent or is the putative other
natural parent.
      (5)   “Person living as a spouse.” Means a person who is living or has
lived with the recipient of the telecommunication against whom the act
prohibited in subsection (a)(9) of this section is committed in a common law
marital relationship, who otherwise is cohabiting with the recipient, or who
otherwise has cohabited with the recipient within five years prior to the date
of the alleged commission of the act in question.
      (6)   “Sexual activity” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2907.01.
      (7)   “Telecommunication” and “telecommunications device” have the same
meanings as in Ohio R.C. 2913.01.
   (h)   Nothing in this section prohibits a person from making a
telecommunication to a debtor that is in compliance with the “Fair Debt
Collection Practices Act”, 15 U.S.C. § 1692, as amended, or the “Telephone
Consumer Protection Act”, 47 U.S.C. § 227, as amended.
(ORC 2917.21)
§ 636.16  PLACING HARMFUL SUBSTANCE OR OBJECTS IN FOOD OR CONFECTION.
   (a)   No person shall do either of the following, knowing or having
reasonable cause to believe that any person may suffer physical harm or be
seriously inconvenienced or annoyed thereby:
      (1)   Place a pin, razor blade, glass, laxative, drug of abuse, or other
harmful or hazardous object or substance in any food or confection.
      (2)   Furnish to any person any food or confection which has been
adulterated in violation of subsection (a)(1) of this section.
(ORC 3716.11)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(ORC 3716.99(C))
§ 636.17  DOMESTIC VIOLENCE.
   (a)   Prohibited conduct.
      (1)   No person shall knowingly cause or attempt to cause physical harm
to a family or household member.
      (2)   No person shall recklessly cause serious physical harm to a family
or household member.
      (3)   No person, by threat of force, shall knowingly cause a family or
household member to believe that the offender will cause imminent physical harm
to the family or household member.
      (4)   A.   Whoever violates this section is guilty of domestic violence,
and the court shall sentence the offender as provided in subsections (a)(4)B.
to (a)(4)E. of this section.
         B.   Except as otherwise provided in subsection (a)(4)C., (a)(4)D. or
(a)(4)E. of this section, a violation of subsection (a)(3) is a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree and a violation of subsection (a)(1) or (a)(2) is a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
         C.   Except as otherwise provided in subsection (a)(4)D. of this
section, if the offender previously has pleaded guilty to or been convicted of
domestic violence, a violation of an existing or former municipal ordinance or
law of this or any other state or the United States that is substantially
equivalent to domestic violence, a violation of Ohio R.C. 2903.14, 2909.06,
2909.07, 2911.12, 2911.211 or 2919.22 if the victim of the violation was a
family or household member at the time of the violation, a violation of an
existing or former municipal ordinance or law of this or any other state or the
United States that is substantially equivalent to any of those sections if the
victim of the violation was a family or household member at the time of the
commission of the violation, or any offense of violence if the victim of the
offense was a family or household member at the time of the commission of the
offense, a violation of subsections (a)(1) or (a)(2) is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law, and a violation of subsection (a)(3) is
a misdemeanor of the second degree.
         D.   If the offender previously has pleaded guilty to or been
convicted of two or more offenses of domestic violence or two or more
violations or offenses of the type described in subsection (a)(4)C. of this
section involving a person who was a family or household member at the time of
the violations or offenses, a violation of subsection (a)(1) or (a)(2) of this
section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law, and a
violation of subsection (a)(3) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
         E.   Except as otherwise provided in subsection (a)(4)C. or (a)(4)D.
of this section, if the offender knew that the victim of the violation was
pregnant at the time of the violation, a violation of subsection (a)(1) or (a)
(2) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law,
and a violation of subsection (a)(3) of this section is a misdemeanor of the
third degree.
      (5)   Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, no court or
unit of state or local government shall charge any fee, cost, deposit or money
in connection with the filing of charges against a person alleging that the
person violated this section or a municipal ordinance substantially equivalent
to this section or in connection with the prosecution of any charges so filed.
      (6)   As used in this section:
         A.   “Family or household member.” Any of the following:
            1.   Any of the following who is residing or has resided with the
offender:
               a.   A spouse, a person living as a spouse as defined below, or
a former spouse of the offender;
               b.   A parent, a foster parent, or a child of the offender, or
another person related by consanguinity or affinity to the offender;
               c.   A parent or a child of a spouse, person living as a spouse,
or former spouse of the offender, or another person related by consanguinity or
affinity to a spouse, person living as a spouse, or former spouse of the
offender.
            2.   The natural parent of any child of whom the offender is the
other natural parent or is the putative other natural parent.
         B.   “Person living as a spouse.” A person who is living or has lived
with the offender in a common law marital relationship, who otherwise is
cohabiting with the offender, or who otherwise has cohabited with the offender
within five years prior to the date of the alleged commission of the act in
question.
(ORC 2919.25)
§ 636.18  SAFETY OF CROWDS ATTENDING LIVE ENTERTAINMENT PERFORMANCES.
   (a)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   "Concert."  A musical performance of which the primary component is
a presentation by persons singing or playing musical instruments, that is
intended by its sponsors mainly, but not necessarily exclusively, for the
listening enjoyment of the audience, and that is held in a facility. A
"concert" does not include any performance in which music is a part of the
presentation and the primary component of which is acting, dancing, a motion
picture, a demonstration of skills or talent other than singing or playing an
instrument, an athletic event, an exhibition or a speech.
      (2)   "Facility."  Any structure that has a roof or partial roof and that
has walls that wholly surround the area on all sides, including, but not
limited to, a stadium, hall, arena, armory, auditorium, ballroom, exhibition
hall, convention center or music hall.
      (3)   "Live entertainment performance." Any live speech; any live musical
performance, including a concert; any live dramatic performance; any live
variety show; and any other live performance with respect to which the primary
intent of the audience can be construed to be viewing the performers. A "live
entertainment performance" does not include any form of entertainment with
respect to which the person purchasing a ticket routinely participates in
amusements as well as views performers.
      (4)   "Person."  Includes, in addition to an individual or entity
specified in Ohio R.C. 1.59(C), any governmental entity.
      (5)   "Restricted entertainment area."  Any wholly or partially enclosed
area, whether indoors or outdoors, that has limited access through established
entrances or established turnstiles or similar devices.
   (b)   (1)   No person shall sell, offer to sell, or offer in return for a
donation, any ticket that is not numbered and that does not correspond to a
specific seat for admission to either of the following:
         A.   A live entertainment performance that is not exempted under
subsection (d) of this section, that is held in a restricted entertainment
area, and for which more than 8,000 tickets are offered to the public;
         B.   A concert that is not exempted under subsection (d) of this
section and for which more than 3,000 tickets are offered to the public.
      (2)   No person shall advertise any live entertainment performance as
described in subsection (b)(1)A. of this section or any concert as described in
subsection (b)(1)B. of this section, unless the advertisement contains the
words "Reserved Seats Only."
   (c)   Unless exempted by subsection (d)(1) of this section, no person who
owns or operates any restricted entertainment area shall fail to open, maintain
and properly staff at least the number of entrances designated under subsection
(e) of this section for a minimum of 90 minutes prior to the scheduled start of
any live entertainment performance that is held in the restricted entertainment
area and for which more than 3,000 tickets are sold, offered for sale or
offered in return for a donation.
   (d)   (1)   A live entertainment performance, other than a concert, is
exempted from the provisions of subsections (b) and (c) of this section if both
of the following apply:
         A.   The restricted entertainment area in which the performance is
held has at least eight entrances or, if both entrances and separate admission
turnstiles or similar devices are used, has at least eight turnstiles or
similar devices.
         B.   The eight entrances or, if applicable, the eight turnstiles or
similar devices, are opened, maintained and properly staffed at least one hour
prior to the scheduled start of the performance.
      (2)   A.   The officer responsible for public safety in the municipality
may, upon application of the sponsor of a concert covered by subsection (b) of
this section, exempt the concert from the provisions of that subsection if such
officer finds that the health, safety and welfare of the participants and
spectators would not be substantially affected by failure to comply with the
provisions of that subsection. In determining whether to grant an exemption,
the officer shall consider the following factors:
            1.   The size and design of the facility in which the concert is
scheduled;
            2.   The size, age and anticipated conduct of the crowd expected to
attend the concert;
            3.   The ability of the sponsor to manage and control the expected
crowd.
               If the sponsor of any concert desires to obtain an exemption
under this subsection, the sponsor shall apply to the appropriate official on a
form prescribed by that official. The official shall issue an order that grants
or denies the exemption within five days after receipt of the application. The
sponsor may appeal any order that denies an exemption to the Court of Common
Pleas of the county in which the facility is located.
         B.   If an official grants an exemption under subsection (d)(2)A. of
this section, the official shall designate an on-duty law enforcement officer
to be present at the concert. The designated officer has authority to issue
orders to all security personnel at the concert to protect the health, safety
and welfare of the participants and spectators.
      (3)   Notwithstanding subsection (d)(2) of this section, in the case of a
concert held in a facility located on the campus of an educational institution
covered by Ohio R.C. 3345.04, a state university law enforcement officer
appointed pursuant to Ohio R.C. 3345.04 and 3345.21 shall do both of the
following:
         A.   Exercise the authority to grant exemptions provided by subsection
(d)(2)A. of this section in lieu of an official designated in that subsection;
         B.   If the officer grants an exemption under subsection (d)(3)A. of
this section, designate an on-duty state university law enforcement officer to
be present at the concert. The designated officer has authority to issue orders
to all security personnel at the concert to protect the health, safety and
welfare of the participants and spectators.
   (e)   (1)   Unless a live entertainment performance is exempted by
subsection (d)(1) of this section, the officer responsible for public safety
within the municipality shall designate, for purposes of subsection (c) of this
section, the minimum number of entrances required to be opened, maintained and
staffed at each live entertainment performance so as to permit crowd control
and reduce congestion at the entrances. The designation shall be based on such
factors as the size and nature of the crowd expected to attend the live
entertainment performance, the length of time prior to the live entertainment
performance that crowds are expected to congregate at the entrances and the
amount of security provided at the restricted entertainment area.
      (2)   Notwithstanding subsection (e)(1) of this section, a state
university law enforcement officer appointed pursuant to Ohio R.C. 3345.04 and
3345.21 shall designate the number of entrances required to be opened,
maintained and staffed in the case of a live entertainment performance that is
held at a restricted entertainment area located on the campus of an educational
institution covered by Ohio R.C. 3345.04.
   (f)   No person shall enter into any contract for a live entertainment
performance that does not permit or require compliance with this section.
   (g)   (1)   This section does not apply to a live entertainment performance
held in a restricted entertainment area if one admission ticket entitles the
holder to view or participate in three or more different games, rides,
activities or live entertainment performances occurring simultaneously at
different sites within the restricted entertainment area and if the initial
admittance entrance to the restricted entertainment area, for which the ticket
is required, is separate from the entrance to any specific live entertainment
performance and an additional ticket is not required for admission to the
particular live entertainment performance.
      (2)   This section does not apply to a symphony orchestra performance, a
ballet performance, horse races, dances or fairs.
   (h)   This section does not prohibit the Council from imposing additional
requirements, not in conflict with the section, for the promotion or holding of
live entertainment performances.
   (i)   Whoever violates subsection (b), (c) or (f) of this section is guilty
of a misdemeanor of the first degree. If any individual suffers physical harm
to his or her person as a result of a violation of this section, the sentencing
court shall consider this factor in favor of imposing a term of imprisonment
upon the offender.
(ORC 2917.40)
§ 636.19  HAZING.
   (a)   As used in this section, "hazing" means doing any act or coercing
another, including the victim, to do any act of initiation into any student or
other organization that causes or creates a substantial risk of causing mental
or physical harm to any person.
   (b)   (1)   No person shall recklessly participate in the hazing of another.
      (2)   No administrator, employee, or faculty member of any primary,
secondary, or post-secondary school or of any other educational institution,
public or private, shall recklessly permit the hazing of any person.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of hazing, a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree.
(ORC 2903.31)
Statutory reference:
   Civil liability for hazing, see Ohio R.C. 2307.44
§ 636.20  ILLEGAL DISTRIBUTION OF CIGARETTES, OTHER TOBACCO PRODUCTS, OR
ALTERNATIVE NICOTINE PRODUCTS; TRANSACTION SCANS.
   (a)   Illegal distribution of cigarettes, other tobacco products, or
alternative nicotine products.
      (1)   As used in this section:
         A.   “Age verification.” A service provided by an independent third
party (other than a manufacturer, producer, distributor, wholesaler, or
retailer of cigarettes, other tobacco products, alternative nicotine products,
or papers used to roll cigarettes) that compares information available from a
commercially available database, or aggregate of databases, that regularly are
used by government and businesses for the purpose of age and identity
verification to personal information provided during an internet sale or other
remote method of sale to establish that the purchaser is 18 years of age or
older.
         B.   “Alternative nicotine product.”
            1.   Subject to division 2. of this definition, an electronic
cigarette or any other product or device that consists of or contains nicotine
that can be ingested into the body by any means, including, but not limited to,
chewing, smoking, absorbing, dissolving, or inhaling.
            2.   The phrase does not include any of the following:
               a.   Any cigarette or other tobacco product;
               b.   Any product that is a “drug” as that term is defined in 21
U.S.C. § 321(g)(1);
               c.   Any product that is a “device” as that term is defined in
21 U.S.C. § 321(h);
               d.   Any product that is a “combination product” as described in
21 U.S.C. § 353(g).
         C.   “Child.” Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2151.011.
         D.   “Cigarette.” Includes clove cigarettes and hand-rolled
cigarettes.
         E.   “Distribute.”  Means to furnish, give, or provide cigarettes,
other tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or papers used to roll
cigarettes to the ultimate consumer of the cigarettes, other tobacco products,
alternative nicotine products, or papers used to roll cigarettes.
         F.   “Electronic cigarette.”
            1.   Subject to division 2. of this definition, any electronic
product or device that produces a vapor that delivers nicotine or any other
substance to the person inhaling from the device to simulate smoking and that
is likely to be offered to or purchased by consumers as an electronic
cigarette, electronic cigar, electronic cigarillo, or electronic pipe.
            2.   The phrase does not include any item, product, or device
described in division 2. of the definition for "alternative nicotine product"
in this section.
         G.   “Proof of age.” Means a driver’s license, a commercial driver’s
license, a military identification card, a passport, or an identification card
issued under R.C. §§ 4507.50 to 4507.52 that shows that a person is 18 years of
age or older.
         H.   “Tobacco product.” Means any product that is made from tobacco,
including, but not limited to, a cigarette, a cigar, pipe tobacco, chewing
tobacco, or snuff.
         I.   “Vending machine.” Has the same meaning as “coin machine” in R.C.
§ 2913.01.
      (2)   No manufacturer, producer, distributor, wholesaler, or retailer of
cigarettes, other tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or papers
used to roll cigarettes, no agent, employee, or representative of a
manufacturer, producer, distributor, wholesaler, or retailer of cigarettes,
other tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or papers used to roll
cigarettes, and no other person shall do any of the following:
         A.   Give, sell, or otherwise distribute cigarettes, other tobacco
products, alternative nicotine products, or papers used to roll cigarettes to
any child;
         B.   Give away, sell, or distribute cigarettes, other tobacco
products, alternative nicotine products, or papers used to roll cigarettes in
any place that does not have posted in a conspicuous place a sign stating that
giving, selling, or otherwise distributing cigarettes, other tobacco products,
alternative nicotine products, or papers used to roll cigarettes to a person
under 18 years of age is prohibited by law;
         C.   Knowingly furnish any false information regarding the name, age,
or other identification of any child with purpose to obtain cigarettes, other
tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or papers used to roll
cigarettes for that child;
         D.   Manufacture, sell, or distribute in this state any pack or other
container of cigarettes containing fewer than 20 cigarettes or any package of
roll-your-own tobacco containing less than six-tenths of one ounce of tobacco;
         E.   Sell cigarettes or alternative nicotine products in a smaller
quantity than that placed in the pack or other container by the manufacturer;
         F.   Give, sell, or otherwise distribute alternative nicotine
products, papers used to roll cigarettes, or tobacco products other than
cigarettes over the internet or through another remote method without age
verification.
      (3)   No person shall sell or offer to sell cigarettes, other tobacco
products, or alternative nicotine products by or from a vending machine, except
in the following locations:
         A.   An area within a factory, business, office, or other place not
open to the general public;
         B.   An area to which children are not generally permitted access;
         C.   Any other place not identified in division (a)(3)A. or (a)(3)B.
of this section, upon all of the following conditions:
            1.   The vending machine is located within the immediate vicinity,
plain view, and control of the person who owns or operates the place, or an
employee of that person, so that all cigarettes, other tobacco product, and
alternative nicotine product purchases from the vending machine will be readily
observed by the person who owns or operates the place or an employee of that
person. For the purpose of this section, a vending machine located in any
unmonitored area, including an unmonitored coatroom, restroom, hallway, or
outer waiting area, shall not be considered located within the immediate
vicinity, plain view, and control of the person who owns or operates the place,
or an employee of that person.
            2.   The vending machine is inaccessible to the public when the
place is closed.
      (4)   The following are affirmative defenses to a charge under division
(a)(2)A. of this section:
         A.   The child was accompanied by a parent, spouse who is 18 years of
age or older, or legal guardian of the child.
         B.   The person who gave, sold, or distributed cigarettes, other
tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or papers used to roll
cigarettes to a child under division (a)(2)A. of this section is a parent,
spouse who is 18 years of age or older, or legal guardian of the child.
      (5)   It is not a violation of division (a)(2)A. or (a)(2)B. of this
section for a person to give or otherwise distribute to a child cigarettes,
other tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or papers used to roll
cigarettes while the child is participating in a research protocol if all of
the following apply:
         A.   The parent, guardian, or legal custodian of the child has
consented in writing to the child participating in the research protocol.
         B.   An institutional human subjects protection review board, or an
equivalent entity, has approved the research protocol.
         C.   The child is participating in the research protocol at the
facility or location specified in the research protocol.
      (6)   A.   Whoever violates division (a)(2)A., (a)(2)B., (a)(2)D., (a)
(2)E., or (a)(2)F. or (a)(3) of this section is guilty of illegal distribution
of cigarettes, other tobacco products, or alternative nicotine products. Except
as otherwise provided in this division, illegal distribution of cigarettes,
other tobacco products, or alternative nicotine products is a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of a violation
of division (a)(2)A., (a)(2)B., (a)(2)D., (a)(2)E., or (a)(2)F. or (a)(3) of
this section or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance,
illegal distribution of cigarettes, other tobacco products, or alternative
nicotine products is a misdemeanor of the third degree.
         B.   Whoever violates division (a)(2)C. of this section is guilty of
permitting children to use cigarettes, other tobacco products, or alternative
nicotine products. Except as otherwise provided in this division, permitting
children to use cigarettes, other tobacco products, or alternative nicotine
products is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If the offender previously has
been convicted of a violation of division (a)(2)C. of this section or a
substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, permitting children
to use cigarettes, other tobacco products, or alternative nicotine products is
a misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (7)   Any cigarettes, other tobacco products, alternative nicotine
products, or papers used to roll cigarettes that are given, sold, or otherwise
distributed to a child in violation of this section and that are used,
possessed, purchased, or received by a child in violation of R.C. § 2151.87 are
subject to seizure and forfeiture as contraband under R.C. Chapter 2981.
(R.C. § 2927.02)
   (b)   Transaction scan.
      (1)   For the purpose of this division and division (c) of this section,
the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning.
         A.   “Card holder.” Any person who presents a driver’s or commercial
driver’s license or an identification card to a seller, or an agent or employee
of a seller, to purchase or receive cigarettes, other tobacco products, or
alternative nicotine products from a seller, agent or employee.
         B.   “Identification card.” An identification card issued under R.C.
§§ 4507.50 to 4507.52.
         C.   “Seller.” A seller of cigarettes, other tobacco products, or
alternative nicotine products and includes any person whose gift of or other
distribution of cigarettes, other tobacco products, or alternative nicotine
products is subject to the prohibitions of division (a) of this section.
         D.   “Transaction scan.” The process by which a seller or an agent or
employee of a seller checks, by means of a transaction scan device, the
validity of a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or an identification card
that is presented as a condition for purchasing or receiving cigarettes, other
tobacco products, or alternative nicotine products.
         E.   “Transaction scan device.” Any commercial device or combination
of devices used at a point of sale that is capable of deciphering in an
electronically readable format the information encoded on the magnetic strip or
bar code of a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or an identification
card.
      (2)   A.   A seller or an agent or employee of a seller may perform a
transaction scan by means of a transaction scan device to check the validity of
a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or identification card presented by a
card holder as a condition for selling, giving away or otherwise distributing
to the card holder cigarettes, other tobacco products, or alternative nicotine
products.
         B.   If the information deciphered by the transaction scan performed
under division (b)(2)A. of this section fails to match the information printed
on the driver’s or commercial driver’s license or identification card presented
by the card holder, or if the transaction scan indicates that the information
so printed is false or fraudulent, neither the seller nor any agent or employee
of the seller shall sell, give away or otherwise distribute any cigarettes,
other tobacco products, or alternative nicotine products to the card holder.
         C.   Division (b)(2)A. of this section does not preclude a seller or
an agent or employee of a seller from using a transaction scan device to check
the validity of a document other than a driver’s or commercial driver’s license
or identification card, if the document includes a bar code or magnetic strip
that may be scanned by the device, as a condition for selling, giving away or
otherwise distributing cigarettes, other tobacco products, or alternative
nicotine products to the person presenting the document.
      (3)   Rules adopted by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles under R.C. §
4301.61(C) apply to the use of transaction scan devices for purposes of this
division (b) and division (c) of this section.
      (4)   A.   No seller or agent or employee of a seller shall
electronically or mechanically record or maintain any information derived from
a transaction scan, except for the following:
            1.   The name and date of birth of the person listed on the
driver’s or commercial driver’s license or identification card presented by the
card holder;
            2.   The expiration date and identification number of the driver’s
or commercial driver’s license or identification card presented by the card
holder.
         B.   No seller or agent or employee of a seller shall use the
information that is derived from a transaction scan or that is permitted to be
recorded and maintained under division (b)(4)A. of this section, except for
purposes of division (c) of this section.
         C.   No seller or agent or employee of a seller shall use a
transaction scan device for a purpose other than the purpose specified in
division (c)(2)A. of this section.
         D.   No seller or agent or employee of a seller shall sell or
otherwise disseminate the information derived from a transaction scan to any
third party, including but not limited to selling or otherwise disseminating
that information for any marketing, advertising or promotional activities, but
a seller or agent or employee of a seller may release that information pursuant
to a court order or as specifically authorized by division (c) of this section
or another section of these Codified Ordinances or the Ohio Revised Code.
      (5)   Nothing in this division (b) or division (c) of this section
relieves a seller or an agent or employee of a seller of any responsibility to
comply with any other applicable local, state or federal laws or rules
governing the sale, giving away or other distribution of cigarettes, other
tobacco products, or alternative nicotine products.
      (6)   Whoever violates division (b)(2)B. or (b)(4) of this section is
guilty of engaging in an illegal tobacco product or alternative nicotine
product transaction scan, and the court may impose upon the offender a civil
penalty of up to $1,000 for each violation. The Clerk of the Court shall pay
each collected civil penalty to the County Treasurer for deposit into the
County Treasury.
(R.C. § 2927.021)
   (c)   Affirmative defenses.
      (1)   A seller or an agent or employee of a seller may not be found
guilty of a charge of a violation of division (a) of this section in which the
age of the purchaser or other recipient of cigarettes, other tobacco products,
or alternative nicotine products is an element of the alleged violation, if the
seller, agent or employee raises and proves as an affirmative defense that all
of the following occurred:
         A.   A card holder attempting to purchase or receive cigarettes, other
tobacco products, or alternative nicotine products presented a driver’s or
commercial driver’s license or an identification card.
         B.   A transaction scan of the driver’s or commercial driver’s license
or identification card that the card holder presented indicated that the
license or card was valid.
         C.   The cigarettes, other tobacco products, or alternative nicotine
products were sold, given away or otherwise distributed to the card holder in
reasonable reliance upon the identification presented and the completed
transaction scan.
      (2)   In determining whether a seller or an agent or employee of a seller
has proven the affirmative defense provided by division (c)(1) of this section,
the trier of fact in the action for the alleged violation of division (a) of
this section shall consider any written policy that the seller has adopted and
implemented and that is intended to prevent violations of division (a) of this
section. For purposes of division (c)(1)C. of this section, the trier of fact
shall consider that reasonable reliance upon the identification presented and
the completed transaction scan may require a seller or an agent or employee of
a seller to exercise reasonable diligence to determine, and that the use of a
transaction scan device does not excuse a seller or an agent or employee of a
seller from exercising reasonable diligence to determine, the following:
         A.   Whether a person to whom the seller or agent or employee of a
seller sells, gives away or otherwise distributes cigarettes, other tobacco
products, or alternative nicotine products is 18 years of age or older;
         B.   Whether the description and picture appearing on the driver’s or
commercial driver’s license or identification card presented by a card holder
is that of the card holder.
      (3)   In any criminal action in which the affirmative defense provided by
division (c)(1) of this section is raised, the Registrar of Motor Vehicles or a
Deputy Registrar who issued an identification card under R.C. §§ 4507.50 to
4507.52 shall be permitted to submit certified copies of the records of that
issuance in lieu of the testimony of the personnel of or contractors with the
Bureau of Motor Vehicles in the action.
(R.C. § 2927.022)
   (d)   Shipment of tobacco products.
      (1)   As used in this subsection (d):
         A.   “Authorized recipient of tobacco products” means a person who is:
            1.   Licensed as a cigarette wholesale dealer under Ohio R.C.
5743.15;
            2.   Licensed as a retail dealer as long as the person purchases
cigarettes with the appropriate tax stamp affixed;
            3.   An export warehouse proprietor as defined in Section 5702 of
the Internal Revenue Code;
            4.   An operator of a customs bonded warehouse under 19 U.S.C. §
1311 or 19 U.S.C. § 1555;
            5.   An officer, employee, or agent of the federal government or of
this state acting in the person’s official capacity;
            6.   A department, agency, instrumentality, or political
subsubsection of the federal government or of this state;
            7.   A person having a consent for consumer shipment issued by the
Tax Commissioner under Ohio R.C. 5743.71.
         B.   “Motor carrier.”  Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 4923.01.
      (2)   The purpose of this subsection (d) is to prevent the sale of
cigarettes to minors and to ensure compliance with the Master Settlement
Agreement, as defined in Ohio R.C. 1346.01.
      (3)   A.   No person shall cause to be shipped any cigarettes to any
person in this municipality other than an authorized recipient of tobacco
products.
         B.   No motor carrier or other person shall knowingly transport
cigarettes to any person in this municipality that the carrier or other person
reasonably believes is not an authorized recipient of tobacco products. If
cigarettes are transported to a home or residence, it shall be presumed that
the motor carrier or other person knew that the person to whom the cigarettes
were delivered was not an authorized recipient of tobacco products.
      (4)   No person engaged in the business of selling cigarettes who ships
or causes to be shipped cigarettes to any person in this municipality in any
container or wrapping other than the original container or wrapping of the
cigarettes shall fail to plainly and visibly mark the exterior of the container
or wrapping in which the cigarettes are shipped with the words “cigarettes”.
      (5)   A court shall impose a fine of up to one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) for each violation of subsection (d)(3)A., (d)(3)B. or (d)(4) of
this section.
(ORC 2927.023)
§ 636.21  ETHNIC INTIMIDATION.
   (a)   No person shall violate Ohio R.C. 2903.21, 2903.22, 2909.06, or
2909.07, or Ohio R.C. 2917.21(A)(3), (4), or (5), or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance to any of these sections, by reason of the race,
color, religion, or national origin of another person or group of persons.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of ethnic intimidation. Ethnic
intimidation is an offense of the next higher degree than the offense the
commission of which is a necessary element of ethnic intimidation. In the case
of an offense that is a misdemeanor of the first degree, ethnic intimidation is
a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(ORC 2927.12)
§ 636.22  INTIMIDATION IN CONNECTION WITH HOUSING.
   (a)   No person, whether or not acting under color of law, shall by force or
threat of force willfully injure, intimidate, or interfere with, or attempt to
injure, intimidate, or interfere with any of the following:
      (1)   Any person because of race, color, religion, sex, familial status,
HIV-positive status, military status, as defined in Ohio R.C. 4112.01, national
origin, disability as defined in that section, or ancestry and because that
person is or has been selling, purchasing, renting, financing, occupying,
contracting, or negotiating for the sale, purchase, rental, financing, or
occupation of any housing accommodations, or applying for or participating in
any service, organization, or facility relating to the business of selling or
renting housing accommodations.
      (2)   Any person because that person is or has been doing, or in order to
intimidate that person or any other person or any class of persons from doing
either of the following:
         A.   Participating, without discrimination on account of race, color,
religion, sex, familial status, HIV-positive status, military status, as
defined in Ohio R.C. 4112.01, national origin, disability as defined in that
section, or ancestry, in any of the activities, services, organizations, or
facilities described in subsection (a)(1) of this section;
         B.   Affording another person or class of persons opportunity or
protection so to participate.
      (3)   Any person because that person is or has been, or in order to
discourage that person or any other person from, lawfully aiding or encouraging
other persons to participate, without discrimination on account of race, color,
religion, sex, familial status, HIV-positive status, military status, as
defined in Ohio R.C. 4112.01, national origin, disability as defined in that
section, or ancestry, in any of the activities, services, organizations, or
facilities described in subsection (a)(1) of this section, or participating
lawfully in speech or peaceful assembly opposing any denial of the opportunity
to so participate.
   (b)   Whoever violates subsection (a) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(ORC 2927.03)
§ 636.23  FAILING TO PROVIDE FOR A FUNCTIONALLY IMPAIRED PERSON.
   (a)   No caretaker shall knowingly fail to provide a functionally impaired
person under his or her care with any treatment, care, goods, or service that
is necessary to maintain the health of safety of the functionally impaired
person when this failure results in physical harm or serious physical harm to
the functionally impaired person.
   (b)   No caretaker shall recklessly fail to provide a functionally impaired
person under his or her care with any treatment, care, goods, or service that
is necessary to maintain the health of safety of the functionally impaired
person when this failure results in serious physical harm to the functionally
impaired person.
   (c)   (1)   Whoever violates subsection (a) of this section is guilty of
knowingly failing to provide for a functionally impaired person, a misdemeanor
of the first degree. If the functionally impaired person under the offender's
care suffers serious physical harm as a result of the violation of this
section, a violation of subsection (a) of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   Whoever violates subsection (b) of this section is guilty of
recklessly failing to provide for a functionally impaired person, a misdemeanor
of the second degree. If the functionally impaired person under the offender's
care suffers serious physical harm as a result of the violation of this
section, a violation of subsection (b) of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(ORC 2903.16)
   (d)   As used in this section:
      (1)   "Caretaker" means a person who assumes the duty to provide for the
care and protection of a functionally impaired person on a voluntary basis, by
contract, through receipt of payment for care and protection, as a result of a
family relationship, or by order of a court of competent jurisdiction.
"Caretaker" does not include a person who owns, operates, or administers, or
who is an agent or employee of, a care facility, as defined in Ohio R.C.
2903.33.
      (2)   "Functionally impaired person" means any person who has a physical
or mental impairment that prevents the person from providing for his or her own
care or protection or whose infirmities caused by aging prevent the person from
providing for his or her own care or protection.
(ORC 2903.10)
§ 636.24  FAILURE TO PERFORM VIABILITY TESTING.
   (a)   Except in a medical emergency that prevents compliance with this
subsection, no physician shall perform or induce or attempt to perform or
induce an abortion on a pregnant woman after the beginning of the twentieth
week of gestation unless, prior to the performance or inducement of the
abortion or the attempt to perform or induce the abortion, the physician
determines, in the physician’s good faith medical judgment, that the unborn
child is not viable, and the physician makes that determination after
performing a medical examination of the pregnant woman and after performing or
causing to be performed those tests for assessing gestational age, weight, lung
maturity, or other tests that the physician, in that physician’s good faith
medical judgment, believes are necessary to determine whether an unborn child
is viable.
   (b)   Except in a medical emergency that prevents compliance with this
subsection, no physician shall perform or induce or attempt to perform or
induce an abortion on a pregnant woman after the beginning of the twentieth
week of gestation without first entering the determination made in subsection
(a) of this section and the associated findings of the medical examination and
tests in the medical record of the pregnant woman.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of failure to perform
viability testing, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
   (d)   The State Medical Board shall suspend a physician’s license to
practice medicine in this state for a period of not less than six months if the
physician violates this section.
(ORC 2919.18)
§ 636.25  UNLAWFUL COLLECTION OF BODILY SUBSTANCES.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly collect any blood, urine, tissue, or other
bodily substance of another person without privilege or consent to do so.
   (b)   (1)   Subsection (a) of this section does not apply to any of the
following:
         A.   The collection of any bodily substance of a person by a law
enforcement officer, or by another person pursuant to the direction or advice
of a law enforcement officer, for purposes of a chemical test or tests of the
substance under Ohio R.C. 1547.111(A)(1) or 4511.191(A)(2) to determine the
alcohol, drug, controlled substance, metabolite of a controlled substance, or
combination content of the bodily substance;
         B.   The collection of any bodily substance of a person by a peace
officer, or by another person pursuant to the direction or advice of a peace
officer, for purposes of a test or tests of the substance as provided in Ohio
R.C. 4506.17(A) to determine the person’s alcohol concentration or the presence
of any controlled substance or metabolite of a controlled substance.
      (2)   Subsection (b)(1) of this section shall not be construed as
implying that the persons identified in subsections (b)(1)A. and B. of this
section do not have privilege to collect the bodily substance of another person
as described in those divisions or as limiting the definition of “privilege”
set forth in Ohio R.C. 2901.01.
   (c)   Whoever violates subsection (a) of this section is guilty of unlawful
collection of a bodily substance. Except as otherwise provided in this
division, unlawful collection of a bodily substance is a misdemeanor of the
first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of subsection (a) of this section or a substantially
equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, unlawful collection of a bodily
substance is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(ORC 2927.15)
CHAPTER 642:  OFFENSES RELATING TO PROPERTY
Section
642.01   Definitions.
642.015   Theft.
642.02   Possession of municipal property.
642.03   Degree of offense when certain property involved.
642.035   Evidence and theft of rented property.
642.04   Unauthorized use of a vehicle; vehicle trespass.
642.05   Unauthorized use of property.
642.06   Injuring vines, bushes, trees or crops.
642.07   Desecration.
642.08   Assaulting police dog or horse or assistance dog.
642.09   Arson.
642.10   Criminal damaging or endangering; vehicular vandalism.
642.11   Criminal mischief.
642.12   Criminal trespass.
642.125   Aggravated trespass.
642.13   Tampering with coin machines.
642.14   Passing bad checks.
642.145   Forging or selling forged identification cards.
642.146   Criminal simulation.
642.15   Misuse of credit cards.
642.155   Recording credit card, telephone or Social Security numbers.
642.16   Making or using slugs.
642.17   Prima facie evidence of purpose to defraud.
642.18   Tampering with records.
642.19   Securing writings by deception.
642.20   Personating an officer.
642.205   Taking the identity of another.
642.21   Defrauding creditors.
642.22   Receiving stolen property.
642.23   Theft of C.A.T.V. (Repealed)
642.24   Determining property value in theft offense.
642.25   Determining property value in arson.
642.26   Prosecutions for theft of utilities.
642.27   Food stamps. (Repealed)
642.28   Insurance fraud.
642.29   False statements alleging theft of motor vehicles. (Repealed)
642.30   Misconduct involving a public transportation system.
642.31   Worker's compensation fraud.
642.32   Medicaid fraud.
642.33   Motion picture piracy.
642.34   Diminishing or interfering with forfeitable property.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Alteration, injury, removal of traffic control devices - see TRAF.
414.08
   Definitions generally - see GEN. OFF.
606.01
   Detention of shoplifters and those committing motion picture piracy;
protection of  institutional property - see GEN. OFF.
606.23
   Disposition of unclaimed or forfeited property held by Police Division - see
GEN. OFF.
606.24
   Endangering aircraft and airport operations - see GEN. OFF.
672.13
   Odometers - see TRAF.
444.01
   Offenses relating to theft and fraud re motor vehicles - see TRAF.
Ch. 444
   Parents' liability for destructive acts of their children - see Ohio R.C.
3109.09
   "Physical harm to property" defined - see GEN. OFF.
606.01
   Possessing criminal tools - see GEN. OFF.
672.14
   "Property" defined - see GEN. OFF.
606.01
   See section histories for similar state law
   "Serious physical harm to property" defined - see GEN. OFF.
606.01
   Value of written instrument or evidence of debt - see Ohio R.C. 1.07
§ 642.01  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   (a)   “Active duty service member.” Any member of the armed forces of the
United States performing active duty under Title 10 of the United States Code.
   (b)   “Anhydrous ammonia.” A compound formed by the combination of two
gaseous elements, nitrogen and hydrogen, in the manner described below.
Anhydrous ammonia is one part nitrogen to three parts hydrogen (NH3). Anhydrous
ammonia by weight is fourteen parts nitrogen to three parts hydrogen, which is
approximately 82 percent nitrogen to 18 percent hydrogen.
   (c)   “Assistance dog” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 955.011.
   (d)   “Cable television service.”  Any services provided by or through the
facilities of any cable television system or other similar closed circuit
coaxial cable communications system, or any microwave or similar transmission
service used in connection with any cable television system or other similar
closed circuit coaxial cable communications system.
   (e)   “Coin machine.”  Any mechanical or electronic device designed to do
both of the following:
      (1)   Receive a coin or bill, or token made for that purpose;
      (2)   In return for the insertion or deposit of a coin, bill, or token,
automatically dispense property, provide a service, or grant a license.
   (f)   “Computer.”  An electronic device that performs logical, arithmetic,
and memory functions by the manipulation of electronic or magnetic impulses.
“Computer” includes, but is not limited to, all input, output, processing,
storage, computer program, or communication facilities that are connected, or
related, in a computer system or network to an electronic device of that
nature.
   (g)   “Computer contaminant.”  Means a computer program that is designed to
modify, damage, destroy, disable, deny or degrade access to, allow unauthorized
access to, functionally impair, record,or transmit information within a
computer, computer system, or computer network without the express or implied
consent of the owner or other person authorized to give consent and that is of
a type or kind described in subsections (1) through (4) of this definition or
of a type or kind similar to a type or kind described in subsections (1)
through (4) of this definition:
      (1)   A group of computer programs commonly known as “viruses” and
“worms” that are self-replicating or self-propagating and that are designed to
contaminate other computer programs, compromise computer security, consume
computer resources, modify, destroy, record, or transmit data, or disrupt the
normal operation of the computer, computer system, or computer network;
      (2)   A group of computer programs commonly known as “Trojans” or “Trojan
horses” that are not self-replicating or self-propagating and that are designed
to compromise computer security, consume computer resources, modify, destroy,
record, or transmit data, or disrupt the normal operation of the computer,
computer system, or computer network;
      (3)   A group of computer programs commonly known as “zombies” that are
designed to use a computer without the knowledge and consent of the owner, or
other person authorized to give consent, and that are designed to send large
quantities of data to a targeted computer network for the purpose of degrading
the targeted computer’s or network’s performance, or denying access through the
network to the targeted computer or network, resulting in what is commonly
known as “denial of service” or “distributed denial of service” attacks;
      (4)   A group of computer programs commonly known as “trap doors”, “back
doors”, or “root kits” that are designed to bypass standard authentication
software and that are designed to allow access or use of a computer without the
knowledge or consent of the owner, or other person authorized to give consent.
   (h)   “Computer hacking.”
      (1)   “Computer hacking” means any of the following:
         A.   Gaining access or attempting to gain access to all or part of a
computer, computer system, or a computer network without express or implied
authorization with the intent to defraud or with intent to commit a crime;
         B.   Misusing computer or network services including but not limited
to mail transfer programs, file transfer programs, proxy servers, and web
servers by performing functions not authorized by the owner of the computer,
computer system, or computer network or other person authorized to give
consent. As used in this subsection, “misuse of computer and network services”
includes but is not limited to the unauthorized use of any of the following:
            1.   Mail transfer programs to send mail to persons other than the
authorized users of that computer or computer network;
            2.   File transfer program services or proxy servers to access
other computers, computer systems, or computer networks;
            3.   Web servers to redirect users to other web pages or web
servers.
         C.   1.   Subject to subsection (1)C.2. of this definition, using a
group of computer programs commonly known as “port scanners” or “probes” to
intentionally access any computer, computer system, or computer network without
the permission of the owner of the computer, computer system, or computer
network or other person authorized to give consent. The group of computer
programs referred to in this subsection includes but is not limited to those
computer programs that use a computer network to access a computer, computer
system, or another computer network to determine any of the following: the
presence or types of computers or computer systems on a network; the computer
network’s facilities and capabilities; the availability of computer or network
services; the presence or versions of computer software including but not
limited to operating systems, computer services, or computer contaminants; the
presence of a known computer software deficiency that can be used to gain
unauthorized access to a computer, computer system, or computer network; or any
other information about a computer, computer system, or computer network not
necessary for the normal and lawful operation of the computer initiating the
access.
            2.   The group of computer programs referred to in subsection
(1)C.1. of this definition does not include standard computer software used for
the normal operation, administration, management, and test of a computer,
computer system, or computer network including but not limited to domain name
services, mail transfer services, and other operating system services, computer
programs commonly called “ping”, “tcpdump”, and “traceroute” and other network
monitoring and management computer software, and computer programs commonly
knows as “nslookup” and “whois” and other systems administration computer
software.
         D.   The intentional use of a computer, computer system, or a computer
network in a manner that exceeds any right or permission granted by the owner
of the computer, computer system, or computer network or other person
authorized to give consent.
      (2)   “Computer hacking” does not include the introduction of a computer
contaminant, as defined in this section, into a computer, computer system,
computer program, or computer network.
   (i)   “Computer network.”  A set of related and remotely-connected computers
and communication facilities that includes more than one computer system that
has the capability to transmit among the connected computers and communication
facilities through the use of computer facilities.
   (j)   “Computer program.”  An ordered set of data representing coded
instructions or statements that, when executed by a computer, causes the
computer to process data.
   (k)   “Computer services.”  Includes, but is not limited to, the use of a
computer system, computer network, computer program, data that is prepared for
computer use, or data that is contained within a computer system or computer
network.
   (l)   “Computer software.”  Computer programs, procedures, and other
documentation associated with the operation of a computer system.
   (m)   “Computer system.”  A computer and related devices, whether connected
or unconnected, including, but not limited to, data input, output, and storage
devices, data communications links, and computer programs and data that make
the system capable of performing specified special purpose data processing
tasks.
   (n)   “Counterfeit telecommunications device.”  A telecommunications device
that, alone or with another telecommunications device, has been altered,
constructed, manufactured, or programmed to acquire, intercept, receive, or
otherwise facilitate the use of a telecommunications service or information
service without the authority or consent of the provider of the
telecommunications service or information service. The phrase includes but is
not limited to a clone telephone, clone microchip, tumbler telephone, or
tumbler microchip; a wireless scanning device capable of acquiring,
intercepting, receiving, or otherwise facilitating the use of
telecommunications service or information service without immediate detection;
or a device, equipment, hardware, or software designed for, or capable of,
altering or changing the electronic serial number in a wireless telephone.
   (o)   “Create a substantial risk of serious physical harm to any person.” 
Includes the creation of a substantial risk of serious physical harm to any
emergency personnel.
   (p)   “Credit card.”  Includes, but is not limited to, a card, code, device,
or other means of access to a customer’s account for the purpose of obtaining
money, property, labor, or services on credit, or for initiating an electronic
fund transfer at a point-of-sale terminal, an automated teller machine, or a
cash dispensing machine. It also includes a county procurement card issued
under Ohio R.C. 301.29.
   (q)   “Dangerous drug.” Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 4729.01.
   (r)   “Data.”  A representation of information, knowledge, facts, concepts,
or instructions that are being or have been prepared in a formalized manner and
that are intended for use in a computer, computer system, or computer network.
   (s)   “Deception.”  To knowingly deceive another or cause another to be
deceived by any false or misleading representation, by withholding information,
by preventing another from acquiring information, or by any other conduct, act,
or omission that creates, confirms, or perpetuates a false impression in
another, including a false impression as to law, value, state of mind, or other
objective or subjective fact.
   (t)   “Defraud.”  To knowingly obtain, by deception, some benefit for
oneself or another, or to knowingly cause, by deception, some detriment to
another.
   (u)   “Deprive.”  To do any of the following:
      (1)   To withhold property of another permanently, or for a period that
appropriates a substantial portion of its value or use, or with purpose to
restore it only upon payment of a reward or other consideration;
      (2)   To dispose of property so as to make it unlikely that the owner
will recover it;
      (3)   To accept, use, or appropriate money, property, or services, with
purpose not to give proper consideration in return for the money, property, or
services, and without reasonable justification or excuse for not giving proper
consideration.
   (v)   “Disabled adult.”  A person who is 18 years of age or older and has
some impairment of body or mind that makes the person unable to work at any
substantially remunerative employment that the person otherwise would be able
to perform and that will, with reasonable probability, continue for a period of
at least 12 months without any present indication of recovery from the
impairment, or who is 18 years of age or older and has been certified as
permanently and totally disabled by an agency of this state or the United
States that has the function of so classifying persons.
   (w)   “Drug abuse offense.”  Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2925.01.
   (x)   “Elderly person.”  A person who is 65 years of age or older.
   (y)   “Electronic fund transfer.”  Has the same meaning as in 92 Stat. 3728,
15 U.S.C. 1693a, as amended.
   (z)   “Emergency personnel.”  Means any of the following persons:
      (1)   A peace officer, as defined in Ohio R.C. 2935.01;
      (2)   A member of a fire department or other firefighting agency of a
municipal corporation, township, township fire district, joint fire district,
other political subsubsection, or combination of political subsubsections;
      (3)   A member of a private fire company, as defined in Ohio R.C. 9.60,
or a volunteer firefighter;
      (4)    A member of a joint ambulance district or joint emergency medical
services district;
      (5)   An emergency medical technician-basic, emergency medical
technician- intermediate, emergency medical technician-paramedic, ambulance
operator, or other member of an emergency medical service that is owned of
operated by a political subsubsection or a private entity;
      (6)   The state Fire Marshal, the Chief Deputy state Fire Marshal, or an
assistant state fire marshal;
      (7)   A fire prevention officer of a political subsubsection or an arson,
fire, or similar investigator of a political subsubsection.
   (aa)   “Federally-licensed firearms dealer.” Has the same meaning as in Ohio
R.C. 5502.63.
   (bb)   “Firearm” and “dangerous ordnance.”  Have the same meaning as in Ohio
R.C. 2923.11.
   (cc)   “Forge.”  To fabricate or create, in whole or in part and by any
means, any spurious writing, or to make, execute, alter, complete, reproduce,
or otherwise purport to authenticate any writing, when the writing in fact is
not authenticated by that conduct.
   (dd)   “Gain access.”  To approach, instruct, communicate with, store data
in, retrieve data from, or otherwise make use of any resources of a computer,
computer system, or computer network, or any cable service or cable system both
as defined in Ohio R.C. 2913.04.
   (ee)   “Information service.”
      (1)   Subject to subsection (2) of this definition, the offering of a
capability for generating, acquiring, storing, transforming, processing,
retrieving, utilizing, or making available information via telecommunications,
including but not limited to electronic publishing.
      (2)   “Information service” does not include any use of a capability of a
type described in subsection (1) of this definition for the management,
control, or operation of a telecommunications system or the management of a
telecommunications service.
   (ff)   “Internet.”  Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 341.42.
   (gg)   “Motor vehicle.”  Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 4501.01.
   (hh)   “Occupied structure.”  Means any house, building, outbuilding,
watercraft, aircraft, railroad car, truck, trailer, tent, or other structure,
vehicle, or shelter, or any portion thereof, to which any of the following
applies:
      (1)   It is maintained as a permanent or temporary dwelling, even though
it is temporarily unoccupied and whether or not any person is actually present;
      (2)   At the time, it is occupied as the permanent or temporary
habitation of any person, whether or not any person is actually present;
      (3)   At the time, it is specially adapted for the overnight
accommodation of any person, whether or not any person is actually present;
      (4)   At the time, any person is present or likely to be present in it.
   (ii)   “Owner.”  Unless the context requires a different meaning, any
person, other than the actor, who is the owner of, who has possession or
control of, or who has any license or interest in property or services, even
though the ownership, possession, control, license, or interest is unlawful.
   (jj)   “Police dog or horse” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2921.321.
   (kk)   “Political subsubsection.”  Has the same meaning  as in Ohio R.C.
2744.01.
   (ll)   “Rented property.”  Personal property in which the right of
possession and use of the property is for a short and possibly indeterminate
term in return for consideration; the rentee generally controls the duration of
possession of the property within any applicable minimum or maximum term; and
the amount of consideration is generally determined by the duration of
possession of the property.
   (mm)   “Services.”  Includes labor, personal services, professional
services, rental services, public utility services including wireless service
as defined in Ohio R.C. 128.01(F)(1), common carrier services, and food, drink,
transportation, entertainment, and cable television services and, for purposes
of Ohio R.C. 2913.04 or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance,
includes cable services as defined in that section.
   (nn)   “Slug.”  An object that, by virtue of its size, shape, composition,
or other quality, is capable of being inserted or deposited in a coin machine
as an improper substitute for a genuine coin, bill, or token made for that
purpose.
   (oo)   “State.”  Has the same meaning  as in Ohio R.C. 2744.01.
   (pp)   “Telecommunication.”  The origination, emission, dissemination,
transmission, or reception of data, images, signals, sounds, or other
intelligence or equivalence or intelligence of any nature over any
communications system by any method, including but not limited to a fiber
optic, electronic, magnetic, optical, digital or analog method.
   (qq)   “Telecommunications device.”  Any instrument, equipment, machine, or
other device that facilitates telecommunication, including but not limited to a
computer, computer network, computer chip, computer circuit, scanner,
telephone, cellular telephone, pager, personal communications device,
transponder, receiver, radio, modem, or device that enables the use of a modem.
   (rr)   “Telecommunications service.”  The providing, allowing, facilitating,
or generating of any form of telecommunication through the use of a
telecommunications device over a telecommunications system.
   (ss)   “Theft offense.”  Any of the following:
      (1)   A violation of Ohio R.C. 2911.01, 2911.02, 2911.11, 2911.12,
2911.13, 2911.31, 2911.32, 2913.02, 2913.03, 2913.04, 2913.041, 2913.11,
2913.21, 2913.31, 2913.32, 2913.33, 2913.34, 2913.40, 2913.42, 2913.43,
2913.44, 2913.45, 2913.47, 2913.48, former Ohio R.C. 2913.47 or 2913.48, or
Ohio R.C. 2913.51, 2915.05, or 2921.41;
      (2)   A violation of an existing or former municipal ordinance or law of
this or any other state or of the United States substantially equivalent to any
section listed in subsection (1) of this definition, or a violation of Ohio
R.C. 2913.41, 2913.81 or 2915.06 as it existed prior to July 1, 1996;
      (3)   An offense under an existing or former municipal ordinance or law
of this or any other state or the United States involving robbery, burglary,
breaking and entering, theft, embezzlement, wrongful conversion, forgery,
counterfeiting, deceit, or fraud;
      (4)   A conspiracy to commit, attempt to commit, or complicity in
committing any offense under subsection (1), (2), or (3) of this definition.
   (tt)   “Utter.”  To issue, publish, transfer, use, put or send into
circulation, deliver, or display.
   (uu)   “Writing.”  Any computer software, document, letter, memorandum,
note, paper, plate, data, film, or other thing having in or upon it any
written, type-written, or printed matter, and any token, stamp, seal, credit
card, badge, trademark, label, or other symbol of value, right, privilege,
license, or identification.
(ORC 2909.01, 2913.01)
§ 642.015  THEFT.
   (a)   No person, with purpose to deprive the owner of property or services,
shall knowingly obtain or exert control over either the property or services in
any of the following ways:
      (1)   Without the consent of the owner or person authorized to give
consent;
      (2)   Beyond the scope of the express or implied consent of the owner or
person authorized to give consent;
      (3)   By deception;
      (4)   By threat;
      (5)   By intimidation.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of theft. Except as otherwise
provided in this subsection, a violation of this section is petty theft, a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If any of the following criteria are met, then
a violation of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law:
      (1)   If the value of the property or services is one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) or more;
      (2)   If the property stolen is any of the property listed in Ohio R.C.
2913.71;
      (3)   If the victim of the offense is an elderly person, disabled adult,
active duty service member, or spouse of an active duty service member;
      (4)   If the property stolen is a firearm or dangerous ordnance;
      (5)   If the property stolen is a motor vehicle;
      (6)   If the property stolen is any dangerous drug, or if the offender
previously has been convicted of a felony drug abuse offense;
      (7)   If the property stolen is a police dog or horse or an assistance
dog and the offender knows or should know that the property stolen is a police
dog or horse or an assistance dog;
      (8)   If the property stolen is anhydrous ammonia; or
      (9)   If the property stolen is a special purchase article as defined in
R.C. § 4737.04 or is a bulk merchandise container as defined in R.C. §
4737.012.
   (c)   In addition to the penalties described in subsection (b) of this
section, if the offender committed the violation by causing a motor vehicle to
leave the premises of an establishment at which gasoline is offered for retail
sale without the offender making full payment for gasoline that was dispensed
into the fuel tank of the motor vehicle or into another container, the court
may do one of the following:
      (1)   Unless subsection (c)(2) of this section applies, suspend for not
more than six months the offender's driver's license, probationary driver's
license, commercial driver's license, temporary instruction permit, or
nonresident operating privilege;
      (2)   If the offender’s driver’s license, probationary driver’s license,
commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction permit, or nonresident
operating privilege has previously been suspended pursuant to subsection (c)(1)
of this section, or any other substantially equivalent state or local law,
impose a class seven suspension of the offender’s license, permit, or privilege
from the range specified in Ohio R.C. 4510.02(A)(7), provided that the
suspension shall be at least six months;
      (3)   The court, in lieu of suspending the offender’s driver’s or
commercial driver’s license, probationary driver’s license, temporary
instruction permit, or nonresident operating privilege pursuant to subsection
(c)(1) or (c)(2) of this section, instead may require the offender to perform
community service for a number of hours determined by the court.
   (d)   In addition to the penalties described in subsection (b) of this
section, if the offender committed the violation by stealing rented property or
rental services, the court may order that the offender make restitution
pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2929.18 or 2929.28. Restitution may include, but is not
limited to, the cost of repairing or replacing the stolen property, or the cost
of repairing the stolen property and any loss of revenue resulting from
deprivation of the property due to theft of rental services that is less than
or equal to the actual value of the property at the time it was rented.
Evidence of intent to commit theft of rented property or rental services shall
be determined pursuant to the provisions of Ohio R.C. 2913.72.
   (e)   The sentencing court that suspends an offender’s license, permit, or
nonresident operating privilege under subsection (c) of this section may grant
the offender limited driving privileges during the period of the suspension in
accordance with Ohio R.C. Chapter 4510.
(ORC 2913.02)
Statutory reference:
   Felony theft provisions, see Ohio R.C. 2913.02(B)
§ 642.02  POSSESSION OF MUNICIPAL PROPERTY.
   (a)   No person shall, without being authorized, have in his or her control
or possession any equipment, tools, implements or other property belonging to
the municipality.
(ORC 5589.12)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 5589.99(B))
§ 642.03  DEGREE OF OFFENSE WHEN CERTAIN PROPERTY INVOLVED.
   Regardless of the value of the property involved, and regardless of whether
the offender previously has been convicted of a theft offense, a violation of §
642.015 or §
642.22 is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law if the property
involved is any of the following:
   (a)   A credit card;
   (b)   A printed form for a check or other negotiable instrument, that on its
face identifies the drawer or maker for whose use it is designed or identifies
the account on which it is to be drawn, and that has not been executed by the
drawer or maker or on which the amount is blank;
   (c)   A motor vehicle identification license plate as prescribed by Ohio
R.C. 4503.22, a temporary license placard or windshield sticker as prescribed
by Ohio R.C. 4503.182, or any comparable license plate, placard, or sticker as
prescribed by the applicable law of another state or the United States;
   (d)   A blank form for a certificate of title or a manufacturer's or
importer's certificate to a motor vehicle, as prescribed by Ohio R.C. 4505.07;
   (e)   A blank form for any license listed in Ohio R.C. 4507.01.
(ORC 2913.71)
§ 642.035  EVIDENCE OF THEFT OF RENTED PROPERTY.
   (a)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   "Renter."  A person who owns rented property.
      (2)   "Rentee."  A person who pays consideration to a renter for the use
of rented property.
   (b)   Each of the following shall be considered evidence of intent to commit
theft of rented property or rental services:
      (1)   At the time of entering into the rental contract, the rentee
presented the renter with identification that was materially false, fictitious,
or not current with respect to name, address, place of employment, or other
relevant information.
      (2)   After receiving a notice demanding the return of the rented
property as provided in subsection (c) of this section, the rentee neither
returned the rented property nor made arrangements acceptable with the renter
to return the rented property.
   (c)   To establish that a rentee has an intent to commit theft of rented
property or rental services under subsection (b)(2) above, a renter may issue a
notice to a rentee demanding the return of the rented property. The renter
shall mail the notice by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the
rentee at the address the rentee gave when the rental contract was executed, or
to the rentee at the last address the rentee or the rentee’s agent furnished in
writing to the renter.
   (d)   A demand for the return of the rented property is not a prerequisite
for the prosecution of a rentee for theft of rented property or rental
services. The evidence specified in subsection (b) above does not constitute
the only evidence that may be considered as evidence of intent to commit theft
of rented property or rental services.
(ORC 2913.72)
§ 642.04  UNAUTHORIZED USE OF A VEHICLE; VEHICLE TRESPASS.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly use or operate an aircraft, motor vehicle,
motorcycle, motorboat, or other motor-propelled vehicle without the consent of
the owner or person authorized to give consent.
   (b)   No person shall knowingly use or operate an aircraft, motor vehicle,
motorboat, or other motor-propelled vehicle without the consent of the owner or
person authorized to give consent, and either remove it from this state, or
keep possession of it for more than 48 hours.
   (c)   The following are affirmative defenses to a charge under this section:
      (1)   At the time of the alleged offense, the actor, though mistaken,
reasonably believed that he or she was authorized to use or operate the
property.
      (2)   At the time of the alleged offense, the actor reasonably believed
that the owner or person empowered to give consent would authorize the actor to
use or operate the property.
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of unauthorized use of a
vehicle.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection (d)(1), a violation
of subsection (a) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the
victim of the offense is an elderly person or disabled adult and if the victim
incurs a loss as a result of the violation, a violation of subsection (a) of
this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   A violation of subsection (b) of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(ORC 2913.03)
Statutory reference:
   Theft offense involving motor vehicle, offender to pay towing and storage
fees, see Ohio R.C. 2913.82
§ 642.05  UNAUTHORIZED USE OF PROPERTY.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly use or operate the property of another
without the consent of the owner or person authorized to give consent.
   (b)   No person, in any manner and by any means, including but not limited
to computer hacking, shall knowingly gain access to, attempt to gain access to,
or cause access to be gained to any computer, computer system, computer
network, cable service, cable system, telecommunications device,
telecommunications service, or information service without the consent of, or
beyond the scope of the express or implied consent of, the owner of the
computer, computer system, computer network, cable service, cable system,
telecommunications device, telecommunications service, or information service
or other person authorized to give consent.
   (c)   Except as permitted under R.C. § 5503.101, no person shall knowingly
gain access to, attempt to gain access to, cause access to be granted to, or
disseminate information gained from access to the law enforcement automated
database system created pursuant to Ohio R.C. 5503.10 without the consent of,
or beyond the scope of the express or implied consent of, the chair of the Law
Enforcement Automated Data System Steering Committee.
   (d)   No person shall knowingly gain access to, attempt to gain access to,
cause access to be granted to, or disseminate information gained from access to
the Ohio law enforcement gateway established and operated pursuant to Ohio R.C.
109.57(C)(1) without the consent of, or beyond the scope of the express or
implied consent of, the Superintendent of the Bureau of Criminal Identification
and Investigation.
   (e)   The affirmative defenses contained in Ohio R.C. 2913.03(C) are
affirmative defenses to a charge under this section.
   (f)   Whoever violates subsection (a) of this section is guilty of
unauthorized use of property. Except as otherwise provided in this subsection,
unauthorized use of property is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
      (1)   If unauthorized use of property is committed for the purpose of
devising or executing a scheme to defraud or to obtain property or services,
unauthorized use of property is whichever of the following is applicable:
         A.   Except as otherwise provided below, unauthorized use of property
is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
         B.   If the value of the property or services or the loss to the
victim is one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or more, it is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   If the victim of the offense is an elderly person or disabled
adult, unauthorized use of property is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
   (g)   Whoever violates subsection (b) of this section is guilty of
unauthorized use of computer, cable,  or telecommunication property, a felony
to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (h)   Whoever violates subsection (c) of this section is guilty of
unauthorized use of the law enforcement automated database system, a felony to
be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (i)   Whoever violates subsection (d) of this section is guilty of
unauthorized use of the Ohio law enforcement gateway, a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.
   (j)   As used in this section:
      (1)   "Cable operator" means any person or group of persons that does
either of the following:
         A.   Provides cable service over a cable system and directly through
one or more affiliates owns a significant interest in that cable system;
         B.   Otherwise controls or is responsible for, through any
arrangement, the management and operation of a cable system.
      (2)   "Cable service" means any of the following:
         A.   The one-way transmission to subscribers of video programming or
of information that a cable operator makes available to all subscribers
generally;
         B.   Subscriber interaction, if any, that is required for the
selection or use of video programming or of information that a cable operator
makes available to all subscribers generally, both as described in subsection
(g)(2)A. above;
         C.   Any cable television service.
      (3)   "Cable system" means any facility, consisting of a set of closed
transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception, and control
equipment that is designed to provide cable service that includes video
programming and that is provided to multiple subscribers within a community.
"Cable system" does not include any of the following:
         A.   Any facility that serves only to retransmit the television
signals of one or more television broadcast stations;
         B.   Any facility that serves subscribers without using any public
right-of-way;
         C.   Any facility of a common carrier that, under 47 U.S.C. 522(7)(c),
is excluded from the term "cable system" as defined in 47 U.S.C. 522(7);
         D.   Any open video system that complies with 47 U.S.C. 573;
         E.   Any facility of any electric utility used solely for operating
its electric utility system.
(ORC 2913.04)
Statutory reference:
   Telecommunications: fraud and unlawful use of a device, felony offenses, see
Ohio R.C. 2913.05 and 2913.06
§ 642.06  INJURING VINES, BUSHES, TREES OR CROPS.
   (a)   No person, without privilege to do so, shall recklessly cut down,
destroy, girdle, or otherwise injure a vine, bush, shrub, sapling, tree, or
crop standing or growing on the land of another or upon public land.
   (b)   In addition to the penalty provided in subsection (c) of this section,
whoever violates this section is liable in treble damages for the injury
caused.
(ORC 901.51)
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.
(ORC 901.99(A))
§ 642.07  DESECRATION.
   (a)   No person, without privilege to do so, shall purposely deface, damage,
pollute or otherwise physically mistreat any of the following:
      (1)   Any public monument;
      (2)   Any historical or commemorative marker, or any structure, Indian
mound or earthwork, cemetery, thing or site of great historical or
archeological interest;
      (3)   A place of worship, its furnishings, or religious artifacts or
sacred texts within the place of worship or within the grounds upon which the
place of worship is located;
      (4)   A work of art or museum piece;
      (5)   Any other object of reverence or sacred devotion.
   (b)   As used in this section, "cemetery" means any place of burial and
includes burial sites that contain American Indian burial objects placed with
or containing American Indian human remains.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of desecration. A violation of
subsection (a)(1), (2), (4) or (5) of this section is a misdemeanor of the
second degree. A violation of subsection (a)(3) of this section is a felony to
be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(ORC 2927.11)
§ 642.08  ASSAULTING POLICE DOG OR HORSE, OR ASSISTANCE DOG.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly cause, or attempt to cause, physical harm to
a police dog or horse in either of the following circumstances:
      (1)   The police dog or horse is assisting a law enforcement officer in
the performance of the officer's official duties at the time the physical harm
is caused or attempted.
      (2)   The police dog or horse is not assisting a law enforcement officer
in the performance of the officer's official duties at the time the physical
harm is caused or attempted, but the offender has actual knowledge that the dog
or horse is a police dog or horse.
   (b)   No person shall recklessly do any of the following:
      (1)   Taunt, torment, or strike a police dog or horse;
      (2)   Throw an object or substance at a police dog or horse;
      (3)   Interfere with or obstruct a police dog or horse, or interfere with
or obstruct a law enforcement officer who is being assisted by a police dog or
horse, in a manner that does any of the following:
         A.   Inhibits or restricts the law enforcement officer's control of
the police dog or horse;
         B.   Deprives the law enforcement officer of control of the police dog
or horse;
         C.   Releases the police dog or horse from its area of control;
         D.   Enters the area of control of the police dog or horse without the
consent of the law enforcement officer, including placing food or any other
object or substance into that area;
         E.   Inhibits or restricts the ability of the police dog or horse to
assist a law enforcement officer;
      (4)   Engage in any conduct that is likely to cause serious physical
injury or death to a police dog or horse;
      (5)   If the person is the owner, keeper, or harborer of a dog, fail to
reasonably restrain the dog from taunting, tormenting, chasing, approaching in
a menacing fashion or apparent attitude of attack, or attempting to bite or
otherwise endanger a police dog or horse that at the time of the conduct is
assisting a law enforcement officer in the performance of the officer's duties
or that the person knows is a police dog or horse.
   (c)   No person shall knowingly cause, or attempt to cause, physical harm to
an assistance dog in either of the following circumstances:
      (1)   The dog is assisting or serving a blind, deaf or hearing impaired,
or mobility impaired person at the time the physical harm is caused or
attempted.
      (2)   The dog is not assisting or serving a blind, deaf or hearing
impaired, or mobility impaired person at the time the physical harm is caused
or attempted, but the offender has actual knowledge that the dog is an
assistance dog.
   (d)   No person shall recklessly do any of the following:
      (1)   Taunt, torment, or strike an assistance dog;
      (2)   Throw an object or substance at an assistance dog;
      (3)   Interfere with or obstruct an assistance dog, or interfere with or
obstruct a blind, deaf or hearing impaired, or mobility impaired person who is
being assisted or served by an assistance dog, in a manner that does any of the
following:
         A.   Inhibits or restricts the assisted or served person's control of
the dog;
         B.   Deprives the assisted or served person of control of the dog;
         C.   Releases the dog from its area of control;
         D.   Enters the area of control of the dog without the consent of the
assisted or served person, including placing food or any other object or
substance into that area;
         E.   Inhibits or restricts the ability of the dog to assist the
assisted or served person;
      (4)   Engage in any conduct that is likely to cause serious physical
injury or death to an assistance dog;
      (5)   If the person is the owner, keeper, or harborer of a dog, fail to
reasonably restrain the dog from taunting, tormenting, chasing, approaching in
a menacing fashion or apparent attitude of attack, or attempting to bite or
otherwise endanger an assistance dog that at the time of the conduct is
assisting or serving a blind, deaf or hearing impaired, or mobility impaired
person or that the person knows is an assistance dog.
   (e)   (1)   Whoever violates subsection (a) of this section is guilty of
assaulting a police dog or horse. Except as otherwise provided in this
subsection, assaulting a police dog or horse is a misdemeanor of the second
degree. If the violation results in physical harm to the police dog or horse
other than death or serious physical harm, assaulting a police dog or horse is
a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the violation results in serious physical
harm to the police dog or horse or results in its death, assaulting a police
dog or horse is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   Whoever violates subsection (b) of this section is guilty of
harassing a police dog or horse. Except as otherwise provided this subsection,
harassing a police dog or horse is a misdemeanor of the second degree. If the
violation results in physical harm to the police dog or horse but does not
result in its death or in serious physical harm to it, harassing a police dog
or horse is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the violation results in
serous physical harm to the police dog or horse or results in its death,
harassing a police dog or horse is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
      (3)   Whoever violates subsection (c) of this section is guilty of
assaulting an assistance dog. Except as otherwise provided in this subsection,
assaulting an assistance dog is a misdemeanor of the second degree. If the
violation results in physical harm to the assistance dog other than death or
serious physical harm, assaulting an assistance dog is a misdemeanor of the
first degree. If the violation results in serious physical harm to the
assistance dog or results in its death, assaulting an assistance dog is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (4)   Whoever violates subsection (d) of this section is guilty of
harassing an assistance dog. Except as otherwise provided in this subsection,
harassing an assistance dog is a misdemeanor of the second degree. If the
violation results in physical harm to the assistance dog but does not result in
the death or in serious physical harm to it, harassing an assistance dog is a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If the violation results in serious physical
harm to the assistance dog or results in its death, harassing an assistance dog
is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (5)   In addition to any other sanctions or penalty imposed for the
offense under this section, Ohio R.C. Chapter 2929 or any other provision of
the Revised Code or this code, whoever violates subsection (a), (b), (c), or
(d) of this section is responsible for the payment of all of the following:
         A.   Any veterinary bill or bill for medication incurred as a result
of the violation by the Police Division regarding a violation of subsection (a)
or (b) of this section or by the blind, deaf or hearing impaired, or mobility
impaired person assisted or served by the assistance dog regarding a violation
of subsection (c) or (d) of this section;
         B.   The cost of any damaged equipment that results from the
violation;
         C.   If the violation did not result in the death of the police dog or
horse or the assistance dog that was the subject of the violation and if, as a
result of that dog or horse being the subject of the violation, the dog or
horse needs further training or retraining to be able to continue in the
capacity of a police dog or horse or an assistance dog, the cost of any further
training or retraining of that dog or horse by a law enforcement officer or by
the blind, deaf or hearing impaired, or mobility impaired person assisted or
served by the assistance dog;
         D.   If the violation resulted in the death of the assistance dog that
was the subject of the violation or resulted in serious physical harm to the
police dog or horse or the assistance dog that was the subject of the violation
to the extent that the dog or horse needs to be replaced on either a temporary
or a permanent basis, the cost of replacing that dog or horse and of any
further training of a new police dog or horse or a new assistance dog by a law
enforcement officer or by the blind, deaf or hearing impaired, or mobility
impaired person assisted or served by the assistance dog, which replacement or
training is required because of the death of or the serious physical harm to
the dog or horse that was the subject of the violation.
   (f)   This section does not apply to a licensed veterinarian whose conduct
is in accordance with Ohio R.C. Chapter 4741.
   (g)   This section only applies to an offender who knows or should know at
the time of the violation that the police dog or horse or assistance dog that
is the subject of a violation under this section is a police dog or horse or an
assistance dog.
   (h)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   "Assistance dog", "blind" and "mobility impaired person" have the
same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 955.011.
      (2)   "Physical harm" means any injury, illness, or other psychological
impairment, regardless of its gravity or duration.
      (3)   "Police dog or horse" means a dog or horse that has been trained
and may be used to assist law enforcement officers in the performance of their
official duties.
      (4)   "Serious physical harm" means any of the following:
         A.   Any physical harm that carries a substantial risk of death.
         B.   Any physical harm that causes permanent maiming or that involves
some temporary, substantial maiming.
         C.   Any physical harm that causes acute pain of a duration that
results in substantial suffering.
(ORC 2921.321)
§ 642.09  ARSON.
   (a)   No person, by means of fire or explosion, shall knowingly do any of
the following:
      (1)   Cause, or create a substantial risk of, physical harm to any
property of another without the other person’s consent;
      (2)   Cause, or create a substantial risk of, physical harm to any
property of the offender or another, with purpose to defraud;
      (3)   Cause, or create a substantial risk of, physical harm to the
statehouse or a courthouse, school building, or other building or structure
that is owned or controlled by the state, any political subdivision, or any
department, agency, or instrumentality of the state or a political subdivision,
and that is used for public purposes;
      (4)   Cause, or create a substantial risk of, physical harm, through the
offer or the acceptance of an agreement for hire or other consideration, to any
property of another without the other person’s consent or to any property of
the offender or another with purpose to defraud;
      (5)   Cause, or create a substantial risk of, physical harm to any park,
preserve, wildlands, brush-covered land, cut-over land, forest, timberland,
greenlands, woods, or similar real property that is owned or controlled by
another person, the state, or a political subdivision without the consent of
the other person, the state, or the political subdivision;
      (6)   With purpose to defraud, cause, or create a substantial risk of,
physical harm to any park, preserve, wildlands, brush-covered land, cut-over
land, forest, timberland, greenlands, woods, or similar real property that is
owned or controlled by the offender, another person, the state, or a political
subdivision.
   (b)   No person, by means of fire or explosion, shall knowingly do any of
the following:
      (1)   Cause, or create a substantial risk of, physical harm to any
structure of another that is not an occupied structure;
      (2)   Cause, or create a substantial risk of, physical harm, through the
offer or the acceptance of an agreement for hire or other consideration, to any
structure of another that is not an occupied structure;
      (3)   Cause, or create a substantial risk of, physical harm to any
structure that is not an occupied structure and that is in or on any park,
preserve, wildlands, brush-covered land, cut-over land, forest, timberland,
greenlands, woods, or similar real property that is owned or controlled by
another person, the state, or a political subdivision.
   (c)   (1)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (b)(1)
or (b)(2) of this section that the defendant acted with the consent of the
other person.
      (2)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (b)(3) of
this section that the defendant acted with the consent of the other person, the
state, or the political subdivision.
   (d)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of arson.
      (2)   A violation of division (a)(1) or (b)(1) of this section is one of
the following:
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in division (d)(2)B. of this
section, a misdemeanor of the first degree;
         B.   If the value of the property or the amount of the physical harm
involved is one thousand dollars ($1,000) or more, a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.
      (3)   A violation of division (a)(2), (a)(3), (a)(4), (a)(5), (a)(6), (b)
(2) or (b)(3) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
(ORC 2909.03)
Statutory reference:
   Aggravated arson, felony provisions, see Ohio R.C. 2909.02
   Arson, felony provisions generally, see Ohio R.C. 2909.03
   Convicted arsonist to make restitution to public agency, see Ohio R.C.
2929.28
§ 642.10  CRIMINAL DAMAGING OR ENDANGERING; VEHICULAR VANDALISM.
   (a)   Criminal damaging or endangering.
      (1)   No person shall cause or create a substantial risk of physical harm
to any property of another without the other person's consent:
         A.   Knowingly, by any means; or
         B.   Recklessly, by means of fire, explosion, flood, poison gas,
poison, radioactive material, caustic or corrosive material, or other
inherently dangerous agency or substance.
      (2)   Whoever violates this subsection (a) is guilty of criminal damaging
or endangering, a misdemeanor of the second degree. If violation of this
subsection (a) creates a risk of physical harm to any person, criminal damaging
or endangering is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the property involved
in a violation of this subsection (a) is an aircraft, an aircraft engine,
propeller, appliance, spare part, or any other equipment or implement used or
intended to be used in the operation of an aircraft and if the violation
creates a risk of physical harm to any person, criminal damaging or endangering
is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. If the property
involved in a violation of this subsection (a) is an aircraft, an aircraft
engine, propeller, appliance, spare part, or any other equipment or implement
used or intended to be used in the operation of an aircraft and if the
violation creates a substantial risk of physical harm to any person or if the
property involved in a violation of this subsection (a) is an occupied
aircraft, criminal damaging or endangering is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
(ORC 2909.06)
   (b)   Vehicular vandalism.
      (1)   As used in this subsection (b):
         A.   "Alley", "street", and "vehicle" have the same meanings as in
Ohio R.C. 4511.01.
         B.   "Highway" means any highway as defined in Ohio R.C. 4511.01 or
any lane, road, street, alley, bridge, or overpass.
         C.   "Vessel" and "waters in this state" have the same meanings as in
Ohio R.C. 1546.01.
      (2)   No person shall knowingly, and by any means, drop or throw any
object at, onto, or in the path of any of the following:
         A.   Any vehicle on a highway;
         B.   Any boat or vessel on any of the waters in this state.
      (3)   Whoever violates this subsection (b) is guilty of vehicular
vandalism. Except as otherwise provided in this subsection (b)(3), vehicular
vandalism is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the violation of this
subsection (b) creates a substantial risk of physical harm to any person or the
violation of this subsection (b) causes serious physical harm to property,
vehicular vandalism is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
If the violation of this subsection (b) causes physical harm to any person or
serious physical harm to any person, vehicular vandalism is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(ORC 2909.09)
Statutory reference:
   Disrupting public services, felony offense, see Ohio R.C. 2909.04
   Railroad grade crossing device vandalism, see Ohio R.C. 2909.101
   Railroad vandalism, see Ohio R.C. 2909.10
   Vandalism, felony offense, see Ohio R.C. 2909.05
§ 642.11  CRIMINAL MISCHIEF.
   (a)   No person shall:
      (1)   Without privilege to do so, knowingly move, deface, damage,
destroy, or otherwise improperly tamper with the either of the following:
         A.   The property of another;
         B.   One’s own residential real property with the purpose to decrease
the value of or enjoyment of the residential real property, if both of the
following apply:
            1.   The residential real property is subject to a mortgage.
            2.   The person has been served with a summons and complaint in a
pending residential mortgage loan foreclosure action relating to that real
property. As used in this division, “pending” includes the time between
judgment entry and confirmation of sale.
      (2)   With purpose to interfere with the use or enjoyment of property of
another, employ a tear gas device, stink bomb, smoke generator, or other device
releasing a substance that is harmful or offensive to persons exposed, or that
tends to cause public alarm;
      (3)   Without privilege to do so, knowingly move, deface, damage,
destroy, or otherwise improperly tamper with a bench mark, triangulation
station, boundary marker, or other survey station, monument, or marker;
      (4)   Without privilege to do so, knowingly move, deface, damage,
destroy, or otherwise improperly tamper with any safety device, the property of
another, or the property of the offender when required or placed for the safety
of others, so as to destroy or diminish its effectiveness or availability for
its intended purpose;
      (5)   With purpose to interfere with the use or enjoyment of the property
of another, set a fire on the land of another or place personal property that
has been set on fire on the land of another, which fire or personal property is
outside and apart from any building, other structure, or personal property that
is on that land;
      (6)   Without privilege to do so, and with intent to impair the
functioning of any computer, computer system, computer network, computer
software, or computer program, knowingly do any of the following:
         A.   In any manner or by any means, including but not limited to,
computer hacking, alter, damage, destroy, or modify a computer, computer
system, computer network, computer software, or computer program or data
contained in a computer, computer system, computer network, computer software,
or computer program;
         B.   Introduce a computer contaminant into a computer, computer
system, computer network, computer software, or computer program.
   (b)   As used in this section, "safety device" means any fire extinguisher,
fire hose, or fire axe, or any fire escape, emergency exit, or emergency escape
equipment, or any life line, life-saving ring, life preserver, or life boat or
raft, or any alarm, light, flare, signal, sign, or notice intended to warn of
danger or emergency, or intended for other safety purposes, or any guard
railing or safety barricade, or any traffic sign or signal, or any railroad
grade crossing sign, signal, or gate, or any first aid or survival equipment,
or any other device, apparatus, or equipment intended for protecting or
preserving the safety of persons or property.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of criminal mischief, and
shall be punished as provided in subsection (c)(1) or (c)(2) of this section.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, criminal mischief
committed in violation of subsection (a)(1), (a)(2), (a)(3), (a)(4), or (a)(5)
of this section is a misdemeanor of the third degree. Except as otherwise
provided in this subsection, if the violation of subsection (a)(1), (a)(2), (a)
(3), (a)(4), or (a)(5) of this section creates a risk of physical harm to any
person, criminal mischief committed in violation of subsection (a)(1), (a)(2),
(a)(3), (a)(4), or (a)(5) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
If the property involved in the violation of subsection (a)(1), (a)(2), (a)(3),
(a)(4), or (a)(5) of this section is an aircraft, an aircraft engine,
propeller, appliance, spare part, fuel, lubricant, hydraulic fluid, any other
equipment, implement, or material used or intended to be used in the operation
of an aircraft, or any cargo carried or intended to be carried in an aircraft
and if the violation creates any risk of physical harm to any person, or if the
aircraft in question is an occupied aircraft, criminal mischief committed in
violation of subsection (a)(1), (a)(2), (a)(3), (a)(4), or (a)(5) of this
section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, criminal mischief
committed in violation of subsection (a)(6) of this section is a misdemeanor of
the first degree. If the value of the computer, computer system, computer
network, computer software, computer program, or data involved in the violation
of subsection (a)(6) of this section or the loss to the victim resulting from
the violation is one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or more, or if the computer,
computer system, computer network, computer software, computer program, or data
involved in the violation of subsection (a)(6) is used or intended to be used
in the operation of an aircraft and the violation creates any risk of physical
harm to any person, or if the aircraft in question is an occupied aircraft,
criminal mischief committed in violation of subsection (a)(6) of this section
is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(ORC 2909.07)
§ 642.12  CRIMINAL TRESPASS.
   (a)   No person, without privilege to do so, shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Knowingly enter or remain on the land or premises of another;
      (2)   Knowingly enter or remain on the land or premises of another, the
use of which is lawfully restricted to certain persons, purposes, modes, or
hours, when the offender knows the offender is in violation of any such
restriction or is reckless in that regard;
      (3)   Recklessly enter or remain on the land or premises of another, as
to which notice against unauthorized access or presence is given by actual
communication to the offender, or in a manner prescribed by law, or by posting
in a manner reasonably calculated to come to the attention of potential
intruders, or by fencing or other enclosure manifestly designed to restrict
access;
      (4)   Being on the land or premises of another, negligently fail or
refuse to leave upon being notified by signage posted in a conspicuous place or
otherwise being notified to do so by the owner or occupant, or the agent or
servant of either.
   (b)   It is no defense to a charge under this section that the land or
premises involved was owned, controlled, or in custody of a public agency.
   (c)   It is no defense to a charge under this section that the offender was
authorized to enter or remain on the land or premises involved, when the
authorization was secured by deception.
   (d)   (1)   Whoever violates subsection (a) of this section is guilty of
criminal trespass, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
      (2)   Notwithstanding Ohio R.C. 2929.28, if the person, in committing the
violation of this section, used a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle or all-
purpose vehicle, the court shall impose a fine of two times the usual amount
imposed for the violation.
      (3)   If an offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty
to two or more violations of this section, Ohio R.C. 2911.21 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, and the offender, in committing each violation,
used a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle, the court, in
addition to or independent of all other penalties imposed for the violation,
may impound the certificate of registration of that snowmobile or off-highway
motorcycle or the certificate of registration and license plate of that all-
purpose vehicle for not less than 60 days. In such a case, Ohio R.C. 4519.47
applies.
   (e)   Notwithstanding any provision of the Ohio Revised Code, if the
offender, in committing the violation of this section, used an all-purpose
vehicle, the Clerk of the Court shall pay the fine imposed pursuant to this
section to the State Recreational Vehicle Fund created by Ohio R.C. 4519.11.
   (f)   As used in this section:
      (1)   “All-purpose vehicle”, “off-highway motorcycle” and “snowmobile”
have the same meanings as in Ohio R.C. 4519.01.
      (2)   “Land” or “premises” includes any land, building, structure or
place belonging to, controlled by or in custody of another, and any separate
enclosure or room, or portion thereof.
(ORC 2911.21)
   (g)   Criminal trespass on a place of public amusement.
      (1)   As used in this subsection (g), “place of public amusement” means a
stadium, theater, or other facility, whether licensed or not, at which a live
performance, sporting event, or other activity takes place for entertainment of
the public and to which access is made available to the public, regardless of
whether admission is charged.
      (2)   No person, without privilege to do so, shall knowingly enter or
remain on any restricted portion of a place of public amusement and, as a
result of that conduct, interrupt or cause the delay of the live performance,
sporting event, or other activity taking place at the place of public amusement
after a printed written notice has been given as provided in subsection (g)
(4)A. of this section that the general public is restricted from access to that
restricted portion of the place of public amusement. A restricted portion of a
place of public amusement may include, but is not limited to, a playing field,
an athletic surface, or a stage located at the place of public amusement.
      (3)   An owner or lessee of a place of public amusement, an agent of the
owner or lessee, or a performer or participant at a place of public amusement
may use reasonable force to restrain and remove a person from a restricted
portion of the place of public amusement if the person enters or remains on the
restricted portion of the place of public amusement and, as a result of that
conduct, interrupts or causes the delay of the live performance, sporting
event, or other activity taking place at the place of public amusement. This
subsection does not provide immunity from criminal liability for any use of
force beyond reasonable force by an owner or lessee of a place of public
amusement, an agent of either the owner or lessee, or a performer or
participant at a place of public amusement.
      (4)   A.   Notice has been given that the general public is restricted
from access to a portion of a place of public amusement if a printed written
notice of the restricted access has been conspicuously posted or exhibited at
the entrance to that portion of the place of public amusement. If a printed
written notice is posted or exhibited as described in this subsection regarding
a portion of a place of public amusement, in addition to that posting or
exhibition, notice that the general public is restricted from access to that
portion of the place of public amusement also may be given, but is not required
to be given, by either of the following means:
            1.   By notifying the person personally, either orally or in
writing, that access to that portion of the place of public amusement is
restricted;
            2.   By broadcasting over the public address system of the place of
public amusement an oral warning that access to that portion of the place of
public amusement is restricted.
         B.   If notice that the general public is restricted from access to a
portion of a place of public amusement is provided by the posting or exhibition
of a printed written notice as described in subsection (g)(4)A. of this
section, the municipality, in a criminal prosecution for a violation of
subsection (g)(2) of this section, is not required to prove that the defendant
received actual notice that the general public is restricted from access to a
portion of a place of public amusement.
      (5)   A.   Whoever violates subsection (g)(2) of this section is guilty
of criminal trespass on a place of public amusement, a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
         B.   In addition to any jail term, fine, or other sentence, penalty,
or sanction it imposes upon the offender pursuant to subsection (g)(5)A. of
this section, a court may require an offender who violates this section to
perform not less than 30 and not more than 120 hours of supervised community
service work.
(ORC 2911.23)
§ 642.125  AGGRAVATED TRESPASS.
   (a)   No person shall enter or remain on the land or premises of another
with purpose to commit on that land or those premises a misdemeanor, the
elements of which involve causing physical harm to another person or causing
another person to believe that the offender will cause physical harm to him or
her.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of aggravated trespass, a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(ORC 2911.211)
§ 642.13  TAMPERING WITH COIN MACHINES.
   (a)   No person, with purpose to commit theft or to defraud, shall knowingly
enter, force an entrance into, tamper with, or insert any part of an instrument
into any coin machine.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of tampering with coin
machines, a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously has
been convicted of a violation of this section or of any theft offense as
defined in Ohio R.C. 2913.01, tampering with coin machines is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(ORC 2911.32)
§ 642.14  PASSING BAD CHECKS.
   (a)   As used in this section:
      (1)   "Check" includes any form of debit from a demand deposit account,
including but not limited to any of the following:
         A.   A check, bill of exchange, draft, order of withdrawal, or similar
negotiable or non-negotiable instrument;
         B.   An electronic check, electronic transaction, debit card
transaction, check card transaction, substitute check, web check, or any form
of automated clearing house transaction.
      (2)   "Issue a check" means causing any form of debit from a demand
deposit account.
   (b)   No person, with purpose to defraud, shall issue or transfer or cause
to be issued or transferred a check or other negotiable instrument, knowing
that it will be dishonored or knowing that a person has ordered or will order
stop payment on the check or other negotiable instrument.
   (c)   For purposes of this section, a person who issues or transfers a check
or other negotiable instrument is presumed to know that it will be dishonored
if either of the following occurs:
      (1)   The drawer has no account with the drawee at the time of issue or
the stated date, whichever is later.
      (2)   The check or other negotiable instrument was properly refused
payment for insufficient funds upon presentment within 30 days after issue or
the stated date, whichever is later, and the liability of the drawer, indorser,
or any party who may be liable thereon is not discharged by payment or
satisfaction within ten days after receiving notice of dishonor.
   (d)   For purposes of this section, a person who issues or transfers a
check, bill of exchange, or other draft is presumed to have the purpose to
defraud if the drawer fails to comply with Ohio R.C. 1349.16 by doing any of
the following when opening a checking account intended for personal, family, or
household purposes at a financial institution:
      (1)   Falsely stating that he or she has not been issued a valid driver's
or commercial driver's license or identification card issued under Ohio R.C.
4507.50;
      (2)   Furnishing the license or card, or another identification document
that contains false information;
      (3)   Making a false statement with respect to the drawer's current
address or any additional relevant information reasonably required by the
financial institution.
   (e)   In determining the value of the payment for purposes of subsection (f)
of this section, the court may aggregate all checks and other negotiable
instruments that the offender issued or transferred or caused to be issued or
transferred in violation of subsection (b) of this section within a period of
180 consecutive days.
   (f)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of passing bad checks. Except
as otherwise provided in this subsection, passing bad checks is a misdemeanor
of the first degree. If the check or checks or other negotiable instrument or
instruments are issued or transferred to a single vendor or single other person
for the payment of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or more, or if the check or
checks or other negotiable instrument or instruments are issued or transferred
to multiple vendors or persons for the payment of one thousand five hundred
dollars ($1,500.00) or more, passing bad checks is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.
(ORC 2913.11)
§ 642.145  FORGING OR SELLING FORGED IDENTIFICATION CARDS.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly do either of the following:
      (1)   Forge an identification card.
      (2)   Sell or otherwise distribute a card that purports to be an
identification card, knowing it was forged.
   (b)   As used in this section, "identification card" means a card that
includes personal information or characteristics of an individual, a purpose of
which is to establish the identity of the bearer described on the card, whether
the words "identity", "identification", "identification card", or other similar
words appear on the card.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of forging identification
cards or selling or distributing forged identification cards. Except as
otherwise provided in this subsection, forging identification cards or selling
or distributing forged identification cards is a misdemeanor of the first
degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of
subsection (a) of this section or a substantially equivalent state law or
municipal ordinance, forging identification cards or selling or distributing
forged identification cards is a misdemeanor of the first degree and, in
addition, the court shall impose upon the offender a fine not less than two
hundred fifty dollars ($250.00).
(ORC 2913.31(B), (C)(2))
Statutory reference:
   Forgery, felony provisions, see Ohio R.C. 2913.31(A), (C)(1)
   Forgery of originating address or other routing information in connection
with the transmission of an electronic mail advertisement, felony provisions,
see Ohio R.C. 2307.64
§ 642.146  CRIMINAL SIMULATION.
   (a)   No person, with purpose to defraud, or knowing that the person is
facilitating a fraud, shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Make or alter any object so that it appears to have value because
of antiquity, rarity, curiosity, source, or authorship, which it does not in
fact possess.
      (2)   Practice deception in making, retouching, editing, or reproducing
any photograph, movie film, video tape, phonograph record, or recording tape.
      (3)   Falsely or fraudulently make, simulate, forge, alter, or
counterfeit any wrapper, label, stamp, cork or cap prescribed by the Liquor
Control Commission under Ohio R.C. Chapters 4301 and 4303, falsely or
fraudulently cause to be made, simulated, forged, altered, or counterfeited any
wrapper, label, stamp, cork or cap prescribed by the Liquor Control Commission
under Ohio R.C. Chapters 4301 and 4303, or use more than once any wrapper,
label, stamp, cork or cap prescribed by the Liquor Control Commission under
Ohio R.C. Chapters 4301 and 4303.
      (4)   Offer, or possess with the purpose to offer, any object that the
person knows to have been simulated as provided in subsections (a)(1), (2) or
(3) of this section.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of criminal simulation. Except
as otherwise provided in this subsection, criminal simulation is a misdemeanor
of the first degree. If the loss to the victim is one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) or more, criminal simulation is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
(ORC 2913.32)
§ 642.15  MISUSE OF CREDIT CARDS.
   (a)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Practice deception for the purpose of procuring the issuance of a
credit card, when a credit card is issued in actual reliance thereon;
      (2)   Knowingly buy or sell a credit card from or to a person other than
the issuer.
   (b)   No person, with purpose to defraud, shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Obtain control over a credit card as security for a debt;
      (2)   Obtain property or services by the use of a credit card, in one or
more transactions, knowing or having reasonable cause to believe that the card
has expired or been revoked, or was obtained, is retained, or is being used in
violation of law;
      (3)   Furnish property or services upon presentation of a credit card,
knowing that the card is being used in violation of law;
      (4)   Represent or cause to be represented to the issuer of a credit card
that property or services have been furnished, knowing that the representation
is false.
   (c)   No person, with purpose to violate this section, shall receive,
possess, control, or dispose of a credit card.
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of misuse of credit cards.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in subsection (d)(3) of this section,
a violation of subsection (a), (b)(1), or (c) of this section is a misdemeanor
of the first degree.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection or subsection (d)
(3) of this section, a violation of subsection (b)(2), (3), or (4) of this
section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the cumulative retail value of
the property and services involved in one or more violations of subsection (b)
(2), (3), or (4) of this section which violations involve one or more credit
card accounts and occur within a period of 90 consecutive days commencing on
the date of the first violation, is one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or more,
misuse of credit cards is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state
law.
      (3)   If the victim of the offense is an elderly person or disabled
adult, and if the offense involves a violation of subsection (b)(1) or (b)(2)
of this section, misuse of credit cards is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
(ORC 2913.21)
§ 642.155  RECORDING CREDIT CARD, TELEPHONE OR SOCIAL SECURITY NUMBERS.
   (a)   No person shall record or cause to be recorded either of the
following:
      (1)   A credit card account number of the other party to a transaction,
when a check, bill of exchange or other draft is presented for payment; or
      (2)   The telephone number or Social Security account number of the other
party to a transaction, when payment is made by credit card charge agreement,
check, bill of exchange or other draft.
   (b)   Division (a) of this section does not apply to a transaction, if all
of the following conditions are met:
      (1)   The credit card account number, Social Security account number or
telephone number is recorded for a legitimate business purpose, including
collection purposes.
      (2)   The other party to the transaction consents to the recording of the
credit card account number, Social Security account number or telephone number.
      (3)   The credit card account number, Social Security account number or
telephone number that is recorded during the course of the transaction is not
disclosed to any third party for any purposes other than collection purposes
and is not used to market goods or services unrelated to the goods or services
purchased in the transaction.
   (c)   Nothing in this section prohibits the recording of the number of a
credit card account when given in lieu of a deposit to secure payment in the
event of default, loss, damage or other occurrence, or requires a person to
accept a check presented for payment, if the other party to the transaction
refuses to consent to the recording of the number of the party's Social
Security account or license to operate a motor vehicle.
(ORC 1349.17)
   (d)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 1349.99)
§ 642.16  MAKING OR USING SLUGS.
   (a)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Insert or deposit a slug in a coin machine, with purpose to
defraud;
      (2)   Make, possess, or dispose of a slug, with purpose of enabling
another to defraud by inserting or depositing it in a coin machine.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of making or using slugs, a
misdemeanor of the second degree.
(ORC 2913.33)
§ 642.17  PRIMA FACIE EVIDENCE OF PURPOSE TO DEFRAUD.
   In a prosecution of a person for a theft offense that alleges that the
person, with purpose to defraud or knowing that he or she was facilitating a
fraud, hired or rented an aircraft, motor vehicle, motorcycle, motorboat,
sailboat, camper, trailer, horse, buggy, or other property or equipment, kept
or operated any of the same that has been hired or rented, or engaged
accommodations at a hotel, motel, inn, campground, or other hostelry, it is
prima facie evidence of purpose to defraud if the person did any of the
following:
   (a)   Used deception to induce the rental agency to furnish the person with
the aircraft, motor vehicle, motorcycle, motorboat, sailboat, camper, trailer,
horse, buggy, or other property or equipment, or used deception to induce the
hostelry to furnish the person with accommodations;
   (b)   Hired or rented any aircraft, motor vehicle, motorcycle, motorboat,
sailboat, camper, trailer, horse, buggy, or other property or equipment, or
engaged accommodations, knowing that he or she is without sufficient means to
pay the hire or rental;
   (c)   Absconded without paying the hire or rental;
   (d)   Knowingly failed to pay the hire or rental as required by the contract
of hire or rental, without reasonable excuse for the failure;
   (e)   Knowingly failed to return hired or rented property as required by the
contract of hire or rental, without reasonable excuse for the failure.
(ORC 2913.41)
§ 642.18  TAMPERING WITH RECORDS.
   (a)   No person, knowing that he or she has no privilege to do so, and with
purpose to defraud or knowing that he or she is facilitating a fraud, shall do
any of the following:
      (1)   Falsify, destroy, remove, conceal, alter, deface, or mutilate any
writing, computer software, data, or record;
      (2)   Utter any writing or record, knowing it to have been tampered with
as provided in subsection (a)(1) of this section.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of tampering with records.
      (1)   Except as provided in subsection (b)(3) of this section, if the
offense does not involve data or computer software, tampering with records is
whichever of the following is applicable:
         A.   If subsection (b)(1)B. of this section does not apply, it is a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
         B.   If the writing or record is a will unrevoked at the time of the
offense, it is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   Except as provided in subsection (b)(3) of this section, if the
offense involves a violation of subsection (a) of this section involving data
or computer software, tampering with records is whichever of the following is
applicable:
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in subsection (b)(2)B. of this
section, it is a misdemeanor of the first degree;
         B.   If the value of the data or computer software involved in the
offense or the loss to the victim is one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or more
or if the offense is committed for the purpose of devising or executing a
scheme to defraud or to obtain property or services and the value of the
property or services or the loss to the victim is seven thousand five hundred
dollars ($7,500.00) or more, it is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
      (3)   If the writing, data, computer software, or record is kept by or
belongs to a local, state, or federal governmental entity, it is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(ORC 2913.42)
§ 642.19  SECURING WRITINGS BY DECEPTION.
   (a)   No person, by deception, shall cause another to execute any writing
that disposes of or encumbers property, or by which a pecuniary obligation is
incurred.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of securing writings by
deception. Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, securing writings
by deception is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the value of the property
or the obligation involved is one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or more,
securing writings by deception is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
to state law. If the victim of the offense is an elderly person, disabled
adult, active duty service member, or spouse of an active duty service member, 
securing writings by deception is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
(ORC 2913.43)
§ 642.20  PERSONATING AN OFFICER.
   (a)   No person, with purpose to defraud or knowing that he or she is
facilitating a fraud, or with purpose to induce another to purchase property or
services, shall personate a law enforcement officer, or an inspector,
investigator, or agent of any governmental agency.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of personating an officer, a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(ORC 2913.44)
§ 642.205  TAKING THE IDENTITY OF ANOTHER.
   (a)   As used in this section, "personal identifying information" includes,
but is not limited to, the following: the name, address, telephone number,
driver's license, driver's license number, commercial driver's license,
commercial driver's license number, state identification card, state
identification card number, Social Security card, Social Security number, birth
certificate, place of employment, employee identification number, mother's
maiden name, demand deposit account number, savings account number, money
market account number, mutual fund account number, other financial account
number, personal identification number, password, or credit card number of a
living or dead individual.
   (b)   No person, without the express or implied consent of the other person,
shall use, obtain, or possess any personal identifying information of another
person with intent to do either of the following:
      (1)   Hold the person out to be the other person;
      (2)   Represent the other person's personal identifying information as
the person's own personal identifying information.
   (c)   No person shall create, obtain, possess, or use the personal
identifying information of any person with the intent to aid or abet another
person in violating subsection (b) of this section.
   (d)   No person, with intent to defraud, shall permit another person to use
the person's own personal identifying information.
   (e)   No person who is permitted to use another person's personal
identifying information as described in subsection (d) of this section shall
use, obtain, or posses the other person's personal identifying information with
intent to defraud any person by doing any act identified in subsection (b)(1)
or (b)(2) of this section.
   (f)   (1)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under subsection (b) of
this section that the person using the personal identifying information is
acting in accordance with a legally recognized guardianship or conservatorship
or as a trustee or fiduciary.
      (2)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under subsection (b), (d),
or (e) of this section that either of the following applies:
         A.   The person or entity using the personal identifying information
is a law enforcement agency, authorized fraud personnel, or a representative of
or attorney for a law enforcement agency or authorized fraud personnel and is
using the personal identifying information in a bona fide investigation, and
information security evaluation, a pretext calling evaluation, or a similar
matter.
         B.   The personal identifying information was obtained, possessed, or
used for a lawful purpose.
   (g)   It is not a defense to a charge under this section that the person
whose personal identifying information was obtained, possessed, or used was
deceased at the time of the offense.
   (h)   (1)   If the violation of subsection (b), (d), or (e) of this section
occurs as part of a course of conduct involving other violations of subsection
(b), (d), or (e) of this section or violations of, attempts to violate,
conspiracies to violate, or complicity in violations of subsection (c) of this
section or Ohio R.C. 2913.02, 2913.04, 2913.11, 2913.21, 2913.31, 2913.42,
2913.43 or 2921.13, or any substantially similar municipal ordinance, the
court, in determining the degree of the offense pursuant to subsection (i) of
this section, may aggregate all credit, property, or services obtained or
sought to be obtained by the offender and all debts or other legal obligations
avoided or sought to be avoided by the offender in the violations involved in
that course of conduct. The course of conduct may involve one victim or more
than one victim.
      (2)   If the violation of subsection (c) of this section occurs as part
of a course of conduct involving other violations of subsection (c) of this
section or violations of, attempts to violate, conspiracies to violate, or
complicity in violations of subsection (b), (d), or (e) of this section or Ohio
R.C. 2913.02, 2913.04, 2913.11, 2913.21, 2913.31, 2913.42, 2913.43 or 2921.13,
or any substantially similar municipal ordinance, the court, in determining the
degree of the offense pursuant to subsection (i) of this section, may aggregate
all credit, property, or services obtained or sought to be obtained by the
person aided or abetted and all debts or other legal obligations avoided or
sought to be avoided by the person aided or abetted in the violations involved
in that course of conduct. The course of conduct may involve one victim or more
than one victim.
   (i)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of identity fraud. Except as
otherwise provided in this subsection, identity fraud is a misdemeanor of the
first degree. If the value of the credit, property, services, debt, or other
legal obligation involved in the violation or course of conduct is five hundred
dollars ($500.00) or more, identity fraud is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
(ORC 2913.49)
§ 642.21  DEFRAUDING CREDITORS.
   (a)   No person, with purpose to defraud one or more of his or her
creditors, shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Remove, conceal, destroy, encumber, convey, or otherwise deal with
any of his or her property;
      (2)   Misrepresent or refuse to disclose to a fiduciary appointed to
administer or manage his or her affairs or estate, the existence, amount, or
location of any of his or her property, or any other information regarding the
property which he or she is legally required to furnish to the fiduciary.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of defrauding creditors.
Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, defrauding creditors is a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If the value of the property involved is one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or more, defrauding creditors is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(ORC 2913.45)
§ 642.22  RECEIVING STOLEN PROPERTY.
   (a)   No person shall receive, retain, or dispose of property of another
knowing or having reasonable cause to believe that the property has been
obtained through commission of a theft offense.
   (b)   It is not a defense to a charge of receiving stolen property in
violation of this section that the property was obtained by means other than
through the commission of a theft offense if the property was explicitly
represented to the accused person as being obtained through the commission of a
theft offense.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of receiving stolen property.
Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, receiving stolen property is a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If any of the following criteria are met, then
a violation of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law:
      (1)   The value of the property involved is one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) or more;
      (2)   The property involved is any of the property listed in Ohio R.C.
2913.71;
      (3)   The property involved is a firearm or dangerous ordnance, as
defined in Ohio R.C. 2923.11;
      (4)   The property involved is a motor vehicle as defined in Ohio R.C.
4501.01;
      (5)   The property involved is any dangerous drug, as defined in Ohio
R.C. 4729.01; or
      (6)   The property involved in violation of this section is a special
purchase article as defined in R.C. § 4737.04 or a bulk merchandise container
as defined in R.C. § 4737.012.
(ORC 2913.51)
§ 642.23  THEFT OF C.A.T.V.(Repealed)
Editor's note:
   Section
642.23 was repealed as part of the 1987 updating and revision of these Codified
Ordinances because substantially identical state law (Ohio R.C. 4933.42 and
4933.99(A)) was repealed by the Ohio General Assembly by Sub. S.B. No. 183,
effective September 26, 1984. See §§
642.01(a), (r) and
642.02.
§ 642.24  DETERMINING PROPERTY VALUE IN THEFT OFFENSE.
   (a)   If more than one item of property or services is involved in a theft
offense or in a violation of Ohio R.C. 1716.14(A) involving a victim who is an
elderly person or disabled adult, or any substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, the value of the property or services involved for the purpose of
determining the value as required by Ohio R.C. 2913.61(A) is the aggregate
value of all property or services involved in the offense.
   (b)   (1)   When a series of offenses under Ohio R.C. 2913.02, or a series
of violations of, attempts to commit a violation of, conspiracies to violate,
or complicity in violations of Ohio R.C. 1716.14(A), Ohio R.C. 2913.02,
2913.03, or 2913.04, Ohio R.C. 2913.21(B)(1) or (B)(2), or Ohio R.C. 2913.31 or
2913.43 involving a victim who is an elderly person or disabled adult, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance to any of these offenses, is
committed by the offender in the offender’s same employment, capacity, or
relationship to another, all of those offenses shall be tried as a single
offense. When a series of offenses under R.C. § 2913.02, or a series of
violations of, attempts to commit a violation of, conspiracies to violate, or
complicity in violations of R.C. § 2913.02 or 2913.43 involving a victim who is
an active duty service member or spouse of an active duty service member, or
any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance to any of these offenses, is
committed by the offender in the offender’s same employment, capacity, or
relationship to another, all of those offenses shall be tried as a single
offense. The value of the property or services involved in the series of
offenses for the purpose of determining the value as required by Ohio R.C.
2913.61(A) is the aggregate value of all property and services involved in all
offenses in the series.
      (2)   If an offender commits a series of offenses under Ohio R.C. 2913.02
that involves a common course of conduct to defraud multiple victims, all of
the offenses may be tried as a single offense. If an offender is being tried
for the commission of a series of violations of, attempts to commit a violation
of, conspiracies to violate, or complicity in violations of Ohio R.C. 1716.14
(A), Ohio R.C. 2913.02, 2913.03, or 2913.04, Ohio R.C. 2913.21(B)(1) or (B)(2),
or Ohio R.C. 2913.31 or 2913.43, whether committed against one victim or more
than one victim, involving a victim who is an elderly person or disabled adult,
or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance to any of these offenses, 
pursuant to a scheme or course of conduct, all of those offenses may be tried
as a single offense. If an offender is being tried for the commission of a
series of violations of, attempts to commit a violation of, conspiracies to
violate, or complicity in violations of R.C. § 2913.02 or 2913.43, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance to any of these offenses, whether
committed against one victim or more than one victim, involving a victim who is
an active duty service member or spouse of an active duty service member
pursuant to a scheme or course of conduct, all of those offenses may be tried
as a single offense. If the offenses are tried as a single offense, the value
of the property or services involved for the purpose of determining the value
as required by Ohio R.C. 2913.61(A) is the aggregate value of all property and
services involved in all of the offenses in the course of conduct.
      (3)   When a series of two or more offenses under Ohio R.C. 2913.40,
2913.48, or 2921.41 is committed by the offender in the offender’s same
employment, capacity, or relationship to another, all of those offenses may be
tried as a single offense. If the offenses are tried as a single offense, the
value of the property or services involved for the purpose of determining the
value as required by Ohio R.C. 2913.61(A) is the aggregate value of all
property and services involved in all of the offenses in the series of two or
more offenses.
      (4)   In prosecuting a single offense under subsection (b)(1), (b)(2) or
(b)(3) of this section, it is not necessary to separately allege and prove each
offense in the series. Rather, it is sufficient to allege and prove that the
offender, within a given span of time, committed one or more theft offenses or
violations of Ohio R.C. 2913.40, 2913.48, or 2921.41 in the offender’s same
employment, capacity, or relationship to another as described in subsection (b)
(1) or (b)(3) of this section, or committed one or more theft offenses that
involve a common course of conduct to defraud multiple victims or a scheme or
course of conduct as described in subsection (b)(2) of this section. While it
is not necessary to separately allege and prove each offense in the series in
order to prosecute a single offense under subsection (b)(1), (b)(2), or (b)(3)
of this section, it remains necessary in prosecuting them as a single offense
to prove the aggregate value of the property or services in order to meet the
requisite statutory offense level sought by the prosecution.
   (c)   The following criteria shall be used in determining the value of
property or services involved in a theft offense:
      (1)   The value of an heirloom, memento, collector’s item, antique,
museum piece, manuscript, document, record, or other thing that has intrinsic
worth to its owner and that either is irreplaceable or is replaceable only on
the expenditure of substantial time, effort, or money, is the amount which
would compensate the owner for its loss.
      (2)   The value of personal effects and household goods, and of
materials, supplies, equipment, and fixtures used in the profession, business,
trade, occupation, or avocation of its owner, which property is not covered
under subsection (c)(1) of this section, and which retains substantial utility
for its purpose regardless of its age or condition, is the cost of replacing
such property with new property of like kind and quality.
      (3)   The value of any real or personal property that is not covered
under subsection (c)(1) or (2) of this section, and the value of services, is
the fair market value of the property or services. As used in this section,
“fair market value” is the money consideration which a buyer would give and a
seller would accept for property or services, assuming that the buyer is
willing to buy and the seller is willing to sell, that both are fully informed
as to all facts material to the transaction, and that neither is under any
compulsion to act.
   (d)   Without limitation on the evidence which may be used to establish the
value of property or services involved in a theft offense:
      (1)   When the property involved is personal property held for sale at
wholesale or retail, the price at which the property was held for sale is prima
facie evidence of its value.
      (2)   When the property involved is a security or commodity traded on an
exchange, the closing price or, if there is no closing price, the asked price,
given in the latest marked quotation prior to the offense, is prima facie
evidence of the value of the security or commodity.
      (3)   When the property involved is livestock, poultry, or raw
agricultural products for which a local market price is available, the latest
local market price prior to the offense is prima facie evidence of the value of
the livestock, poultry, or products.
      (4)   When the property involved is a negotiable instrument, the face
value is prima facie evidence of the value of the instrument.
      (5)   When the property involved is a warehouse receipt, bill of lading,
pawn ticket, claim check, or other instrument entitling the holder or bearer to
receive property, the face value or, if there is no face value, the value of
the property covered by the instrument less any payment necessary to receive
the property, is prima facie evidence of the value of the instrument.
      (6)   When the property involved is a ticket of admission, ticket for
transportation, coupon, token, or other instrument entitling the holder or
bearer to receive property or services, the face value or, if there is no face
value, the value of the property or services which may be received by the
instrument is prima facie evidence of the value of the instrument.
      (7)   When the services involved are gas, electricity, water, telephone,
transportation, shipping, or other services for which the rate is established
by law, the duly established rate is prima facie evidence of the value of the
services.
      (8)   When the services involved are services for which the rate is not
established by law, and the offender has been notified prior to the offense of
the rate for the services, either in writing, or orally, or by posting in a
manner reasonably calculated to come to the attention of potential offenders,
the rate contained in the notice is prima facie evidence of the value of the
services.
(ORC 2913.61(B) - (E))
§ 642.25  DETERMINING PROPERTY VALUE IN ARSON.
   (a)   The following criteria shall be used in determining the value of
property or amount of physical harm involved in a violation of §
642.06:
      (1)   If the property is an heirloom, memento, collector's item, antique,
museum piece, manuscript, document, record, or other thing that is either
irreplaceable or is replaceable only on the expenditure of substantial time,
effort, or money, the value of the property or the amount of physical harm
involved is the amount that would compensate the owner for its loss.
      (2)   If the property is not covered under subsection (a)(1) of this
section, and the physical harm is such that the property can be restored
substantially to its former condition, the amount of physical harm involved is
the reasonable cost of restoring the property.
      (3)   If the property is not covered under subsection (a)(1) of this
section, and the physical harm is such that the property cannot be restored
substantially to its former condition, the value of the property, in the case
of personal property, is the cost of replacing the property with new property
of like kind and quality, and in the case of real property or real property
fixtures, is the difference in the fair market value of the property
immediately before and immediately after the offense.
   (b)   As used in this section, "fair market value" has the same meaning as
in Ohio R.C. 2913.61.
   (c)   Prima facie evidence of the value of property, as provided in Ohio
R.C. 2913.61(D), may be used to establish the value of property pursuant to
this section.
(ORC 2909.11(B) - (D))
§ 642.26  PROSECUTIONS FOR THEFT OF UTILITIES.
   (a)   In a prosecution for a theft offense, as defined in Ohio R.C. 2913.01,
that involves alleged tampering with a gas, electric, steam or water meter,
conduit or attachment of a utility that has been disconnected by the utility,
proof that a meter, conduit or attachment of a utility has been tampered with
is prima facie evidence that the person who is obligated to pay for the service
rendered through the meter, conduit or attachment, and who is in possession or
control of the meter, conduit or attachment at the time the tampering occurred
has caused the tampering with intent to commit a theft offense.
   (b)   In a prosecution for a theft offense, as defined in Ohio R.C. 2913.01,
that involves the alleged reconnection of a gas, electric, steam or water
meter, conduit or attachment of a utility that has been disconnected by the
utility, proof that a meter, conduit or attachment disconnected by a utility
has been reconnected without the consent of the utility is prima facie evidence
that the person in possession or control of the meter, conduit or attachment at
the time of the reconnection has reconnected the meter, conduit or attachment
with intent to commit a theft offense.
   (c)   As used in this section:
      (1)   “Utility” means any electric light company, gas company, natural
gas company, pipe-line company, water-works company or heating or cooling
company, as defined in Ohio R.C. 4905.03(C), (D), (E), (F), (G), or (H), its
lessees, trustees or receivers, or any similar utility owned or operated by a
political subsubsection.
      (2)   “Tamper” means to interfere with, damage or bypass a utility meter,
conduit or attachment with the intent to impede the correct registration of a
meter or the proper functions of a conduit or attachment so as to reduce the
amount of utility service that is registered on the meter.
(ORC 4933.18)
   (d)   Each electric light company, gas company, natural gas company,
pipeline company, waterworks company or heating or cooling company, as defined
by Ohio R.C. 4905.03(C), (D), (E), (F), (G), or (H), or its lessees, trustees
or receivers, and each similar utility owned or operated by a political
subsubsection, shall notify its customers, on an annual basis, that tampering
with or bypassing a meter constitutes a theft offense that could result in the
imposition of criminal sanctions.
(ORC 4933.19)
§ 642.27  FOOD STAMPS.(Repealed)
Editor's note:
   Section
642.27 was repealed as part of the 1997 updating and revision of this Model
Ohio Municipal Code because a violation of substantially equivalent state law
(Ohio R.C. 2913.46) was made a felony by the Ohio General Assembly.
§ 642.28  INSURANCE FRAUD.
   (a)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   "Data" has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2913.01 and
additionally includes any other representation of information, knowledge,
facts, concepts, or instructions that are being or have been prepared in a
formalized manner.
      (2)   "Deceptive" means that a statement, in whole or in part, would
cause another to be deceived because it contains a misleading representation,
withholds information, prevents the acquisition of information, or by any other
conduct, act, or omission creates, confirms, or perpetuates a false impression,
including, but not limited to, a false impression as to law, value, state of
mind, or other objective or subjective fact.
      (3)   "Insurer" means any person that is authorized to engage in the
business of insurance in this state under Ohio R.C. Title 39, the Ohio Fair
Plan Underwriting Association created under Ohio R.C. 3929.43, any health
insuring corporation, and any legal entity that is self-insured and provides
benefits to its employees or members.
      (4)   "Policy" means a policy, certificate, contract, or plan that is
issued by an insurer.
      (5)   "Statement" includes but is not limited to any notice, letter, or
memorandum; proof of loss; bill of lading; receipt for payment; invoice,
account, or other financial statement; estimate of property damage; bill for
services; diagnosis or prognosis; prescription; hospital, medical, or dental
chart or other record; x-ray, photograph, videotape, or movie film; test
result; other evidence of loss, injury, or expense; computer-generated
document; and data in any form.
   (b)   No person, with purpose to defraud or knowing that the person is
facilitating a fraud, shall do either of the following:
      (1)   Present to, or cause to be presented to, an insurer any written or
oral statement that is part of, or in support of, an application for insurance,
a claim for payment pursuant to a policy, or a claim for any other benefit
pursuant to a policy, knowing that the statement, or any part of the statement,
is false or deceptive;
      (2)   Assist, aid, abet, solicit, procure, or conspire with another to
prepare or make any written or oral statement that is intended to be presented
to an insurer as part of, or in support of, an application for insurance, a
claim for payment pursuant to a policy, or a claim for any other benefit
pursuant to a policy, knowing that the statement, or any part of the statement,
is false or deceptive.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of insurance fraud. Except as
otherwise provided in this subsection, insurance fraud is a misdemeanor of the
first degree. If the amount of the claim that is false or deceptive is one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or more, insurance fraud is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (d)   This section shall not be construed to abrogate, waive, or modify Ohio
R.C. 2317.02(A).
(ORC 2913.47)
§ 642.29  FALSE STATEMENTS ALLEGING THEFT OF MOTOR VEHICLES. (Repealed)
Editor's note:
   Section
642.29 was repealed as part of the 1987 updating and revision of these Codified
Ordinances because substantially identical state law (Ohio R.C. 2913.48) was
repealed by the Ohio General Assembly by Am. Sub. H.B. No. 632, effective March
28 1985.
§ 642.30  MISCONDUCT INVOLVING A PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM.
   (a)   As used in this section, "public transportation system" means a county
transit system operated in accordance with Ohio R.C. 306.01 to 306.13, a
regional transit authority operated in accordance with Ohio R.C. 306.30 to
306.71, or a regional transit commission operated in accordance with Ohio R.C.
306.80 to 306.90.
   (b)   No person shall evade the payment of the known fares of a public
transportation system.
   (c)   No person shall alter any transfer, pass, ticket or token of a public
transportation system with the purpose of evading the payment of fares or of
defrauding the system.
   (d)   No person shall do any of the following while in any facility or on
any vehicle of a public transportation system:
      (1)   Play sound equipment without the proper use of a private earphone;
      (2)   Smoke, eat or drink in any area where the activity is clearly
marked as being prohibited; or
      (3)   Expectorate upon a person, facility or vehicle.
   (e)   No person shall write, deface, draw or otherwise mark on any facility
or vehicle of a public transportation system.
   (f)   No person shall fail to comply with a lawful order of a public
transportation system police officer, and no person shall resist, obstruct or
abuse a public transportation police officer in the performance of the
officer's duties.
   (g)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section is guilty of
misconduct involving a public transportation system.
      (1)   A violation of subsection (b), (c), or (f) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
      (2)   A violation of subsection (d) of this section is a minor
misdemeanor on a first offense. If a person previously has been convicted of or
pleaded guilty to a violation of any subsection of this section or of a
municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to any subsection of this
section, a violation of subsection (d) of this section is a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree.
      (3)   A violation of subsection  (e) of this section is a misdemeanor of
the third degree.
   (h)   Notwithstanding any other provision of law, 75 percent of each fine
paid to satisfy a sentence imposed for a violation of any of the provisions of
this section shall be deposited into the treasury of the county and 25 percent
shall be deposited with the county transit board, regional transit authority or
regional transit commission that operates the public transportation system
involved in the violation, unless the Board of County Commissioners operates
the public transportation system, in which case 100 percent of each fine shall
be deposited into the treasury of the county.
(ORC 2917.41)
§ 642.31  WORKERS' COMPENSATION FRAUD.
   (a)   No person, with purpose to defraud or knowing that the person is
facilitating a fraud shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Receive workers' compensation benefits to which the person is not
entitled;
      (2)   Make or present or cause to be made or presented a false or
misleading statement with the purpose to secure payment for goods or services
rendered under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4121, 4123, 4127, or 4131 or to secure
workers' compensation benefits;
      (3)   Alter, falsify, destroy, conceal, or remove any record or document
that is necessary to fully establish the validity of any claim filed with, or
necessary to establish the nature and validity of all goods and services for
which reimbursement or payment was received or is requested from the Bureau of
Workers' Compensation, or a self-insuring employer under Ohio R.C. Chapter
4121, 4123, 4127, or 4131;
      (4)   Enter into an agreement or conspiracy to defraud the Bureau of
Workers' Compensation or a self-insuring employer by making or presenting or
causing to be made or presented a false claim for workers' compensation
benefits;
      (5)   Make or present or cause to be made or presented a false statement
concerning manual codes, classification or employees, payroll, paid
compensation, or number of personnel, when information of that nature is
necessary to determine the actual workers' compensation premium or assessment
owed to the Bureau by an employer;
      (6)   Alter, forge, or create a workers' compensation certificate or
falsely show current or correct workers' compensation coverage;
      (7)   Fail to secure or maintain workers' compensation coverage as
required by Ohio R.C. Chapter 4123 with the intent to defraud the Bureau of
Workers' Compensation.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of workers’ compensation
fraud. Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, workers’ compensation
fraud is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the value of premiums and
assessments unpaid pursuant to actions described in subsections (a)(5), (a)(6),
or (a)(7) of this section, or goods, services, property, or money stolen is one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or more, workers’ compensation fraud is a felony
to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (c)   Upon application of the governmental body that conducted the
investigation and prosecution of a violation of this section, the court shall
order the person who is convicted of the violation to pay the governmental body
its costs of investigating and prosecuting the case. These costs are in
addition to any other costs or penalty provided under federal, state or local
law.
   (d)   The remedies and penalties provided in this section are not exclusive
remedies and penalties and do not preclude the use of any other criminal or
civil remedy or penalty for any act that is in violation of this section.
   (e)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   "Claim" means any attempt to cause the Bureau of Workers'
Compensation, an independent third party with whom the administrator or an
employer contracts under Ohio R.C. 4121.44, or a self-insuring employer to make
payment or reimbursement for workers' compensation benefits.
      (2)   "Employer", "employee", and "self-insuring employer" have the same
meanings as in Ohio R.C. 4123.01.
      (3)   "Employment" means participating in any trade, occupation,
business, service, or profession for substantial gainful remuneration.
      (4)   "False" means wholly or partially untrue or deceptive.
      (5)   "Goods" includes but is not limited to medical supplies,
appliances, rehabilitative equipment, and any other apparatus or furnishing
provided or used in the care, treatment, or rehabilitation of a claimant for
workers' compensation benefits.
      (6)   "Records" means any medical, professional, financial, or business
record relating to the treatment or care of any person, to goods or services
provided to any person, or to rates paid for goods or services provided to any
person, or any record that the administrator of workers' compensation requires
pursuant to rule.
      (7)   "Remuneration" includes but is not limited to wages, commissions,
rebates, and any other reward or consideration.
      (8)   "Services" includes but is not limited to any service provided by
any health care provider to a claimant for workers' compensation benefits and
any and all services provided by the Bureau as part of workers' compensation
insurance coverage.
      (9)   "statement" includes but is not limited to any oral, written,
electronic, electronic impulse, or magnetic communication notice, letter,
memorandum, receipt for payment, invoice, account, financial statement, or bill
for services; a diagnosis, prognosis, prescription, hospital, medical, or
dental chart or other record; and a computer generated document.
      (10)   "Workers' compensation benefits" means any compensation or
benefits payable under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4121, 4123, 4127, or 4131.
(ORC 2913.48)
§ 642.32  MEDICAID FRAUD.
   (a)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   “Provider.” Any person who has signed a provider agreement with the
Department of Medicaid to provide goods or services pursuant to the Medicaid
program or any person who has signed an agreement with a party to such a
provider agreement under which the person agrees to provide goods or services
that are reimbursable under the Medicaid program.
      (2)   “Provider agreement.” Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 5164.01.
      (3)   “Recipient.” Any individual who receives goods or services from a
provider under the Medicaid program.
      (4)   “Records.” Any medical, professional, financial or business records
relating to the treatment or care of any recipient, to goods or services
provided to any recipient, or to rates paid for goods or services provided to
any recipient, and any records that are required by the rules of the Medicaid
Director to be kept for the Medicaid program.
      (5)   “Statement or representation.” Any oral, written, electronic,
electronic impulse or magnetic communication that is used to identify an item
of goods or a service for which reimbursement may be made under the Medicaid
program or that states income and expense and is or may be used to determine a
rate of reimbursement under the Medicaid program.
   (b)   No person shall knowingly make or cause to be made a false or
misleading statement or representation for use in obtaining reimbursement from
the Medicaid program.
   (c)   No person, with purpose to commit fraud or knowing that the person is
facilitating a fraud, shall do either of the following:
      (1)   Contrary to the terms of the person’s provider agreement, charge,
solicit, accept or receive for goods or services that the person provides under
the Medicaid program any property, money or other consideration in addition to
the amount of reimbursement under the Medicaid program and the person’s
provider agreement for the goods or services and any cost-sharing expenses
authorized by R.C. § 5162.20 or rules adopted by the Medicaid Director
regarding the Medicaid program.
      (2)   Solicit, offer or receive any remuneration, other than any cost-
sharing expenses authorized by R.C. § 5162.20 or rules adopted by the Medicaid
Director regarding the Medicaid program, in cash or in kind, including but not
limited to a kickback or rebate, in connection with the furnishing of goods or
services for which whole or partial reimbursement is or may be made under the
Medicaid program.
   (d)   No person, having submitted a claim for or provided goods or services
under the Medicaid program, shall do either of the following for a period of at
least six years after a reimbursement pursuant to that claim, or a
reimbursement for those goods or services, is received under the Medicaid
program:
      (1)   Knowingly alter, falsify, destroy, conceal or remove any records
that are necessary to fully disclose the nature of all goods or services for
which the claim was submitted, or for which reimbursement was received, by the
person; or
      (2)   Knowingly alter, falsify, destroy, conceal or remove any records
that are necessary to disclose fully all income and expenditures upon which
rates of reimbursements were based for the person.
   (e)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of Medicaid fraud. Except as
otherwise provided in this division, Medicaid fraud is a misdemeanor of the
first degree. If the value of the property, services or funds obtained in
violation of this section is $1,000 or more, Medicaid fraud is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (f)   Upon application of the governmental agency, office or other entity
that conducted the investigation and prosecution in a case under this section,
the court shall order any person who is convicted of a violation of this
section for receiving any reimbursement for furnishing goods or services under
the Medicaid program to which the person is not entitled to pay to the
applicant its cost of investigating and prosecuting the case. The costs of
investigation and prosecution that a defendant is ordered to pay pursuant to
this division shall be in addition to any other penalties for the receipt of
that reimbursement that are provided in this section, R.C. § 2913.40 or
5164.35, or any other provision of law.
   (g)   The provisions of this section are not intended to be exclusive
remedies and do not preclude the use of any other criminal or civil remedy for
any act that is in violation of this section.
(R.C. § 2913.40)
   (h)   Medicaid eligibility fraud.
      (1)   No person shall knowingly do any of the following in an application
for enrollment in the Medicaid program or in a document that requires a
disclosure of assets for the purpose of determining eligibility for the
Medicaid program:
         A.   Make or cause to be made a false or misleading statement;
         B.   Conceal an interest in property;
         C.   1.   Except as provided in division (h)(1)C.2. of this section,
fail to disclose a transfer of property that occurred during the period
beginning 36 months before submission of the application or document and ending
on the date the application or document was submitted;
            2.   Fail to disclose a transfer of property that occurred during
the period beginning 60 months before submission of the application or document
and ending on the date the application or document was submitted and that was
made to an irrevocable trust a portion of which is not distributable to the
applicant for or recipient of Medicaid or to a revocable trust.
      (2)   A.   Whoever violates this division (h) is guilty of Medicaid
eligibility fraud. Except as otherwise provided in this division, a violation
of this division (h) is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
If the value of the Medicaid services paid as a result of the violation is
$1,000 or more, a violation of this division (h) is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.
         B.   In addition to imposing a sentence under division (h)(2)A. of
this section, the court shall order that a person who is guilty of Medicaid
eligibility fraud make restitution in the full amount of any Medicaid services
paid on behalf of an applicant for or recipient of Medicaid for which the
applicant or recipient was not eligible, plus interest at the rate applicable
to judgments on unreimbursed amounts from the date on which the Medicaid
services were paid to the date on which restitution is made.
         C.   The remedies and penalties provided in this division (h) are not
exclusive and do not preclude the use of any other criminal or civil remedy for
any act that is in violation of this division (h).
      (3)   This division (h) does not apply to a person who fully disclosed in
an application for Medicaid or in a document that requires a disclosure of
assets for the purpose of determining eligibility for Medicaid all of the
interests in property of the applicant for or recipient of Medicaid, all
transfers of property by the applicant for or recipient of Medicaid, and the
circumstances of all those transfers.
      (4)   Any amounts of Medicaid services recovered as restitution under
this division (h) and any interest on those amounts shall be credited to the
General Revenue Fund, and any applicable federal share shall be returned to the
appropriate agency or department of the United States.
      (5)   For the purpose of this division (h), the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
         A.   “Medicaid services.” Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 5164.01.
         B.   “Property.”Any real or personal property or other asset in which
a person has any legal title or interest.
(R.C. § 2913.401)
§ 642.33  MOTION PICTURE PIRACY.
   (a)   As used in this section:
      (1)   "Audiovisual recording function" means the capability of a device
to record or transmit a motion picture or any part of a motion picture by means
of any technology existing on, or developed after, March 9, 2004.
      (2)   "Facility" means a movie theater.
   (b)   No person, without the written consent of the owner or lessee of the
facility and of the licensor of the motion picture, shall knowingly operate an
audiovisual recording function of a device in a facility in which the motion
picture is being shown.
   (c)   Whoever violates subsection (b) of this section is guilty of motion
picture piracy, a misdemeanor of the first degree on the first offense and a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law on each subsequent offense.
   (d)   This section does not prohibit or restrict a lawfully authorized
investigative, law enforcement, protective, or intelligence gathering employee
or agent of the government of this state or a political subsubsection of this
state, or of the Federal government, when acting in an official capacity, from
operating an audiovisual recording function of a device in any facility in
which a motion picture is being shown.
   (e)   Division (b) of this section does not limit or affect the application
of any other prohibition in this code or the Ohio Revised Code. Any act that is
a violation of both subsection (b) of this section and another provision of
this code or the Ohio Revised Code may be prosecuted under this section, under
the other provision of this code or the Ohio Revised Code, or under both this
section and the other provision of this code or the Ohio Revised Code.
(ORC 2913.07)
§ 642.34  DIMINISHING OR INTERFERING WITH FORFEITABLE PROPERTY.
   (a)   No person shall destroy, damage, remove, or transfer property that is
subject to forfeiture or otherwise take any action in regard to property that
is subject to forfeiture with purpose to do any of the following:
      (1)   Prevent or impair the state's or political subsubsection's lawful
authority to take the property into its custody or control under Ohio R.C.
Chapter 2981 or to continue holding the property under its lawful custody or
control;
      (2)   Impair or defeat the court's continuing jurisdiction over the
person and property;
      (3)   Devalue property that the person knows, or has reasonable cause to
believe, is subject to forfeiture proceedings under Ohio R.C. Chapter 2981.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of interference with or
diminishing forfeitable property. Except as otherwise provided in this
subsection (b), interference with or diminishing forfeitable property is a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If the value of the property is one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00) or more, interference with or diminishing forfeitable
property is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(ORC 2981.07)
CHAPTER 648:  PEACE DISTURBANCES
Section
648.01   Riot.
648.02   Failure to disperse.
648.03   Justifiable use of force to suppress riot.
648.04   Disorderly conduct.
648.05   Disturbing a lawful meeting.
648.06   Misconduct at an emergency.
648.07   Inducing panic.
648.08   Making false alarms.
648.09   Inciting to violence.
648.10   Noise levels; noise disturbances.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Arson - see GEN. OFF.
642.09
   Assault - see GEN. OFF.
636.02,
636.03
   Barking or howling dogs - see GEN. OFF.
618.07
   Construction noise control - see P. & Z.
1242.08
   Cordoning off riot areas; prohibiting sales of firearms and explosives - see
Ohio R.C. 3761.16
   "Deadly force" defined - see GEN. OFF.
606.01
   Definitions generally - see GEN. OFF.
606.01
   Desecration - see GEN. OFF.
642.07
   Detention of disorderly persons - see GEN. OFF.
606.23
   Detention of shoplifters and those committing motion picture piracy;
protection of institutional property - see GEN. OFF.
606.23
   Fireworks - see GEN. OFF.
672.10,
672.11
   "Force" defined - see GEN. OFF.
606.01
   Interfering with civil rights - see GEN. OFF.
606.20
   Liquor sale to intoxicated person - see GEN. OFF.
612.03
   Menacing - see GEN. OFF.
636.04et seq.
   Noisy mufflers - see TRAF.
438.21
   "Peeling"; cracking exhaust noises - see TRAF.
432.35
   Pointing and discharging firearms and other weapons - see GEN. OFF.
672.12
   Power to regulate peace disturbances - see Ohio R.C. 715.49
   Resisting arrest - see GEN. OFF.
606.16
   Riot and civil disorder assistance by state Highway Patrol - see Ohio R.C.
5503.02
   See section histories for similar state law
   Sirens, whistles and bells on motor vehicles - see TRAF.
438.20
   Suspension of beer and liquor sales during emergency - see Ohio R.C.
4301.251
   Trespass - see GEN. OFF.
642.12,
642.125
§ 648.01  RIOT.
   (a)   No person shall participate with four or more others in a course of
disorderly conduct in violation of Ohio R.C. 2917.11 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance:
      (1)   With purpose to commit or facilitate the commission of a
misdemeanor, other than disorderly conduct;
      (2)   With purpose to intimidate a public official or employee into
taking or refraining from official action, or with purpose to hinder, impede,
or obstruct a function of government;
      (3)   With purpose to hinder, impede, or obstruct the orderly process of
administration or instruction at an educational institution, or to interfere
with or disrupt lawful activities carried on at the institution.
   (b)   No person shall participate with four or more others with purpose to
do an act with unlawful force or violence, even though the act might otherwise
be lawful.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of riot, a misdemeanor of the
first degree.
(ORC 2917.03)
   (d)   For the purposes of prosecuting violations of this section, the
prosecution is not required to allege or prove that the offender expressly
agreed with four or more others to commit any act that constitutes a violation
this section prior to or while committing those acts.
(ORC 2917.031)
Statutory reference:
   Aggravated riot, felony provisions, see Ohio R.C. 2917.02
§ 648.02  FAILURE TO DISPERSE.
   (a)   Where five or more persons are participating in a course of disorderly
conduct in violation of Ohio R.C. 2917.11 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, and there are other persons in the vicinity whose presence
creates the likelihood of physical harm to persons or property or of serious
public inconvenience, annoyance, or alarm, a law enforcement officer or other
public official may order the participants and the other persons to disperse.
No person shall knowingly fail to obey the order.
   (b)   Nothing in this section requires persons to disperse who are peaceably
assembled for a lawful purpose.
   (c)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of failure to disperse.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in subsection (c)(3) of this section,
failure to disperse is a minor misdemeanor.
      (3)   Failure to disperse is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree if the
failure to obey the order described in subsection (a) of this section creates
the likelihood of physical harm to persons or is committed at the scene of a
fire, accident, disaster, riot, or emergency of any kind.
(ORC 2917.04)
§ 648.03  JUSTIFIABLE USE OF FORCE TO SUPPRESS RIOT.
   A law enforcement officer or firefighter engaged in suppressing a riot or in
protecting persons or property during a riot:
   (a)   Is justified in using force, other than deadly force, when and to the
extent he or she has probable cause to believe such force is necessary to
disperse or apprehend rioters;
   (b)   Is justified in using force, including deadly force, when and to the
extent he or she has probable cause to believe such force is necessary to
disperse or apprehend rioters whose conduct is creating a substantial risk of
serious physical harm to persons.
(ORC 2917.05)
§ 648.04  DISORDERLY CONDUCT.
   (a)   No person shall recklessly cause inconvenience, annoyance, or alarm to
another, by doing any of the following:
      (1)   Engaging in fighting, in threatening harm to persons or property,
or in violent or turbulent behavior;
      (2)   Making unreasonable noise or an offensively coarse utterance,
gesture, or display, or communicating unwarranted and grossly abusive language
to any person;
      (3)   Insulting, taunting, or challenging another, under circumstances in
which that conduct is likely to provoke a violent response;
      (4)   Hindering or preventing the movement of persons on a public street,
road, highway, or right-of-way, or to, from, within, or upon public or private
property, so as to interfere with the rights of others, and by any act that
serves no lawful and reasonable purpose of the offender;
      (5)   Creating a condition that is physically offensive to persons or
that presents a risk of physical harm to persons or property, by any act that
serves no lawful and reasonable purpose of the offender.
   (b)   No person while voluntarily intoxicated shall do either of the
following:
      (1)   In a public place or in the presence of two or more persons, engage
in conduct likely to be offensive or to cause inconvenience, annoyance, or
alarm to persons of ordinary sensibilities, which conduct the offender, if he
or she were not intoxicated, should know is likely to have such effect on
others;
      (2)   Engage in conduct or create a condition that presents a risk of
physical harm to himself, herself or another, or to the property of another.
   (c)   Violation of any statute or ordinance of which an element is operating
a motor vehicle, locomotive, watercraft, aircraft, or other vehicle while under
the influence of alcohol or any drug of abuse is not a violation of subsection
(b) of this section.
   (d)   If a person appears to an ordinary observer to be intoxicated, it is
probable cause to believe that the person is voluntarily intoxicated for
purposes of subsection (b) of this section.
   (e)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of disorderly conduct.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in subsection (e)(2) of this section,
disorderly conduct is a minor misdemeanor.
      (2)   Disorderly conduct is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree if any of
the following applies:
         A.   The offender persists in disorderly conduct after reasonable
warning or request to desist.
         B.   The offense is committed in the vicinity of a school or in a
school safety zone.
         C.   The offense is committed in the presence of any law enforcement
officer, firefighter, rescuer, medical person, emergency medical services
person, or other authorized person who is engaged in the person's duties at the
scene of a fire, accident, disaster, riot, or emergency of any kind.
         D.   The offense is committed in the presence of any emergency
facility person who is engaged in the person's duties in an emergency facility.
   (f)   As used in this section:
      (1)   "Committed in the vicinity of a school" has the same meaning as in
Ohio R.C. 2925.01.
      (2)   "Emergency facility" has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2909.04.
      (3)   "Emergency facility person" is the singular of "emergency facility
personnel" as defined in Ohio R.C. 2909.04.
      (4)   "Emergency medical services person" is the singular of "emergency
medical services personnel" as defined in Ohio R.C. 2133.21.
(ORC 2917.11)
§ 648.05  DISTURBING A LAWFUL MEETING.
   (a)   No person, with purpose to prevent or disrupt a lawful meeting,
procession, or gathering, shall do either of the following:
      (1)   Do any act which obstructs or interferes with the due conduct of
the meeting, procession, or gathering.
      (2)   Make any utterance, gesture, or display which outrages the
sensibilities of the group.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of disturbing a lawful
meeting, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(ORC 2917.12)
§ 648.06  MISCONDUCT AT AN EMERGENCY.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly do any of the following:
      (1)   Hamper the lawful operations of any law enforcement officer,
firefighter, rescuer, medical person, emergency medical services person, or
other authorized person engaged in the person's duties at the scene of a fire,
accident, disaster, riot, or emergency of any kind;
      (2)   Hamper the lawful activities of any emergency facility person who
is engaged in the person's duties in an emergency facility;
      (3)   Fail to obey the lawful order of any law enforcement officer
engaged in the law enforcement officer's duties at the scene of or in
connection with a fire, accident, disaster, riot, or emergency of any kind.
   (b)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit access or deny
information to any news media representative in the lawful exercise of the news
media representative's duties.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of misconduct at an emergency.
Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, misconduct at an emergency is
a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If violation of this section creates a risk
of physical harm to persons or property, misconduct at an emergency is a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
   (d)   As used in this section:
      (1)   "Emergency facility" has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2909.04.
      (2)   "Emergency facility person" is the singular of "emergency facility
personnel" as defined in Ohio R.C. 2909.04.
      (3)   "Emergency medical services person" is the singular of "emergency
medical services personnel" as defined in Ohio R.C. 2133.21.
(ORC 2917.13)
§ 648.07  INDUCING PANIC.
   (a)   No person shall cause the evacuation of any public place, or otherwise
cause serious public inconvenience or alarm, by doing any of the following:
      (1)   Initiating or circulating a report or warning of an alleged or
impending fire, explosion, crime, or other catastrophe, knowing that the report
or warning is false.
      (2)   Threatening to commit any offense of violence.
      (3)   Committing any offense, with reckless disregard of the likelihood
that its commission will cause serious public inconvenience or alarm.
   (b)   Division (a)(1) of this section does not apply to any person
conducting an authorized fire or emergency drill.
   (c)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of inducing panic.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in subsection (c)(3), inducing panic
is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (3)   If a violation of this section results in physical harm to any
person, inducing panic is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state
law. If a violation of this section results in economic harm of one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00) or more, inducing panic is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law. If the public place involved in a violation of
subsection (a)(1) is a school or an institution of higher education, inducing
panic is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. If a violation
of this section pertains to a purported, 2threatened or actual use of a weapon
of mass destruction, inducing panic is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
   (d)   (1)   It is not a defense to a charge under this section that pertains
to a purported or threatened use of a weapon of mass destruction that the
offender did not possess or have the ability to use a weapon of mass
destruction or that what was represented to be a weapon of mass destruction was
not a weapon of mass destruction.
      (2)   Any act that is a violation of this section and any other section
of the Ohio Revised Code or these Codified Ordinances may be prosecuted under
this section, the other section, or both sections.
   (e)   As used in this section:
      (1)   "Biological agent" has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2917.33.
      (2)   "Economic harm" means any of the following:
         A.   All direct, incidental and consequential pecuniary harm suffered
by a victim as a result of the criminal conduct. "Economic harm" as described
in this subsection includes but is not limited to all of the following:
            1.   All wages, salaries or other compensation lost as a result of
the criminal conduct;
            2.   The cost of all wages, salaries or other compensation paid to
employees for time those employees are prevented from working as a result of
the criminal conduct;
            3.   The overhead costs incurred from the time that a business is
shut down as a result of the criminal conduct;
            4.   The loss of value to tangible or intangible property that was
damaged as a result of the criminal conduct.
         B.   All costs incurred by the state or any political subsubsection as
a result of, or in making any response to, the criminal conduct that
constituted the violation of this section or Ohio R.C. 2917.32, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, including but not limited to all
costs so incurred by any law enforcement officers, firefighters, rescue
personnel, or emergency medical services personnel of the state or the
political subsubsection.
      (3)   "Emergency medical services personnel" has the same meaning as in
Ohio R.C. 2133.21.
      (4)   "Institution of higher education" means any of the following:
         A.   A State university or college as defined in Ohio R.C. 3345.12(A)
(1), community college, State community college, university branch, or
technical college;
         B.   A private, nonprofit college, university or other post-secondary
institution located in this State that possesses a certificate of authorization
issued by the Ohio Board of Regents pursuant to Ohio R.C. Chapter 1713;
         C.   A post-secondary institution with a certificate of registration
issued by the State Board of Career Colleges and Schools pursuant to Ohio R.C.
Chapter 3332.
      (5)   "School" means any school operated by a board of education or any
school for which the state Board of Education prescribes minimum standards
under Ohio R.C. 3301.07, whether or not any instruction, extracurricular
activities, or training provided by the school is being conducted at the time a
violation of this section is committed.
      (6)   "Weapon of mass destruction" means any of the following:
         A.   Any weapon that is designed or intended to cause death or serious
physical harm through the release, dissemination, or impact of toxic or
poisonous chemicals, or other precursors;
         B.   Any weapon involving a disease organism or biological agent;
         C.   Any weapon that is designed to release radiation or radioactivity
at a level dangerous to human life;
         D.   Any of the following, except to the extent that the item or
device in question is expressly excepted from the definition of "destructive
device" pursuant to 18 U.S.C. 921(a)(4) and regulations issued under that
section:
            1.   Any explosive, incendiary, or poison gas bomb, grenade, rocket
having a propellant charge of more than four ounces, missile having an
explosive or incendiary charge of more than one-quarter ounce, mine, or similar
device;
            2.   Any combination of parts either designed or intended for use
in converting any item or device into any item or device described in
subsection D.1. of this definition and from which an item or device described
in that subsection may be readily assembled.
(ORC 2917.31)
§ 648.08  MAKING FALSE ALARMS.
   (a)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Initiate or circulate a report or warning of an alleged or
impending fire, explosion, crime, or other catastrophe, knowing that the report
or warning is false and likely to cause public inconvenience or alarm.
      (2)   Knowingly cause a false alarm of fire or other emergency to be
transmitted to or within any organization, public or private, for dealing with
emergencies involving a risk of physical harm to persons or property.
      (3)   Report to any law enforcement agency an alleged offense or other
incident within its concern, knowing that the offense did not occur.
   (b)   This section does not apply to any person conducting an authorized
fire or emergency drill.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of making false alarms. Except
as otherwise provided in this subsection, making false alarms is a misdemeanor
of the first degree. If a violation of this section results in economic harm of
one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or more, making false alarms is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law. If a violation of this section pertains
to a purported, threatened, or actual use of a weapon of mass destruction,
making false alarms is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (d)   (1)   It is not a defense to a charge under this section that pertains
to a purported or threatened use of a weapon of mass destruction that the
offender did not possess or have the ability to use a weapon of mass
destruction or that what was represented to be a weapon of mass destruction was
not a weapon of mass destruction.
      (2)   Any act that is a violation of this section and any other section
of the Ohio Revised Code or these Codified Ordinances may be prosecuted under
this section, the other section, or both sections.
   (e)   As used in this section, "economic harm" and "weapon of mass
destruction" have the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2917.31.
(ORC 2917.32)
§ 648.09  INCITING TO VIOLENCE.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly engage in conduct designed to urge or incite
another to commit any offense of violence when either of the following apply:
      (1)   The conduct takes place under circumstances that create a clear and
present danger that any offense of violence will be committed.
      (2)   The conduct proximately results in the commission of any offense of
violence.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of inciting to violence. If
the offense of violence that the other person is being urged or incited to
commit is a misdemeanor, inciting to violence is a misdemeanor of the first
degree. If the offense of violence that the other person is being urged or
incited to commit is a felony, inciting to violence is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(ORC 2917.01)
§ 648.10  NOISE LEVELS; NOISE DISTURBANCES.
   (a)   The use of radios or other sound making devices or instruments in, or
on, motor vehicles is hereby prohibited under the following circumstances:
      (1)   No person operating or occupying a motor vehicle within the City
shall operate or amplify the sound produced by a radio, tape player, CD player,
or other sound making device or instrument from within, or on, said motor
vehicle so that the sound is:
         A.   Audible at a distance of 100 feet or more from the motor vehicle;
or
         B.   Louder than necessary for the convenient hearing by persons
inside the motor vehicle in areas adjoining churches, schools or hospitals.
      (2)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to any law
enforcement motor vehicle equipped with any communication device necessary in
the performance of law enforcement duties or to any emergency vehicle or public
safety vehicle equipped with any communication device necessary in the
performance of any emergency procedures.
      (3)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to motor vehicles
used for business or political purposes, which in the normal course of
conducting such business, use sound making devices.
      (4)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to the noise made by
a horn or other warning device required or permitted by state law.
      (5)   As used in this section, "audible" shall mean any sound produced by
a radio, tape player, CD player, or other mechanical or electronic sound making
device or instrument, from within the interior or on the exterior of a motor
vehicle, including sound produced by a portable sound making device, that can
be heard outside the vehicle by a person using his normal hearing faculties at
a distance of 100 feet or more from the motor vehicle.
      (6)   A law enforcement officer who hears a sound that is audible, as
defined herein, shall measure the sound according to the following standards:
         A.   The primary means of detection shall be by the officer's ordinary
auditory senses, so long as the officer's hearing is not enhanced by any
mechanical device, such as a microphone or hearing aid.
         B.   The officer shall have a direct line of sight and hearing to the
motor vehicle producing the sound so that he or she can readily identify the
offending motor vehicle and the distance involved.
      (7)   The officer need not determine the particular words or phrases
being produced or the name of any song or artist producing the sound. The
detection of a rhythmic bass reverberating type sound is sufficient to
constitute an audible sound.
      (8)   The motor vehicle from which the sound is produced shall be located
upon, either stopped, standing or moving, a street, highway, parking lot or
driveway within the City.
   (b)   No person shall unreasonably make, continue or cause to be made,
continued or permitted, any noise disturbance by any of the following means:
      (1)   Air conditioners. Maintaining any refrigeration machinery or air
conditioning, consisting of air compressors or rotating or reciprocating
machinery, in such a manner as to create a noise disturbance across a
residential real property boundary line.
      (2)   Construction. No land developer or subdivider shall operate or
permit the operation of any construction equipment or tools used for purposes
of construction, site preparation, erection, repair or any similar activity
between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of the following day, Monday
through Saturday. This restriction shall not apply to emergency repairs to
prevent or alleviate physical trauma or property damage threatened or caused by
any such emergency. No operation, as described herein shall occur on Sunday
before 12:00 noon, and such operation shall cease on or before 6:00 p.m.
      (3)   Domestic power tools. Operating or permitting the operation of any
mechanically powered saw, drill, sander, grinder, lawn or garden tool, lawn
mower or other similar device used outdoors, other than powered snow removal
equipment, outdoors between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. or on Saturday
or Sunday before the hour of 8:00 a.m.
      (4)   Emergency signaling devices. Intentionally sounding or permitting
the sounding outdoors of any fire, burglar or civil defense alarm, siren,
whistle or similar stationary emergency signaling device, except for emergency
purposes or for testing as provided in this subsection. Testing of a stationary
emergency signaling device shall occur at the same time of day each time such a
test is performed, but not before 7:00 a.m. or after 9:00 p.m. or the closing
time of a commercial establishment, whichever shall occur later. Any such
testing shall use only the minimum cycle test time. In no case, shall any such
time exceed sixty seconds. Testing of the complete emergency signaling system,
including the functioning of the signaling device, and the personnel response
to the signaling device, shall not occur before 7:00 a.m. or after 9:00 p.m.,
and in no case shall such test exceed 10 seconds.
      (5)   Explosives, firearms and similar devices. Using or firing of
explosives, firearms or similar devices which create impulsive sound so as to
cause a noise disturbance across a residential real property boundary line or
on a public space or right-of-way.
      (6)   Loading and unloading materials. Loading, unloading, opening,
closing or other handling of boxes, crates, containers, building materials,
garbage cans or similar objects between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.,
in such a manner as to cause a noise disturbance across a residential real
property boundary line.
      (7)   Loudspeakers/public address systems.
         A.   Using, operating or permitting the operation of any loudspeaker,
public address system, mobile sound vehicle or similar device amplifying sound
therefrom on a public right-of-way or public space for any commercial purpose;
or
         B.   Using, operating or permitting for any noncommercial purpose any
loudspeaker, public address system, mobile sound vehicle, or similar device
between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., or such that the sound therefrom
creates a noise disturbance across a residential real property boundary line.
      (8)   Powered model vehicles. Operating or permitting the operation of a
powered model vehicle or vehicles including, but not limited to, model
airplanes, boats, cars or rockets, so as to create a noise disturbance across a
residential real property boundary line or on a public space of right-of-way
between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
      (9)   Vehicle or motorboat repairs and testing. Repairing, rebuilding,
modifying operating or testing any motor vehicle, motorcycle, motorized bicycle
or motorboat in such a manner as to cause a noise disturbance across a
residential real property boundary line.
   (c)   In addition to the specific prohibitions set forth in subsections (a)
and (b) hereof, no person shall unreasonably make, continue or cause to be
made, continued or permitted, any noise disturbance.
   (d)   This section shall not apply to noncommercial, public speaking and
public assembly activities conducted on any public space or right-of-way.
   (e)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section shall be guilty
of a minor misdemeanor for each offense and shall be subject to a fine of up to
a maximum of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). If the offender has
previously been convicted of violating any provision of this section, then the
offender shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree, and shall be
subject to a sentence of up to thirty days in jail and a fine of up to two
hundred fifty dollars ($250.00), or both. When the offense is continuous or
repetitious in nature, then each day that the violation continues or is
repeated shall be deemed a separate offense and shall be punished as a separate
offense.
   (f)   As referred to in this section, "Noise" is defined as any sound which
annoys or disturbs persons of normal sensibilities or which causes or tends to
cause an adverse psychological or physiological effect on persons. "Noise
Disturbance" is defined as any sound which endangers or injures the safety or
health of humans or animals, annoys or disturbs a reasonable person of normal
sensitivities, or, endangers or injures personal or real property.
   (g)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to the emission of
sound for the purpose of alerting persons to the existence of an emergency or
for the performance of emergency work and for the purpose of organized school-
related programs, activities or parades or other public programs, activities or
events authorized by the city.
(Ord. 00-O-73, passed 12-4-2000; Am. Ord. 00-O-99, passed 12-18-2000)
CHAPTER 660:  SAFETY, SANITATION AND HEALTH
Section
660.01   Venting of heaters and burners.
660.02   Spreading contagion.
660.03   Littering.
660.04   Noxious odors; filthy accumulations; polluting and diverting
watercourses.
660.05   Duty to keep sidewalks in repair and clean.
660.06   Abandoned refrigerators and airtight containers.
660.07   Storage of junk vehicles.
660.08   Open burning.
660.09   Barricades and warning lights.
660.10   Sidewalk obstructions; damage or injury.
660.11   Notice to fill lots, remove putrid substances.
660.12   Storage of rubbish, scrap metal, vehicle parts, etc.
660.13   Smoking in places of public assembly.
660.14   Trees adjacent to or in public rights-of-way.
660.15   Fences.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Animal nuisances - see GEN. OFF.
618.13
   Excavation liability - see Ohio R.C. 723.49 et seq.
   Inducing panic - see GEN. OFF.
648.07
   Littering from motor vehicles - see TRAF.
432.40
   Loads dropping or leaking; tracking mud; removal required - see TRAF.
440.06
   Nuisances - see Ohio R.C. Ch. 3767
   Placing harmful substance or objects in food or confection - see GEN. OFF.
636.16
   Placing injurious material or obstruction in street - see TRAF.
412.01
   Rabies quarantine - see GEN. OFF.
618.11
   Riot - see GEN. OFF.
648.01et seq.
   Safety and equipment for motor vehicles - see TRAF.
Ch. 438
   See section histories for similar state law
   Weapons and explosives - see GEN. OFF.
Ch. 672
   Willfully leaving vehicles on private or public property - see TRAF.
452.05
§ 660.01  VENTING OF HEATERS AND BURNERS.
   (a)   The use of a brazier, salamander, space heater, room heater, furnace,
water heater, or other burner or heater using wood, coal, coke, fuel oil,
kerosene, gasoline, natural gas, liquid petroleum gas or similar fuel, and
tending to give off carbon monoxide or other harmful gases must comply with the
following provisions;
      (1)   When used in living quarters, or in any enclosed building or space
in which persons are usually present, shall be used with a flue or vent so
designed, installed, and maintained as to vent the products of combustion
outdoors; except in storage, factory, or industrial buildings which are
provided with sufficient ventilation to avoid the danger of carbon monoxide
poisoning.
      (2)   When used as a portable or temporary burner or heater at a
construction site, or in a warehouse, shed, or structure in which persons are
temporarily present, shall be vented as provided in subsection (a)(1) or used
with sufficient ventilation to avoid the danger of carbon monoxide poisoning.
   (b)   This section does not apply to domestic ranges, laundry stoves, gas
logs installed in a fireplace with an adequate flue, or hot plates, unless the
same are used as space or room heaters.
   (c)   No person shall negligently use, or, being the owner, person in
charge, or occupant of premises, negligently permit the use of a burner or
heater in violation of the standards for venting and ventilation provided in
this section.
   (d)   Division (a) above does not apply to any kerosene-fired space or room
heater that is equipped with an automatic extinguishing tip-over device, or to
any natural gas-fired or liquid petroleum gas-fired space or room heater that
is equipped with an oxygen depletion safety shut-off system, and that has its
fuel piped from a source outside the building in which it is located, that are
approved by an authoritative source recognized by the state Fire Marshal in the
state Fire Code adopted by him or her under Ohio R.C. 3737.82.
   (e)   The state Fire Marshal may make rules to ensure the safe use of
unvented kerosene, natural gas, or liquid petroleum gas heaters exempted from
subsection (a) above when used in assembly buildings, business buildings, high
hazard buildings, institutional buildings, mercantile buildings, and type R-
1 and R-2 residential buildings, as these groups of buildings are defined in
rules adopted by the Board of Building Standards under Ohio R.C. 3781.10. No
person shall negligently use, or, being the owner, person in charge or occupant
of premises, negligently permit the use of a heater in violation of any rules
adopted under this subsection.
   (f)   The state Fire Marshal may make rules prescribing standards for
written instructions containing ventilation requirements and warning of any
potential fire hazards that may occur in using a kerosene, natural gas, or
liquid petroleum gas heater. No person shall sell or offer for sale any
kerosene, natural gas, or liquid petroleum gas heater unless the manufacturer
provides with the heater written instructions that comply with any rules
adopted under this subsection.
   (g)   No product labeled as a fuel additive for kerosene heaters and having
a flash point below 100°F or 37.8°C shall be sold, offered for sale, or used in
any kerosene space heater.
   (h)   No device that prohibits any safety feature on a kerosene, natural
gas, or liquid petroleum gas space heater from operating shall be sold, offered
for sale, or used in connection with any kerosene, natural gas, or liquid
petroleum gas space heater.
   (i)   No person shall sell or offer for sale any kerosene-fired, natural
gas, or liquid petroleum gas-fired heater that is not exempt from subsection
(a) above, unless it is marked conspicuously by the manufacturer on the
container with the phrase "Not Approved For Home Use."
   (j)   No person shall use a cabinet-type, liquid petroleum gas-fired heater
having a fuel source within the heater, inside any building, except as
permitted by the state Fire Marshal in the state Fire Code adopted by him or
her under Ohio R.C. 3737.82.
(ORC 3701.82)
   (k)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(ORC 3701.99(B))
§ 660.02  SPREADING CONTAGION.
   (a)   No person, knowing or having reasonable cause to believe that he or
she is suffering from a dangerous, contagious disease, shall knowingly fail to
take reasonable measures to prevent exposing himself or herself to other
persons, except when seeking medical aid.
   (b)   No person, having charge or care of a person whom he or she knows or
has reasonable cause to believe is suffering from a dangerous, contagious
disease, shall recklessly fail to take reasonable measures to protect others
from exposure to the contagion, and to inform health authorities of the
existence of the contagion.
   (c)   No person, having charge of a public conveyance or place of public
accommodation, amusement, resort, or trade, and knowing or having reasonable
cause to believe that persons using such conveyance or place have been or are
being exposed to a dangerous, contagious disease, shall negligently fail to
take reasonable measures to protect the public from exposure to the contagion,
and to inform health authorities of the existence of the contagion.
(ORC 3701.81)
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the second
degree.
(ORC 3701.99(C))
§ 660.03  LITTERING.
   (a)   No person, regardless of intent, shall deposit litter or cause litter
to be deposited on any public property, on private property not owned by him or
her, or in or on waters of the state, unless one of the following applies:
      (1)   The person is directed to do so by a public official as part of a
litter collection drive.
      (2)   Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, the person
deposits the litter in a litter receptacle in a manner that prevents its being
carried away by the elements.
      (3)   The person is issued a permit or license covering the litter
pursuant to Ohio R.C. Chapter 3734 or 6111.
   (b)   No person, without privilege to do so, shall knowingly deposit litter,
or cause it to be deposited, in a litter receptacle located on any public
property or on any private property not owned by him or her, unless one of the
following applies:
      (1)   The litter was generated or located on the property on which the
litter receptacle is located.
      (2)   The person is directed to do so by a public official as part of a
litter collection drive.
      (3)   The person is directed to do so by a person whom he or she
reasonably believes to have the privilege to use the litter receptacle.
      (4)   The litter consists of any of the following:
         A.   The contents of a litter bag or container of a type and size
customarily carried and used in a motor vehicle.
         B.   The contents of an ash tray of a type customarily installed or
carried and used in a motor vehicle.
         C.   Beverage containers and food sacks, wrappings, and containers of
a type and in an amount that reasonably may be expected to be generated during
routine commuting or business or recreational travel by a motor vehicle.
         D.   Beverage containers, food sacks, wrappings, containers, and other
materials of a type and in an amount that reasonably may be expected to be
generated during a routine day by a person and deposited in a litter receptacle
by a casual passerby.
   (c)   (1)   As used in subsection (b)(1) of this section, "public property"
includes any private property open to the public for the conduct of business,
the provision of a service, or upon the payment of a fee but does not include
any private property to which the public otherwise does not have a right of
access.
      (2)   As used in subsection (b)(4) of this section, "casual passerby"
means a person who does not have depositing litter in a litter receptacle as
his or her primary reason for traveling to or by the property on which the
litter receptacle is located.
   (d)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   "Deposit" means to throw, drop, discard, or place.
      (2)   "Litter" means garbage, trash, waste, rubbish, ashes, cans,
bottles, wire, paper, cartons, boxes, automobile parts, furniture, glass, or
anything else of an unsightly or unsanitary nature.
      (3)   "Litter receptacle" means a dumpster, trash can, trash bin, garbage
can, or similar container in which litter is deposited for removal.
   (e)   This section may be enforced by any sheriff, deputy sheriff, police
officer of a municipal corporation, police constable or officer of a township,
or township or joint police district, wildlife officer designated under R.C. §
1531.13, natural resources officer appointed under R.C. § 1501.24, forest-fire
investigator appointed under R.C. § 1503.09, conservancy district police
officer, inspector of nuisances of a county, or any other law enforcement
officer within the law enforcement officer’s jurisdiction.
(ORC 3767.32)
   (f)   Whoever violates any provision of this section shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree. The sentencing court may, in addition to or in
lieu of the penalty provided in this subsection, require a person who violates
this section to remove litter from any public or private property or in or on
waters of the state.
(ORC 3767.99(C))
§ 660.04  NOXIOUS ODORS; FILTHY ACCUMULATIONS; POLLUTING AND DIVERTING
WATERCOURSES.
   (a)   No person shall erect, continue to use, or maintain a building,
structure, or place for the exercise of a trade, employment, or business or for
keeping or feeding an animal which, by occasioning noxious exhalations or
noisome or offensive smells, becomes injurious to the health, comfort, or
property of individuals or of the public.
   (b)   No person shall cause or allow offal, filth, or noisome substances to
be collected or remain in any place to the damage or prejudice of others or of
the public.
   (c)   No person shall unlawfully obstruct or impede the passage of a
navigable river, harbor, or collection of water, or corrupt or render
unwholesome or impure a watercourse, stream of water, or unlawfully divert such
watercourse from its natural course or state to the injury or prejudice of
others.
   (d)   Persons who are engaged in agriculture-related activities, as
"agriculture" is defined in Ohio R.C. 519.01, and who are conducting those
activities outside the municipality, in accordance with generally accepted
agricultural practices, and in such a manner so as not to have a substantial,
adverse effect on the public health, safety, or welfare, are exempt from
subsections (a) and (b) above and from any ordinances, resolutions, rules, or
other enactments of the municipality that prohibit excessive noise.
(ORC 3767.13)
   (e)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third
degree.
(ORC 3767.99(C))
§ 660.05  DUTY TO KEEP SIDEWALKS IN REPAIR AND CLEAN.
   (a)   No owner or occupant of lots or lands abutting any sidewalk, curb or
gutter shall fail to keep the sidewalks, curbs and gutters in repair and free
from snow, ice or any nuisance, and to remove from such sidewalks, curbs or
gutters all snow and ice accumulated thereon within a reasonable time, which
will ordinarily not exceed 12 hours after any storm during which the snow and
ice has accumulated.
(ORC 723.011)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
§ 660.06  ABANDONED REFRIGERATORS AND AIRTIGHT CONTAINERS.
   (a)   No person shall abandon, discard, or knowingly permit to remain on
premises under the person's control, in a place accessible to children, any
abandoned or discarded icebox, refrigerator, or other airtight or semi-airtight
container which has a capacity of 1½ cubic feet or more and an opening of 50
square inches or more and which has a door or lid equipped with a hinge, latch,
or other fastening device capable of securing such door or lid, without
rendering the equipment harmless to human life by removing such hinges, latches
or other hardware which may cause a person to be confined therein. This section
shall not apply to an icebox, refrigerator or other airtight or semi-airtight
container located in that part of a building occupied by a dealer, warehouse or
repairer.
(ORC 3767.29)
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.
(ORC 3767.99(B))
§ 660.07  STORAGE OF JUNK VEHICLES.
   (a)   (1)   For purposes of this section, "junk motor vehicle" means any
motor vehicle which is three years old or older; extensively damaged, such
damage including but not limited to any of the following: missing wheels,
tires, motor, or transmission; apparently inoperable; and  having a fair market
value of one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) or less, that is left
uncovered in the open on private property for more than 72 hours with the
permission of the person having the right to possession of the property, except
if the person is operating a junk yard or scrap metal processing facility
licensed under the authority of Ohio R.C. 4737.05 through 4737.12, or otherwise
regulated under authority of a political subsubsection; or if the property on
which the motor vehicle is left is not subject to licensure or regulation by
any governmental authority, unless the person having the right to the
possession of the property can establish that the motor vehicle is part of a
bona fide commercial operation; or if the motor vehicle is a collector's
vehicle.
      (2)   The municipality shall not prevent a person from storing or
keeping, or restrict him or her in the method of storing or keeping, any
collector's vehicle on private property with the permission of the person
having the right to the possession of the property, except that the
municipality may require a person having such permission to conceal, by means
of buildings, fences, vegetation, terrain, or other suitable obstruction, any
unlicensed collector's vehicle stored in the open.
      (3)   The Police Chief, the Council, or the zoning authority may send
notice, by certified mail with return receipt requested, to the person having
the right to the possession of the property on which a junk motor vehicle is
left, that within ten days of receipt of the notice, the junk motor vehicle
either shall be covered by being housed in a garage or other suitable
structure, or shall be removed from the property.
      (4)   No person shall willfully leave a junk motor vehicle uncovered in
the open for more than ten days after receipt of a notice as provided in this
section. The fact that a junk motor vehicle is so left is prima facie evidence
of willful failure to comply with the notice, and each subsequent period of 30
days that a junk motor vehicle continues to be so left constitutes a separate
offense.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided int his subsection, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor on a first offense. If the offender
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one violation of this
section, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to
two or more violations of this section, whoever violates this section is guilty
of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(ORC 4513.65)
§ 660.08  OPEN BURNING.
   (a)   (1)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
         A.   “Agricultural waste.” Any waste material generated by crop,
horticultural, or livestock production practices, and includes such items as
woody debris and plant matter from stream flooding, bags, cartons, structural
materials, and landscape wastes that are generated in agricultural activities,
but does not include land clearing waste; buildings (including dismantled/
fallen barns); garbage; dead animals; animal waste; motor vehicles and parts
thereof; nor economic poisons and containers thereof, unless the manufacturer
has identified open burning as a safe disposal procedure.
         B.   “Air curtain burner.” An engineered apparatus consisting of a
motorized high-velocity fan and an air distribution system designed to aid in
the efficient combustion of materials placed in a manufactured steel structure
and for which a permit-to-install has been obtained as required in O.A.C.
Chapter 3745-31 and a permit-to-operate has been obtained as required in O.A.C.
Chapter 3745-77.
         C.   “Air curtain destructor.” An engineered apparatus consisting of a
motorized high-velocity fan and an air distribution system designed to aid in
the efficient combustion of materials placed in an adjacent pit. An air curtain
burner may be used in place of an air curtain destructor, but an air curtain
destructor may not be used in place of an air curtain burner.
         D.   “Economic poisons.” Include but are not restricted to pesticides
such as insecticides, fungicides, rodenticides, miticides, nematocides and
fumigants; herbicides; seed disinfectants; and defoliants.
         E.   “Emergency burning.” The burning of clean wood waste or deceased
animals caused by a natural disaster or an uncontrolled event such as the
following:
            1.   A tornado.
            2.   High winds.
            3.   An earthquake.
            4.   An explosion.
            5.   A flood.
            6.   A hail storm, a rain storm, or an ice storm.
         F.   “Garbage.” Any waste material resulting from the handling,
processing, preparation, cooking and consumption of food or food products.
         G.   “Inhabited building.” Any inhabited private dwelling house and
any public structure which may be used as a place of resort, assembly,
education, entertainment, lodging, trade, manufacture, repair, storage,
traffic, or occupancy by the public. Examples would include, but are not
limited to, highway rest stops, restaurants, motels, hotels and gas stations.
         H.   “Land clearing waste.” Plant waste material which is removed from
land, including plant waste material removed from stream banks during projects
involving more than one property owner, for the purpose of rendering the land
useful for residential, commercial, or industrial development. Land clearing
waste also includes the plant waste material generated during the clearing of
land for new agricultural development.
         I.   “Landscape waste.” Any plant waste material, except garbage,
including trees, tree trimmings, branches, stumps, brush, weeds, leaves, grass,
shrubbery, yard trimmings, and crop residues.
         J.   “Ohio EPA.” The Ohio Environmental Protection Agency Director or
agencies delegated authority by the Director of the Ohio Environmental
Protection Agency pursuant to R.C. § 3704.03 or the Chief of any Ohio
Environmental Protection Agency District Office.
         K.   “Open burning.” The burning of any materials wherein air
contaminants resulting from combustion are emitted directly into the ambient
air without passing through a stack or chimney. Open burning includes the
burning of any refuse or salvageable material in any device not subject to or
designed specifically to comply with the requirements of O.A.C. 3745-17-09 or
O.A.C. 3745-17-10.
         L.   “Residential waste.” Any waste material, including landscape
waste, generated on the property of a one-, two- or three-family residence as a
result of residential activities, but not including garbage, rubber, grease,
asphalt, liquid petroleum products, or plastics.
         M.   “Restricted area.” The area within the boundary of the
municipality, plus a zone extending 1,000 feet beyond the boundaries of a
municipality having a population of 1,000 to 10,000 persons and a zone
extending one mile beyond any municipality having a population of 10,000
persons or more according to the latest federal census.
         N.   “Unrestricted area.” All areas outside the boundaries of a
restricted area as defined in this section.
      (2)   Referenced materials. This section includes references to certain
matter or materials. The text of the referenced materials is not included in
the legislation contained in this section. Information on the availability of
the referenced materials as well as the date of, and/or the particular edition
or version of the material is included in this legislation. For materials
subject to change, only the specific versions specified in this legislation are
referenced. Material is referenced as it exists on the effective date of this
legislation. Except for subsequent annual publication of existing (unmodified)
Code of Federal Regulation compilations, any amendment or revision to a
referenced document is not applicable unless and until this section has been
amended to specify the new dates.
         A.   Availability. The referenced materials are available as follows:
            1.   Clean Air Act. Information and copies may be obtained by
writing to: Superintendent of Documents, Attn: New Orders, PO Box 371954,
Pittsburgh, PA 15250-7954. The full text of the act as amended in 1990 is also
available in electronic format at www.epa.gov/oar/caa/. A copy of the act is
also available for inspection and use at most public libraries and the State
Library of Ohio.
            2.   Code of Federal Regulations (C.F.R.). Information and copies
may be obtained by writing to: Superintendent of Documents, Attn: New Orders,
PO Box 371954, Pittsburgh, PA 15250-7954. The full text of the C.F.R. is also
available in electronic format at http://www.ecfr.gov. The C.F.R. compilations
are also available for inspection and use at most public libraries and the
State Library of Ohio.
            3.   National Fire Protection Association. Information on the
National Fire Protection Association codes may be obtained by contacting the
Association at 1 Batterymarch Park, Quincy, Massachusetts 02169-7471, 617-770-
3000. Codes may be ordered at www.nfpa.org/catalog/home/index.asp. Copies of
the code exist or are available at most public libraries and the State Library
of Ohio.
         B.   Referenced materials.
            1.   40 C.F.R. § 60.2974: “Am I required to apply for and obtain a
title V operating permit for my air curtain incinerator that burns only wood
waste, clean lumber, and yard waste?” as published in the July 1, 2012 Code of
Federal Regulations.
            2.   40 C.F.R. § 60.3069: “Am I required to apply for and obtain a
title V operating permit for my air curtain incinerator that burns only wood
waste, clean lumber, and yard waste?” as published in the July 1, 2012 Code of
Federal Regulations.
            3.   NFPA publication 1403: “Standard on Live Fire Training
Evolutions, Chapter 4, Acquired Structures” published April 30, 2007.
            4.   Section 129 of the Clean Air Act, contained in 42 U.S.C. §
7429: “Solid waste combustion” published January 2, 2006 in Supplement V of the
2000 Edition of the United States Code.
(O.A.C. 3745-19-01)
   (b)   Relation to other laws.
      (1)   Notwithstanding any provision in O.A.C. Chapter 3745-19, no open
burning shall be conducted in an area where an air alert, warning or emergency
under O.A.C. Chapter 3745-25 is in effect.
      (2)   No provisions of O.A.C. Chapter 3745-19 permitting open burning,
and no permission to open burn granted by the Ohio EPA, shall exempt any person
from compliance with any section of the Ohio Revised Code, or any regulation of
any state department, or any local ordinance or regulation dealing with open
burning.
(O.A.C. 3745-19-02)
   (c)   Open burning in restricted areas.
      (1)   No person or property owner shall cause or allow open burning in a
restricted area except as provided in divisions (c)(2) to (c)(4) of this
section or in R.C. § 3704.11.
      (2)   Open burning shall be allowed for the following purposes without
notification to or permission from the Ohio EPA:
         A.   Heating tar, welding, acetylene torches, highway safety flares,
heating for warmth of outdoor workers and strikers, smudge pots and similar
occupational needs.
         B.   Bonfires, campfires and outdoor fireplace equipment, whether for
cooking food for human consumption, pleasure, religious, ceremonial, warmth,
recreational or similar purposes, if the following conditions are met:
            1.   They are fueled with clean seasoned firewood, natural gas or
equivalent, or any clean burning fuel with emissions that are equivalent to or
lower than those created from the burning of seasoned firewood;
            2.   They are not used for waste disposal purposes; and
            3.   They shall have a total fuel area of three feet or less in
diameter and two feet or less in height.
         C.   Disposal of hazardous explosive materials, military munitions or
explosive devices that require immediate action to prevent endangerment of
human health, public safety, property or the environment and that are excluded
from the requirement to obtain a hazardous waste permit pursuant to O.A.C.
3745-50-45(D)(1)(d).
         D.   Recognized training in the use of fire extinguishers for
commercial or industrial fire prevention.
         E.   Fires set at the direction of federal, state, and local law
enforcement officials for the purpose of destruction of cannabis sativa
(marijuana) plant vegetation, processed marijuana material and/or other drugs
seized by federal, state, or local law enforcement officials.
         F.   Fires allowed by divisions (c)(2)A., (c)(2)B. and (c)(2)D. of
this section shall not be used for waste disposal purposes and shall be of
minimum size sufficient for their intended purpose; the fuel shall be chosen to
minimize the generation and emission of air contaminants.
      (3)   Open burning shall be allowed for the following purposes with prior
notification to the Ohio EPA in accordance with division (d)(2) of this
section:
         A.   Prevention or control of disease or pests, with written or verbal
verification to the Ohio EPA from the Ohio Department of Health or local health
department, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, cooperative
extension service, Ohio Department of Agriculture or U.S. Department of
Agriculture, that open burning is the only appropriate disposal method.
         B.   Bonfires or campfires used for ceremonial purposes that do not
meet the requirements of division (c)(2)B. of this section, provided the
following conditions are met:
            1.   They have a total fuel area no greater than five feet in
diameter by five feet in height and burn no longer than three hours;
            2.   They are not used for waste disposal purposes; and
            3.   They are fueled with clean seasoned firewood, natural gas or
equivalent, or any clean burning fuel with emissions that are equivalent to or
lower than those created from the burning of seasoned firewood.
         C.   Disposal of agricultural waste generated on the premises if the
following conditions are observed:
            1.   The fire is set only when atmospheric conditions will readily
dissipate contaminants;
            2.   The fire does not create a visibility hazard on the roadways,
railroad tracks or air fields;
            3.   The fire is located at a point on the premises no less than
1,000 feet from any inhabited building not located on the premises;
            4.   The wastes are stacked and dried to provide the best
practicable condition for efficient burning; and
            5.   No materials are burned which contain rubber, grease, asphalt,
liquid petroleum products, plastics or building materials.
      (4)   Open burning shall be allowed for the following purposes upon
receipt of written permission from the Ohio EPA, in accordance with division
(d)(1) of this section, provided that any conditions specified in the
permission are followed:
         A.   Disposal of ignitable or explosive materials where the Ohio EPA
determines that there is no practical alternate method of disposal, excluding
those materials identified in division (c)(2)C. of this section;
         B.   Instruction in methods of fire fighting or for research in the
control of fires as recognized by the State Fire Marshal Division of the Ohio
Department of Commerce and the guidelines set forth in the National Fire
Protection Association’s (NFPA) publication 1403, Standard on Live Fire
Training Evolutions, Chapter 4, Acquired Structures, provided that the
application required in division (d)(1)A. of this section is submitted by the
commercial or public entity responsible for the instruction;
         C.   In emergency or other extraordinary circumstances for any purpose
determined to be necessary by the Director and performed as identified in the
appendix to O.A.C. 3745-19-03. If deemed necessary, the open burning may be
authorized with prior oral approval by the Director followed by the issuance of
a written permission to open burn within seven working days of the oral
approval;
         D.   Recognized horticultural, silvicultural, silvicultural
(forestry), range or wildlife management practices; and
         E.   Fires and/or pyrotechnic effects, for purposes other than waste
disposal, set as part of commercial film-making or video production activities
for motion pictures and television.
(O.A.C. 3745-19-03)
   (d)   Permission to individuals and notification to the Ohio EPA.
      (1)   Permission.
         A.   An application for permission to open burn shall be submitted in
writing to Ohio EPA. The applicant shall allow Ohio EPA at least ten working
days to review the permit. Applicant may proceed with burn upon receipt of
written permission from Ohio EPA. Saturday, Sunday, and legal holidays shall
not be considered working days. The application shall be in such form and
contain such information as required by the Ohio EPA.
         B.   Except as provided in divisions (d)(1)F. and (d)(1)G. of this
section, the applications shall contain, as a minimum, information regarding:
            1.   The purpose of the proposed burning;
            2.   The quantity or acreage and the nature of the materials to be
burned;
            3.   The date or dates when the burning will take place;
            4.   The location of the burning site, including a map showing
distances to residences, populated areas, roadways, air fields and other
pertinent landmarks; and
            5.   The methods or actions which will be taken to reduce the
emissions of air contaminants.
         C.   Permission to open burn shall not be granted unless the applicant
demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Ohio EPA that open burning is necessary
to the public interest; will be conducted in a time, place and manner as to
minimize the emission of air contaminants, when atmospheric conditions are
appropriate; and will have no serious detrimental effect upon adjacent
properties or the occupants thereof. The Ohio EPA may impose such conditions as
may be necessary to accomplish the purpose of O.A.C. Chapter 3745-19.
         D.   Except as provided in division (d)(1)F. of this section,
permission to open burn must be obtained for each specific project. In
emergencies where public health or environmental quality will be seriously
threatened by delay while written permission is sought, the fire may be set
with oral permission of the Ohio EPA.
         E.   Violations of any of the conditions set forth by the Ohio EPA in
granting permission to open burn shall be grounds for revocation of that
permission and refusal to grant future permission, as well as for the
imposition of other sanctions provided by law.
         F.   The Ohio Department of Commerce, Division of State Fire Marshal,
may request permission to open burn on an annual basis for the purpose of
training firefighters on pre-flashover conditions using the Ohio Fire Academy’s
mobile training laboratory at either the academy or at other training sites in
Ohio. The annual application required pursuant to division (d)(1)A. of this
section shall contain information as required in division (d)(1)B. of this
section, except the information required in divisions (d)(1)B.3. and (d)(1)B.4.
of this section need not be provided unless it is available at the time of
submittal of the application. The Academy shall contact the appropriate Ohio
EPA District Office or local air agency at least five working days before each
training session of the date or dates when the training session will take place
and its location. Saturday, Sunday and legal holidays shall not be considered a
working day.
         G.   For open burning defined under division (c)(4)B. of this section
and O.A.C. 3745-19-04(C)(2), permission to open burn shall not be granted
unless the applicant provides proof of written notice of intent to demolish
received by the appropriate Ohio EPA field office in accordance with O.A.C.
3745-20-03.
      (2)   Notification.
         A.   Notification shall be submitted in writing at least ten working
days before the fire is to be set. Saturday, Sunday and legal holidays shall
not be considered a working day. It shall be in such form and contain such
information as shall be required by the Ohio EPA.
         B.   Such notification shall inform the Ohio EPA regarding:
            1.   The purpose of the proposed burning;
            2.   The nature and quantities of materials to be burned;
            3.   The date or dates when the burning will take place; and
            4.   The location of the burning site.
         C.   The Ohio EPA, after receiving notification, may determine that
the open burning is not allowed under O.A.C. Chapter 3745-19 and the Ohio EPA
shall notify the applicant to this effect.
(O.A.C. 3745-19-05)
   (e)   Penalty. Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section is
guilty of a minor misdemeanor. A separate offense shall be deemed committed
each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. In addition, the
offender shall be required to pay the cost of proper disposal of the materials
burned. The cost of proper disposal of the materials burned shall be the amount
it would have cost to dispose of the materials in a manner that is consistent
with the air, water and solid waste laws, ordinances and regulations of the
municipality and the state.
§ 660.09  BARRICADES AND WARNING LIGHTS.
   (a)   No person shall abandon or knowingly permit to remain on public or
private property, any excavation, well, cesspool or structure which is in the
process of construction, reconstruction, repair or alteration unless the same
is adequately protected by suitable barricades and guarded by warning devices
or lights at night so that the condition will not reasonably prove dangerous to
life or limb.
   (b)   No person shall destroy, remove, damage or extinguish any barricade or
warning light that is placed for the protection of the public so as to prevent
injury to life or limb.
   (c)   Any owner or agent in control of a premises upon which a basement,
cellar, well or cistern has been abandoned due to demolition, failure to build
or any other reason shall cause the same to be filled to the ground surface
with rock, gravel, earth or other suitable material.
   (d)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during
or on which a violation occurs or continues.
§ 660.10  SIDEWALK OBSTRUCTIONS; DAMAGE OR INJURY.
   (a)   No person shall place or knowingly drop upon any part of a sidewalk or
playground any tacks, bottles, wire, glass, nails or other articles which may
damage property of another or injure any person or animal traveling along or
upon such sidewalk or playground.
   (b)   No person shall walk on, or allow any animal upon, or injure or deface
in any way, any soft or newly laid sidewalk pavement.
   (c)   No person shall place, deposit or maintain any merchandise, goods,
material or equipment upon any sidewalk so as to obstruct pedestrian traffic
thereon except for such reasonable time as may be actually necessary for the
delivery or pickup of such articles. In no case shall the obstruction remain on
such sidewalk for more than one hour.
   (d)   No person shall unload upon, or transport any heavy merchandise,
goods, material or equipment over or across any sidewalk or curb without first
placing some sufficient protection over the pavement to protect against damage
or injury.
   (e)   No person shall allow any cellar or trap door, coal chute or elevator
or lift opening in any sidewalk to remain open without providing suitable
safeguards to protect and warn pedestrian traffic of the dangerous conditions.
   (f)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during
or on which a violation occurs or continues.
§ 660.11  NOTICE TO FILL LOTS, REMOVE PUTRID SUBSTANCES.
   (a)   No person shall fail to comply with the following requirements within
the lawful time after service or publication of the notice or resolution is
made as required by law:  to fill or drain any lot or land or remove all putrid
substances therefrom, or remove all obstructions from culverts, covered drains
or natural watercourses as provided in Ohio R.C. 715.47.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. A
separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a
violation occurs or continues.
§ 660.12  STORAGE OF RUBBISH, SCRAP METAL, VEHICLE PARTS, ETC.
   (a)   Definitions. As used in this section:
      (1)   "Automobile part" means any portion or part of any motor-driven
vehicle as detached from the vehicle as a whole.
      (2)   "Motor vehicle in an inoperable condition" means any kind of motor-
driven vehicle used or useful for the conveyance of persons or property, which
is unable to move under its own power due to defective or missing parts and
which has remained in such condition for a period of not less than ten
consecutive days.
      (3)   "Motor vehicle unfit for further use" means any kind of motor-
driven vehicle used for the conveyance of persons or property, which is in a
dangerous condition, has defective or missing parts or is in such a condition
generally as to be unfit for further use as a conveyance.
      (4)   "Refuse" means only such matter as was either in fact noxious or
has been refused and abandoned by its owner as worthless.
      (5)   "Rubbish" means wire, chips, shavings, bottles, broken glass,
crockery, tin, cast or wooden ware, boxes, rags, paper circulars, handbills,
boots, shoes, ashes or any waste material other than garbage or offal.
      (6)   "Scrap metal" means pieces or parts of steel, iron, tin, zinc,
copper, aluminum or any alloy thereof, whether covered with porcelain or any
other material, whether intact or in parts, which has served its usefulness in
its original form and can no longer be used or useful for its originally
intended purpose.
      (7)   "Used building materials" means any materials, such as wood, stone,
brick, cement block, asphalt, concrete or any composition thereof, used or
useful in the erection of any building, structure or improvement, which have
been used previously for such erection or construction, by the same person or
by any other person.
   (b)   Storage of certain materials declared a nuisance. It is hereby
declared to be a nuisance for any person to store or place used building
materials, motor vehicles in an inoperable condition, motor vehicles unfit for
further use, automobile parts, scrap metal, refuse or rubbish on any lot, part
of a lot or parcel of land, or upon the street or highway right of way adjacent
to any lot, part of a lot or parcel of land, or to allow any of such materials
or items to remain thereon.
   (c)   Order for removal; violations.
      (1)   In the event of a violation of subsection (b) hereof, the Director
of Public Safety shall give notice to the owner, occupant or person having
charge of the premises upon which the violation occurs to cease such violation.
Such notice shall be in writing and shall be served upon the owner, occupant or
person having charge of the premises either personally or at the usual place of
residence of such owner, occupant or person having charge of such premises or
by registered or certified mail addressed to such person's last known place of
residence.
      (2)   No person served with notice, as provided in paragraph (c)(1)
hereof, shall fail to cause such violation to cease within ten days of the date
upon which the notice was issued.
      (3)   If the person served with notice, as provided in paragraph (c)(1)
hereof, fails to cause such violation to cease within ten days of the date upon
which the notice was issued, then, in addition to the penalty provided in
subsection (e) hereof, the City may enter upon the lot or parcel of land and
remove and dispose of the refuse, rubbish, used building materials, motor
vehicles in an inoperable condition, motor vehicles unfit for further use,
automobile parts and/or scrap metal, and the owner, occupant or person having
charge of the premises shall be required to pay for the cost of such removal
and disposal. The cost of the removal and disposal shall be the amount of the
actual cost to the City, including a reasonable charge for the use of equipment
and personnel, and all fees and other costs associated with the proper disposal
of the materials in accordance with state, Federal and City laws.
   (d)   Exceptions.
      (1)   Notwithstanding subsection (b) hereof, it is not unlawful for a
person to purchase used building materials and place or store them on any lot,
part of a lot or parcel of land, when such materials are to be used by the
purchaser or owner in later construction on the same lot or any lot owned or
controlled by such person, provided that such materials do not remain on such
lot, part of a lot or parcel of land for more than 30 days, unless the
construction or erection planned for the use of the materials has commenced,
and provided, further, that such materials are used or consumed in the
construction or removed from the premises within a period of one year from the
time such materials are first placed on the lot, part of a lot or parcel of
land. No person shall move any materials so stored or placed to another
location within the city for the purpose of avoiding the intent of this
section, except that materials may be moved to another lot, part of a lot or
parcel of land when they have been sold to a bona fide purchaser for value for
such purchaser's own use.
      (2)   Notwithstanding subsection (b) hereof, it shall not be unlawful for
any person to store or place used building materials, motor vehicles in an
inoperable condition, motor vehicles unfit for further use, automobile parts or
scrap metal on a parcel of land if they are enclosed within a building or
structure and are in compliance with all state laws and city ordinances,
including the Zoning Code, nor shall it be unlawful to allow any of such
materials or items to remain on such a parcel so long as they are so enclosed
and in compliance with law, as aforesaid.
      (3)   Notwithstanding subsection (b) hereof, it shall not be unlawful for
any person to store or place used building materials, motor vehicles in an
inoperable condition, motor vehicles unfit for further use, automobile parts,
scrap metal or rubbish on a parcel of land if the person has a valid license to
operate a junk yard or motor vehicle salvage facility and is in compliance with
all state laws and city ordinances, including the Zoning Code, nor shall it be
unlawful to allow any of such materials or items to remain on such a parcel so
long as such parcel is so licensed and in compliance with law, as aforesaid.
   (e)   Penalty. Whoever violates subsection (c) hereof is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor and shall be subject to the penalty provided in §
698.02. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on
which a violation or noncompliance occurs or continues beyond the ten-day
period, and no additional notice of violation is required to be given.
(Ord. 83-O-51, passed 8-22-1983)
§ 660.13  SMOKING IN PLACES OF PUBLIC ASSEMBLY.
   (a)   As used in this section, "place of public assembly" means:
      (1)   Enclosed theaters, except the lobby; opera houses; auditoriums;
classrooms; elevators; rooms in which persons are confined as a matter of
health care, including but not limited to a hospital room and a room in a
residential care facility serving as the residence of a person living in such
residential care facility.
      (2)   All buildings and other enclosed structures owned by the state, its
agencies, or political subsubsections, including but not limited to hospitals
and state institutions for the mentally ill and persons with intellectual
disabilities; university and college buildings, except rooms within those
buildings used primarily as the residences of students or other persons
affiliated with the university or college; office buildings; libraries;
museums; and vehicles used in public transportation. That portion of a building
or other enclosed structure that is owned by the state, a state agency, or a
political subsubsection, and that is used primarily as a food service
establishment, is not a place of public assembly.
      (3)   Each portion of a building or enclosed structure that is not
included in subsection (a)(1) or (a)(2) of this section is a place of public
assembly if it has a seating capacity of 50 or more persons and is available to
the public. Restaurants, food service establishments, dining rooms, cafes,
cafeterias, or other rooms used primarily for the service of food, as well as
bowling alleys and places licensed by the Ohio Division of Liquor Control to
sell intoxicating beverages for consumption on the premises, are not places of
public assembly.
   (b)   For the purpose of separating persons who smoke from persons who do
not smoke for the comfort and health of persons not smoking, in every place of
public assembly there shall be an area where smoking is not permitted, which
shall be designated a no smoking area, provided that not more than one-half of
the rooms in any health care facility in which persons are confined as a matter
of health care may be designated as smoking areas in their entirety. The
designation shall be made before the place of public assembly is made available
to the public. In places included in subsection (a)(1) of this section, the
local fire authority having jurisdiction shall designate the no smoking area.
In places included in subsection (a)(2) of this section that are owned by the
state or its agencies, the Ohio Director of Administrative Services shall
designate the area, and if the place is owned by a political subsubsection, its
legislative authority shall designate an officer who shall designate the area.
In places included in subsection (a)(3) of this section, the person having
control of the operations of the place of public assembly shall designate the
no smoking area. In places included in subsection (a)(2) of this section which
are also included in subsection (a)(1) of this section, the officer who has
authority to designate the area in places in subsection (a)(2) of this section
shall designate the no smoking area. A no smoking area may include the entire
place of public assembly. Designations shall be made by the placement of signs
that are clearly visible and that state "no smoking."  No person shall remove
signs from areas designated as no smoking areas.
   (c)   This section does not affect or modify the prohibition contained in
Ohio R.C. 3313.751(B).
   (d)   No person shall smoke in any area designated as a no smoking area in
accordance with subsection (b) of this section.
   (e)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 3791.031)
§ 660.14  TREES ADJACENT TO OR IN PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY.
   (a)   Responsibility of property owners. Any person who is the owner of, or
any other person having the charge or care of, premises abutting on a public
street, road, lane, alley or highway, shall remove any dead tree, or part
thereof, which has become a nuisance or a hazard to persons or property, and
which exists on such premises or in the tree lawn, right-of-way or grass strip
existing between such premises and the edge of the adjoining street curbing or
street surface where such trees, or the branches thereof, overhang or present a
threat of damage to any portion of such street or adjoining sidewalk area.
Further, any person who is the owner of, or any other person having the charge
or care of, the premises abutting on a public street, road, lane, alley or
highway, shall trim and keep trimmed all trees growing on such premises or
between the same and the edge of the curbing or the edge of the street surface
where branches of trees overhang any portion of such street or sidewalk. Such
trees shall be trimmed and kept trimmed so that the lowest branch shall be at
least fourteen feet, six inches above the level of the part of such pavement,
sidewalk, alley, street or highway so overhung by such branches.
   (b)   Noncompliance; remedy of city. If the owner of the premises, or other
person having the charge or care of the premises, neglects or refuses to remove
dead trees or dead parts or branches of trees, or to trim or keep trimmed the
branches of any tree as provided herein, the city may, after ten days written
notice to the owner or occupant of such abutting property, cause such trees or
parts thereof to be removed or to be trimmed, as provided herein. The city
shall thereupon charge the expense to such owner, and upon the owner's failure
to reimburse the city within five days thereafter, the Director of Law shall
collect the same by judicial process. Any judgment uncollected for 30 days
after its date shall be recorded in the records of the Clerk of the Common
Pleas Court of the county, as a lien upon the lands of the property owner
concerned.
   (c)   Notice.
      (1)   Any police officer, the Zoning Inspector, the Public Service
Director or any agent of the city may make service and return of any notice
provided for in this section.
      (2)   If such owner or other person having charge of lands is a
nonresident whose address is known, such notice, if not personally delivered,
shall be sent to his or her address by certified mail. If the address of such
owner is unknown, it shall be sufficient to publish such notice once in a
newspaper of general circulation in the county.
(Ord. 89-O-3, passed 2-21-1989)
§ 660.15  FENCES.
   (a)   No person shall erect or maintain any fence charged with electrical
current, except as permitted in §
1290.02(a)(3).
   (b)   No person shall erect or maintain a barbed wire fence. This subsection
(b) does not prevent the placement and use of not more than three strands of
barbed wire on top of a fence other than a barbed wire fence, provided such
strands are not less than 72 inches from the ground and are used for security
purposes, upon approval of the Planning and Zoning Commission as outlined in §
1290.03(g)(3).
   (c)   Whoever violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than one
hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) for each offense. A separate offense shall be
deemed committed each day during or on which a violation or noncompliance
occurs or continues.
(Ord. 09-O-50, passed 10-19-2009)
CHAPTER 666:  SEX RELATED OFFENSES
Section
666.01   Definitions.
666.02   Unlawful sexual conduct with a minor.
666.03   Sexual imposition.
666.04   Public indecency.
666.05   Voyeurism.
666.06   Polygraph examinations for victims: restrictions on use.
666.07   Procuring.
666.08   Soliciting.
666.085   Loitering to engage in solicitation.
666.09   Prostitution.
666.10   Rules of evidence.
666.11   Disseminating matter harmful to juveniles.
666.115   Displaying matter harmful to juveniles.
666.12   Pandering obscenity. (Repealed)
666.125   Possession and viewing of obscene material involving a minor.
(Repealed)
666.13   Deception to obtain matter harmful to juveniles.
666.14   Presumptions; notice.
666.15   Declaratory judgment.
666.16   Injunction; abatement of nuisance.
666.17   Unlawful operation of viewing booths depicting sexual conduct.
666.18   Juveniles on the premises of adult entertainment establishments
prohibited.
666.19   Sexually oriented businesses; illegal operation and activity.
666.99   Sentencing for sexually oriented offenses; sexual predators;
registration.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Assistance to victims of sexual assault - see Ohio R.C. 2907.28 - 2907.30
   Child victim, disposition of - see Ohio R.C. 2945.481
   Criminal child enticement - see GEN. OFF.
636.075
   Definitions generally - see GEN. OFF.
606.01
   Examination and treatment for venereal disease; HIV tests - see Ohio R.C.
2907.27
   Registration of sex offenders in cities and counties - see Ohio R.C. 2950.01
et seq.
   Sentencing generally - see GEN. OFF.
Ch. 698
   Spreading contagion - see GEN. OFF.
660.02
§ 666.01  DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this chapter:
   (a)   "Harmful to juveniles."  That quality of any material or performance
describing or representing nudity, sexual conduct, sexual excitement, or sado-
masochistic abuse in any form to which all of the following apply:
      (1)   The material or performance, when considered as a whole, appeals to
the prurient interest of juveniles in sex.
      (2)   The material or performance is patently offensive to prevailing
standards in the adult community as a whole with respect to what is suitable
for juveniles.
      (3)   The material or performance, when considered as a whole, lacks
serious literary, artistic, political, and scientific value for juveniles.
   (b)   "Juvenile."  Any unmarried person under 18 years of age.
   (c)   "Material."  Any book, magazine, newspaper, pamphlet, poster, print,
picture, figure, image, description, motion picture film, video cassette, laser
disc, phonograph record, cassette tape, compact disc, or other tangible thing
capable of arousing interest through sight, sound, or touch and includes an
image or text appearing on a computer monitor, television screen, liquid
crystal display, or similar display device or an image or text recorded on a
computer hard disk, computer floppy disk, compact disk, magnetic tape, or
similar data storage device.
   (d)   "Mental health client or patient." Has the same meaning as in Ohio
R.C. 2305.51.
   (e)   "Mental health professional." Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C.
2305.115.
   (f)   "Minor."  A person under the age of 18.
   (g)   "Nudity."  The showing, representation, or depiction of human male or
female genitals, pubic area, or buttocks with less than a full, opaque
covering, or of a female breast with less than a full, opaque covering of any
portion thereof below the top of the nipple, or of covered male genitals in a
discernibly turgid state.
   (h)   "Obscene."  When considered as a whole, and judged with reference to
ordinary adults or, if it is designed for sexual deviates or other specially
susceptible group, judged with reference to that group, any material or
performance is "obscene" if any of the following apply:
      (1)   Its dominant appeal is to prurient interest.
      (2)   Its dominant tendency is to arouse lust by displaying or depicting
sexual activity, masturbation, sexual excitement, or nudity in a way that tends
to represent human beings as mere objects of sexual appetite.
      (3)   Its dominant tendency is to arouse lust by displaying or depicting
bestiality or extreme or bizarre violence, cruelty, or brutality.
      (4)   Its dominant tendency is to appeal to scatological interest by
displaying or depicting human bodily functions of elimination in a way that
inspires disgust or revulsion in persons with ordinary sensibilities, without
serving any genuine scientific, educational, sociological, moral, or artistic
purpose.
      (5)   It contains a series of displays or descriptions of sexual
activity, masturbation, sexual excitement, nudity, bestiality, extreme or
bizarre violence, cruelty, or brutality, or human bodily functions of
elimination, the cumulative effect of which is a dominant tendency to appeal to
prurient or scatological interest, when the appeal to such an interest is
primarily for its own sake or for commercial exploitation, rather than
primarily for a genuine scientific, educational, sociological, moral, or
artistic purpose.
   (i)   "Performance."  Any motion picture, preview, trailer, play, show,
skit, dance, or other exhibition performed before an audience.
   (j)   "Prostitute."  A male or female who promiscuously engages in sexual
activity for hire, regardless of whether the hire is paid to the prostitute or
to another.
   (k)   "Sado-masochistic abuse." Flagellation or torture by or upon a person
or the condition of being fettered, bound, or otherwise physically restrained.
   (l)   "Sexual activity."  Sexual conduct or sexual contact, or both.
   (m)   "Sexual conduct."  Vaginal intercourse between a male and female; anal
intercourse, fellatio, and cunnilingus between persons regardless of sex; and,
without privilege to do so, the insertion, however slight, of any part of the
body or any instrument, apparatus, or other object into the vaginal or anal
opening of another. Penetration, however slight, is sufficient to complete
vaginal or anal intercourse.
   (n)   "Sexual contact."  Any touching of an erogenous zone of another,
including without limitation the thigh, genitals, buttock, pubic region, or, if
the person is a female, a breast, for the purpose of sexually arousing or
gratifying either person.
   (o)   "Sexual excitement."  The condition of human male or female genitals
when in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal.
   (p)   "Spouse."  A person married to an offender at the time of an alleged
offense, except that such person shall not be considered the spouse when any of
the following apply:
      (1)   When the parties have entered into a written separation agreement
pursuant to Ohio R.C. 3103.06.
      (2)   When an action is pending between the parties for annulment,
divorce, dissolution of marriage, or legal separation.
      (3)   In the case of an action for legal separation, after the effective
date of the judgment for legal separation.
(ORC 2907.01)
§ 666.02  UNLAWFUL SEXUAL CONDUCT WITH A MINOR.
   (a)   No person who is 18 years of age or older shall engage in sexual
conduct with another who is not the spouse of the offender, when the offender
knows the other person is 13 years of age or older but less than 16 years of
age, or the offender is reckless in that regard.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of unlawful sexual conduct
with a minor.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in subsection (b)(2), unlawful sexual
conduct with a minor is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in subsection (b)(3) of this section,
if the offender is less than four years older than the other person, unlawful
sexual conduct with a minor is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (3)   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty
to a violation of Ohio R.C. 2907.02, 2907.03 or 2907.04, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, or a violation of former Ohio R.C. 2907.12, or
any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, unlawful sexual conduct with
a minor is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(ORC 2907.04)
§ 666.03  SEXUAL IMPOSITION.
   (a)   No person shall have sexual contact with another, not the spouse of
the offender; cause another, not the spouse of the offender, to have sexual
contact with the offender; or cause two or more other persons to have sexual
contact when any of the following applies:
      (1)   The offender knows that the sexual contact is offensive to the
other person, or one of the other persons, or is reckless in that regard.
      (2)   The offender knows that the other person's, or one of the other
person's ability to appraise the nature of or control the offender's or
touching person's conduct is substantially impaired.
      (3)   The offender knows that the other person, or one of the other
persons, submits because of being unaware of the sexual contact.
      (4)   The other person, or one of the other persons, is 13 years of age
or older but less than 16 years of age, whether or not the offender knows the
age of the person, and the offender is at least 18 years of age and four or
more years older than the other person.
      (5)   The offender is a mental health professional, the other person or
one of the other persons is a mental health client or patient of the offender,
and the offender induces the other person who is the client or patient to
submit by falsely representing to the other person who is the client or patient
that the sexual contact is necessary for mental health treatment purposes.
   (b)   No person shall be convicted of a violation of this section solely
upon the victim's testimony unsupported by other evidence.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of sexual imposition, a
misdemeanor of the third degree. If the offender has been convicted previously
of a violation of this section, Ohio R.C. 2907.02, 2907.03, 2907.04, 2907.05,
2907.06, former Ohio R.C. 2907.12, or a substantially equivalent state law or
municipal ordinance, a violation of this section is a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(ORC 2907.06)
Statutory reference:
   Gross sexual imposition, felony, see Ohio R.C. 2907.05
   Notice to licensing board or agency upon indictment, conviction or guilty
plea of mental health professional, see Ohio R.C. 2907.17 and 2907.18
§ 666.04  PUBLIC INDECENCY.
   (a)   No person shall recklessly do any of the following, under
circumstances in which the person's conduct is likely to be viewed by and
affront others who are in the person's physical proximity and who are not
members of the person's household:
      (1)   Expose the person's private parts.
      (2)   Engage in sexual conduct or masturbation.
      (3)   Engage in conduct that to an ordinary observer would appear to be
sexual conduct or masturbation.
   (b)   No person shall knowingly do any of the following, under circumstances
in which the person's conduct is likely to be viewed by and affront another
person who is a minor, who is not the spouse of the offender, and who resides
in the person's household:
      (1)   Engage in masturbation.
      (2)   Engage in sexual conduct.
      (3)   Engage in conduct that to an ordinary observer would appear to be
sexual conduct or masturbation.
      (4)   Expose the person's private parts with the purpose of personal
sexual arousal or gratification or to lure the minor into sexual activity.
   (c)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of public indecency and
shall be punished as provided in subsections (c)(2), (c)(3), (c)(4), and (c)(5)
of this section.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection (c)(2), a violation
of subsection (a)(1) of this section is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
violation of this section or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal
ordinance, a violation of subsection (a)(1) of this section is a misdemeanor of
the third degree or, if any person who was likely to view and be affronted by
the offender's conduct was a minor, a misdemeanor of the second degree. If the
offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two violations
of this section or a substantially equivalent state law municipal ordinance, a
violation of subsection (a)(1) of this section is a misdemeanor of the second
degree or, if any person who was likely to view and be affronted by the
offender's conduct was a minor, a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the
offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to three or more
violations of this section or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal
ordinance, a violation of subsection (a)(1) of this section is a misdemeanor of
the first degree or, if any person who was likely to view and be affronted by
the offender's conduct was a minor, a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
      (3)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection (c)(3), a violation
of subsection (a)(2) or (a)(3) of this section is a misdemeanor of the third
degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to
one violation of this section or a substantially equivalent state law or
municipal ordinance, a violation of subsection (a)(2) or (a)(3) of this section
is a misdemeanor of the second degree or, if any person who was likely to view
and be affronted by the offender's conduct was a minor, a misdemeanor of the
first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to two or more violations of this section or a substantially equivalent
state law municipal ordinance, a violation of subsection (a)(2) or (a)(3) of
this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree or, if any person who was
likely to view and be affronted by the offender's conduct was a minor, a felony
to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (4)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection (c)(4), a violation
of subsection (b)(1), (b)(2), or (b)(3) of this section is a misdemeanor of the
second degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one violation of this section or a substantially equivalent state law
or municipal ordinance, a violation of subsection (b)(1), (b)(2), or (b)(3) of
this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously
has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations of this
section or a substantially equivalent state law municipal ordinance, a
violation of subsection (b)(1), (b)(2), or (b)(3) of this section is a felony
to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (5)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection (c)(5), a violation
of subsection (b)(4) of this section  is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to any
violation of this section or a substantially equivalent state law municipal
ordinance, a violation of subsection (b)(4) of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(ORC 2907.09)
   (d)   A mother is entitled to breast-feed her baby in any location of a
place of public accommodation, as defined in Ohio R.C. 4112.01, wherein the
mother otherwise is permitted.
(ORC 3781.55)
Statutory reference:
   Bail considerations for persons charged, see Ohio R.C. 2907.41
§ 666.05  VOYEURISM.
   (a)   No person, for the purpose of sexually arousing or gratifying himself
or herself, shall commit trespass or otherwise surreptitiously invade the
privacy of another, to spy or eavesdrop upon another.
   (b)   No person, for the purpose of sexually arousing or gratifying himself
or herself, shall commit trespass or otherwise surreptitiously invade the
privacy of another to videotape, film, photograph, or otherwise record the
other person in a state of nudity.
   (c)   No person, for the purpose of sexually arousing or gratifying himself
or herself, shall commit trespass or otherwise surreptitiously invade the
privacy of another to videotape, film, photograph, otherwise record, or spy or
eavesdrop upon the other person in a state of nudity if the other person is a
minor.
   (d)   No person shall secretly or surreptitiously videotape, film,
photograph, or otherwise record another person under or through the clothing
being worn by that person for the purpose of viewing the body of, or the
undergarments worn by, that other person.
   (e)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of voyeurism.
      (1)   A violation of subsection (a) of this section is a misdemeanor of
the third degree.
      (2)   A violation of subsection (b) of this section is a misdemeanor of
the second degree.
      (3)   A violation of subsection (d) of this section is a misdemeanor of
the first degree.
      (4)   A violation of subsection (c) of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(ORC 2907.08)
§ 666.06  POLYGRAPH EXAMINATIONS FOR VICTIMS: RESTRICTIONS ON USE.
   (a)   (1)   A peace officer, prosecutor, or other public official shall not
ask or require a victim of an alleged sex offense to submit to a polygraph
examination as a condition for proceeding with the investigation of the alleged
sex offense.
      (2)   The refusal of the victim of an alleged sex offense to submit to a
polygraph examination shall not prevent the investigation of the alleged sex
offense, the filing of criminal charges with respect to the alleged sex
offense, or the prosecution of the alleged perpetrator of the alleged sex
offense.
   (b)   As used in this section:
      (1)   "Peace officer" has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2921.51.
      (2)   "Polygraph examination" means any mechanical or electrical
instrument or device of any type used or allegedly used to examine, test, or
question an individual for the purpose of determining the individual's
truthfulness.
      (3)   "Prosecution" means the prosecution of criminal charges in a
criminal prosecution or the prosecution of a delinquent child complaint in a
delinquency proceeding.
      (4)   "Prosecutor" has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2935.01.
      (5)   "Public official" has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 117.01.
      (6)   "Sex offense" means a violation of any provision of Sections
666.02 to
666.05 or Ohio R.C. 2907.02 to 2907.09.
(ORC 2907.10)
§ 666.07  PROCURING.
   (a)   No person, knowingly and for gain, shall do either of the following:
      (1)   Entice or solicit another to patronize a prostitute or brothel;
      (2)   Procure a prostitute for another to patronize, or take or direct
another at the other’s request to any place for the purpose of patronizing a
prostitute.
   (b)   No person, having authority or responsibility over the use of
premises, shall knowingly permit the premises to be used for the purpose of
engaging in sexual activity for hire.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of procuring. Except as
otherwise provided in this division, procuring is a misdemeanor of the first
degree. If the prostitute who is procured, patronized, or otherwise involved in
a violation of subsection (a)(2) of this section is under 18 years of age at
the time of the violation, regardless of whether the offender who violates
subsection (a)(2) of this section knows the prostitute’s age, or if a
prostitute who engages in sexual activity for hire in premises used in
violation of subsection (b) of this section is under 18 years of age at the
time of the violation, regardless of whether the offender who violates
subsection (b) of this section knows the prostitute’s age, procuring is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(ORC 2907.23)
§ 666.08  SOLICITING.
   (a)   (1)   No person shall solicit another who is 18 years of age or older
to engage with the other person in sexual activity for hire.
      (2)   No person shall solicit another to engage with such other person in
sexual activity for hire if the other person is 16 or 17 years of age and the
offender knows that the other person is 16 or 17 years of age or is reckless in
that regard.
      (3)   No person shall solicit another to engage with such other person in
sexual activity for hire if either of the following applies:
         A.   The other person is less than 16 years of age, whether or not the
offender knows the age of the other person.
         B.   The other person is a person with a developmental disability and
the offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe the other person is a
person with a developmental disability.
   (b)   (1)   Whoever violates division (a) of this section is guilty of
soliciting. A violation of division (a)(1) of this section is a misdemeanor of
the third degree. A violation of division (a)(2) or (a)(3) of this section is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   If a person is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of
division (a) of this section or an attempt to commit a violation of division
(a) of this section and if the person, in committing or attempting to commit
the violation, was in, was on or used a motor vehicle, the court, in addition
to or independent of all other penalties imposed for the violation, may impose
upon the offender a class six suspension of the person’s driver’s license,
commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license
or nonresident operating privilege from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02
(A)(6). In lieu of imposing upon the offender the class six suspension, the
court instead may require the offender to perform community service for a
number of hours determined by the court.
   (c)   As used in division (a) of this section:
      (1)   “Person with a developmental disability.” Has the same meaning as
in R.C. § 2905.32.
      (2)   “Sexual activity for hire.” Means an implicit or explicit agreement
to provide sexual activity in exchange for anything of value paid to the person
engaging in such sexual activity, to any person trafficking that person, or to
any person associated with either such person.
(R.C. § 2907.24(A), (C)(1), (D), (E))
Statutory reference:
   Offenders with knowledge that they test HIV positive, felony, see Ohio R.C.
2907.24(B)
   Testing offenders for venereal disease and AIDS, see Ohio R.C. 2907.27
§ 666.085  LOITERING TO ENGAGE IN SOLICITATION.
   (a)   No person, with purpose to solicit another to engage in sexual
activity for hire and while in or near a public place, shall do any of the
following:
      (1)   Beckon to, stop or attempt to stop another;
      (2)   Engage or attempt to engage another in conversation;
      (3)   Stop or attempt to stop the operator of a vehicle or approach a
stationary vehicle;
      (4)   If the offender is the operator of or a passenger in a vehicle,
stop, attempt to stop, beckon to, attempt to beckon to, or entice another to
approach or enter the vehicle of which the offender is the operator or in which
the offender is the passenger;
      (5)   Interfere with the free passage of another.
   (b)   As used in subsection (a) of this section:
      (1)   "Public place" means any of the following:
         A.   A street, road, highway, thoroughfare, bikeway, walkway,
sidewalk, bridge, alley, alleyway, plaza, park, driveway, parking lot or
transportation facility.
         B.   A doorway or entrance way to a building that fronts on a place
described in subsection (1)A. of this definition.
         C.   A place not described in subsection (1)A. or (1)B. of this
definition that is open to the public.
      (2)   "Vehicle" has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 4501.01.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of loitering to engage in
solicitation, a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(ORC 2907.241)
Statutory reference:
   Offenders with knowledge that they test HIV positive, felony, see Ohio R.C.
2907.241(B)
   Testing offenders for venereal disease and AIDS, see Ohio R.C. 2907.27
§ 666.09  PROSTITUTION.
   (a)   No person shall engage in sexual activity for hire.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of prostitution, a misdemeanor
of the third degree.
(ORC 2907.25)
Statutory reference:
   Offenders with knowledge that they test HIV positive, felony, see Ohio R.C.
2907.25(B)
   Testing offenders for venereal disease and AIDS, see Ohio R.C. 2907.27
§ 666.10  RULES OF EVIDENCE.
   (a)   In any case in which it is necessary to prove that a place is a
brothel, evidence as to the reputation of such place and as to the reputation
of the persons who inhabit or frequent it is admissible on the question of
whether such place is or is not a brothel.
   (b)   In any case in which it is necessary to prove that a person is a
prostitute, evidence as to the reputation of such person is admissible on the
question of whether such person is or is not a prostitute.
   (c)   In any prosecution for a violation of §§
666.07 to
666.09, proof of a prior conviction of the accused of any such offense or
substantially equivalent offense is admissible in support of the charge.
   (d)   The prohibition contained in Ohio R.C. 2317.02(D) against testimony by
a husband or wife concerning communications between them does not apply, and
the accused's spouse may testify concerning any such communication in any of
the following cases:
      (1)   When the husband or wife is charged with a violation of §
666.07 and the spouse testifying was the prostitute involved in the offense or
the person who used the offender's premises to engage in sexual activity for
hire;
      (2)   When the husband or wife is charged with a violation of §
666.08 or §
666.09.
(ORC 2907.26)
§ 666.11  DISSEMINATING MATTER HARMFUL TO JUVENILES.
   (a)   No person, with knowledge of its character or content, shall
recklessly do any of following:
      (1)   Directly sell, deliver, furnish, disseminate, provide, exhibit,
rent, or present to a juvenile any material or performance that is obscene or
harmful to juveniles;
      (2)   Offer or agree to sell, deliver, furnish, disseminate, provide,
exhibit, rent, or present to a juvenile, a group of juveniles, a law
enforcement officer posing as a juvenile, or a group of law enforcement
officers posing as juveniles any material or performance that is obscene or
harmful to juveniles;
      (3)   While in the physical proximity of the juvenile or law enforcement
officer posing as a juvenile, allow any juvenile or law enforcement officer
posing as a juvenile to review or peruse any material or view any live
performance that is harmful to juveniles.
   (b)   The following are affirmative defenses to a charge under this section
that involves material or a performance that is harmful to juveniles but not
obscene:
      (1)   The defendant is the parent, guardian, or spouse of the juvenile
involved.
      (2)   The juvenile involved, at the time of the conduct in question, was
accompanied by his or her parent or guardian who, with knowledge of its
character, consented to the material or performance being furnished or
presented to the juvenile.
      (3)   The juvenile exhibited to the defendant or his or her agent or
employee a draft card, driver's license, birth record, marriage license, or
other official or apparently official document purporting to show that the
juvenile was 18 years of age or over or married, and the person to whom the
document was exhibited did not otherwise have reasonable cause to believe that
the juvenile was under the age of 18 and unmarried.
   (c)   (1)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section,
involving material or a performance that is obscene or harmful to juveniles,
that the material or performance was furnished or presented for a bona fide
medical, scientific, educational, governmental, judicial, or other proper
purpose, by a physician, psychologist, sociologist, scientist, teacher,
librarian, clergy, prosecutor, judge, or other proper person.
      (2)   Except as provided in subsection (b)(3) of this section, mistake of
age is not a defense to a charge under this section.
   (d)   (1)   A person directly sells, delivers, furnishes, disseminates,
provides, exhibits, rents, or presents or directly offers or agrees to sell,
deliver, furnish, disseminate, provide, exhibit, rent, or present material or a
performance to a juvenile, a group of juveniles, a law enforcement officer
posing as a juvenile, or a group of law enforcement officers posing as
juveniles in violation of this section by means of an electronic method of
remotely transmitting information if the person knows or has reason to believe
that the person receiving the information is a juvenile or the group of persons
receiving the information are juveniles.
      (2)   A person remotely transmitting information by means of a method of
mass distribution does not directly sell, deliver, furnish, disseminate,
provide, exhibit, rent, or present or directly offer or agree to sell, deliver,
furnish, disseminate, provide, exhibit, rent, or present the material or
performance in question to a juvenile, a group of juveniles, a law enforcement
officer posing as a juvenile, or a group of law enforcement officers posing as
juveniles in violation of this section if either of the following applies:
         A.   The person has inadequate information to know or have reason to
believe that a particular recipient of the information or offer is a juvenile.
         B.   The method of mass distribution does not provide the person the
ability to prevent a particular recipient from receiving the information.
   (e)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of disseminating matter
harmful to juveniles. If the material or performance involved is harmful to
juveniles except as otherwise provided in this subsection, a violation of this
section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the material or performance
involved is obscene, violation of this section is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.
(ORC 2907.31)
§ 666.115  DISPLAYING MATTER HARMFUL TO JUVENILES.
   (a)   No person who has custody, control, or supervision of a commercial
establishment, with knowledge of the character or content of the material
involved, shall display at the establishment any material that is harmful to
juveniles and that is open to view by juveniles as part of the invited general
public.
   (b)   It is not a violation of subsection (a) of this section if the
material in question is displayed by placing it behind "blinder racks" or
similar devices that cover at least the lower two-thirds of the material, if
the material in question is wrapped or placed behind the counter, or if the
material in question otherwise is covered or located so that the portion that
is harmful to juveniles is not open to the view of juveniles.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of displaying matter harmful
to juveniles, a misdemeanor of the first degree. Each day during which the
offender is in violation of this section constitutes a separate offense.
(ORC 2907.311)
§ 666.12  PANDERING OBSCENITY.(Repealed)
Editor's note:
   Section
666.12 was repealed as part of the 1996-B revision of this Model Ohio Municipal
Code because a violation of substantially equivalent state law (Ohio R.C.
2907.32) was made a felony by the General Assembly.
§ 666.125  POSSESSION AND VIEWING OF OBSCENE MATERIAL INVOLVING A MINOR.
(Repealed)
Editor's note:
   Section
666.125 was repealed as part of the 1996-B revision of this Model Ohio
Municipal Code because a violation of substantially equivalent state law (Ohio
R.C. 2907.322 and 2907.323) was made a felony by the General Assembly.
§ 666.13  DECEPTION TO OBTAIN MATTER HARMFUL TO JUVENILES.
   (a)   No person, for the purpose of enabling a juvenile to obtain any
material or gain admission to any performance which is harmful to juveniles,
shall do either of the following:
      (1)   Falsely represent that he or she is the parent, guardian, or spouse
of the juvenile.
      (2)   Furnish the juvenile with any identification or document purporting
to show that the juvenile is 18 years of age or over or married.
   (b)   No juvenile, for the purpose of obtaining any material or gaining
admission to any performance which is harmful to juveniles, shall do either of
the following:
      (1)   Falsely represent that he or she is 18 years of age or over or
married.
      (2)   Exhibit any identification or document purporting to show that he
or she is 18 years of age or over or married.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of deception to obtain matter
harmful to juveniles, a misdemeanor of the second degree. A juvenile who
violates subsection (b) of this section shall be adjudged an unruly child, with
the disposition of the case as may be appropriate under Ohio R.C. Chapter 2151.
(ORC 2907.33)
§ 666.14  PRESUMPTIONS; NOTICE.
   (a)   An owner or manager, or agent or employee of an owner or manager, of a
bookstore, newsstand, theater, or other commercial establishment engaged in
selling material or exhibiting performances, who, in the course of business
does any of the acts prohibited by §
666.11 is presumed to have knowledge of the character of the material or
performance involved if the owner, manager, or agent or employee of the owner
or manager has actual notice of the nature of such material or performance,
whether or not the owner, manager, or agent or employee of the owner or manager
has precise knowledge of its contents.
   (b)   Without limitation on the manner in which such notice may be given,
actual notice of the character of material or a performance may be given in
writing by the chief legal officer of the municipality. Such notice, regardless
of the manner in which it is given, shall identify the sender, identify the
material or performance involved, state whether it is obscene or harmful to
juveniles, and bear the date of such notice.
   (c)   Section
666.11 does not apply to a motion picture operator or projectionist acting
within the scope of employment as an employee of the owner or manager of the
theater or other place for the showing of motion pictures to the general
public, and having no managerial responsibility or financial interest in the
operator's or projectionist's place of employment, other than wages.
   (d)   (1)   The provisions of §§
666.11,
666.12 and
666.15(a) do not apply to a person solely because the person provided access or
connection to or from an electronic method of remotely transferring information
not under that person's control, including having provided capabilities that
are incidental to providing access or connection to or from the electronic
method of remotely transferring the information, and that do not include the
creation of the content of the material that is the subject of the access or
connection.
      (2)   Division (d)(1) of this section does not apply to a person who
conspires with an entity actively involved in the creation or knowing
distribution of material in violation of §§
666.11,
666.12 or
666.15 or who knowingly advertises the availability of material of that nature.
      (3)   Division (d)(1) of this section does not apply to a person who
provides access or connection to an electronic method of remotely transferring
information that is engaged in the violation of §§
666.11,
666.12 or
666.15 and that contain content that person has selected and introduced into
the electronic method of remotely transferring information or content over
which that person exercises editorial control.
   (e)   An employer is not guilty of a violation of §§
666.11,
666.12 or
666.15 based on the actions of an employee or agent of the employer unless the
employee's or agent's conduct is within the scope of the employee's or agent's
employment or agency, and the employer does either of the following:
      (1)   With knowledge of the employee's or agent's conduct, the employer
authorizes or ratifies the conduct.
      (2)   The employer recklessly disregards the employee's or agent's
conduct.
   (f)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under §§
666.11 or
666.12 as the section applies to an image transmitted through the internet or
other electronic method of remotely transmitting information that the person
charged with violating the section has taken, in good faith, reasonable,
effective, and appropriate actions under the circumstances to restrict or
prevent access by juveniles to material that is harmful to juveniles, including
any method that is feasible under available technology.
(ORC 2907.35)
§ 666.15  DECLARATORY JUDGMENT.
   (a)   Without limitation on the persons otherwise entitled to bring an
action for a declaratory judgment pursuant to Ohio R.C. Chapter 2721, involving
the same issue, the following persons have standing to bring a declaratory
judgment action to determine whether particular materials or performances are
obscene or harmful to juveniles:
      (1)   The chief legal officer of the municipality if and when there is
reasonable cause to believe that Ohio R.C. 2907.31 or Ohio R.C. 2907.32, or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, is being or is about to be
violated;
      (2)   Any person who, pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2907.35(B) or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, has received notice in writing from the chief
legal officer stating that particular materials or performances are obscene or
harmful to juveniles.
   (b)   Any party to an action for a declaratory judgment pursuant to
subsection (a) of this section is entitled, upon the party's request, to trial
on the merits within five days after joinder of the issues, and the court shall
render judgment within five days after trial is concluded.
   (c)   An action for a declaratory judgement pursuant to subsection (a) of
this section shall not be brought during the pendency of any civil action or
criminal prosecution when the character of the particular materials or
performances involved is at issue in the pending case, and either of the
following applies:
      (1)   Either of the parties to the action for a declaratory judgment is a
party to the pending case;
      (2)   A judgment in the pending case will necessarily constitute res
judicata as to the character of the materials or performances involved.
   (d)   A civil action or criminal prosecution in which the character of
particular materials or performances is at issue, brought during the pendency
of an action for a declaratory judgment involving the same issue, shall be
stayed during the pendency of the action for a declaratory judgment.
   (e)   The fact that a violation of Ohio R.C. 2907.31 or Ohio R.C. 2907.32,
or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, occurs prior to a judicial
determination of the character of the material or performance involved in the
violation does not relieve the offender of criminal liability for the
violation, even though prosecution may be stayed pending the judicial
determination.
(ORC 2907.36)
§ 666.16  INJUNCTION; ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE.
   (a)   Where it appears that Ohio R.C. 2907.31 or Ohio R.C. 2907.32, or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, is being or is about to be
violated, the chief legal officer of the municipality may bring an action to
enjoin the violation. The defendant, upon his or her request, is entitled to
trial on the merits within five days after the joinder of the issues, and the
court shall render judgment within five days after the trial is concluded.
   (b)   Premises used or occupied for repeated violations of Ohio R.C. 2907.31
or Ohio R.C. 2907.32, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance,
constitute a nuisance subject to abatement pursuant to Ohio R.C. Chapter 3767.
(ORC 2907.37)
§ 666.17  UNLAWFUL OPERATION OF VIEWING BOOTHS DEPICTING SEXUAL CONDUCT.
   (a)   As used in this section:
      (1)   "Commercial establishment" means an entity that is open to the
public and to which either of the following applies:
         A.   It has a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade
of the sale, rental, or viewing of visual materials or performances depicting
sexual conduct.
         B.   It has as a principal business purpose the sale, rental, or
viewing of visual materials or performances depicting sexual conduct.
      (2)   "Visual materials or performances" means films, videos, CD-ROM
discs, streaming video, or other motion pictures.
   (b)   No person who has custody, control, or supervision of a commercial
establishment, with knowledge of the character of the visual material or
performance involved, shall knowingly permit the use of, or offer the use of,
viewing booths, stalls, or partitioned portions of a room located in the
commercial establishment for the purpose of viewing visual materials or
performances depicting sexual conduct unless both of the following apply:
      (1)   The inside of each booth, stall, or partitioned room is visible
from, and at least one side of each booth, stall, or partitioned room is open
to, a continuous and contiguous main aisle or hallway that is open to the
public areas of the commercial establishment and is not obscured by any
curtain, door, or other covering or enclosure.
      (2)   No booth, stall, or partitioned room is designed, constructed,
pandered, or allowed to be used for the purpose of encouraging or facilitating
nudity or sexual activity on the part of or between patrons or members of the
public, and no booth, stall, or partitioned room has any aperture, hole, or
opening for the purpose of encouraging or facilitating nudity or sexual
activity.
   (c)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section that
either of the following applies to the involved visual materials or
performances:
      (1)   The visual materials or performances depicting sexual conduct are
disseminated or presented for a bona fide medical, scientific, educational,
religious, governmental, judicial, or other proper purpose and by or to a
physician, psychologist, sociologist, scientist, teacher, person pursuing bona
fide studies or research, librarian, member of the clergy, prosecutor, judge,
or other person having a proper interest in the visual materials or
performances.
      (2)   The visual materials or performances depicting sexual conduct,
taken as a whole, would be found by a reasonable person to have serious
literary, artistic, political, or scientific value or are presented or
disseminated in good faith for a serious literary, artistic, political, or
scientific purpose and are not pandered for their prurient appeal.
   (d)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of permitting unlawful
operation of viewing booths depicting sexual conduct, a misdemeanor of the
first degree.
(ORC 2907.38)
§ 666.18  JUVENILES ON THE PREMISES OF ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS
PROHIBITED.
   (a)   As used in this section:
      (1)   "Adult arcade" means any place to which the public is permitted or
invited in which coin-operated, slug-operated, or electronically, electrically,
or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, or
other image-producing devices are regularly maintained to show images to five
or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and in which the images so
displayed are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis upon matter
exhibiting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas.
      (2)   "Adult bookstore", "adult novelty store", or "adult video store".
         A.   Means a commercial establishment that, for any form of
consideration, has as a significant or substantial portion of its stock-in-
trade in, derives a significant or substantial portion of its revenues from,
devotes a significant or substantial portion of its interior business or
advertising to, or maintains a substantial section of its sales or display
space for the sale or rental of any of the following:
            1.   Books, magazines, periodicals, or other printed matter, or
photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, compact discs, slides, or
other visual representations, that are characterized by their emphasis upon the
exhibition or description of specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas;
            2.   Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia that are designed for
use or marketed primarily for stimulation of human genital organs or for
sadomasochistic use or abuse of self or others.
         B.   Includes a commercial establishment as defined in Ohio R.C.
2907.38. An establishment may have other principal business purposes that do
not involve the offering for sale, rental, or viewing of materials exhibiting
or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas and
still be categorized as an adult bookstore, adult novelty store, or adult video
store. The existence of other principal business purposes does not exempt an
establishment from being categorized as an adult bookstore, adult novelty
store, or adult video store so long as one of its principal business purposes
is offering for sale or rental, for some form of consideration, such materials
that exhibit or describe specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas.
      (3)   "Adult cabaret" means a nightclub, bar, juice bar, restaurant,
bottle club, or similar commercial establishment, whether or not alcoholic
beverages are served, that regularly features any of the following:
         A.   Persons who appear in a state of nudity or seminudity;
         B.   Live performances that are characterized by the exposure of
specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities;
         C.   Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other
photographic reproductions that are distinguished or characterized by their
emphasis upon the exhibition or description of specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas.
      (4)   "Adult entertainment" means the sale, rental, or exhibition, for
any form of consideration, of books, films, video cassettes, magazines,
periodicals, or live performances that are characterized by an emphasis on the
exposure or display of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activity.
      (5)   "Adult entertainment establishment" means an adult arcade, adult
bookstore, adult novelty store, adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motion
picture theater, adult theater, nude or seminude model studio, or sexual
encounter establishment. An establishment in which a medical practitioner,
psychologist, psychiatrist, or similar professional person licensed by the
state engages in medically approved and recognized therapy, including, but not
limited to, massage therapy, as regulated pursuant to Ohio R.C. 4731.15, is not
an "adult entertainment establishment".
      (6)   "Adult motion picture theater" means a commercial establishment
where films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or similar photographic
reproductions that are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis upon
the exhibition or description of specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas are regularly shown for any form of consideration.
      (7)   "Adult theater" means a theater, concert hall, auditorium, or
similar commercial establishment that, for any form of consideration, regularly
features persons who appear in a state of nudity or seminudity or live
performances that are characterized by their emphasis upon the exposure of
specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities.
      (8)   "Distinguished or characterized by their emphasis upon" means the
dominant or principal character and theme of the object described by this
phrase. For instance, when the phrase refers to films "that are distinguished
or characterized by their emphasis upon the exhibition or description of
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas", the films so
described are those whose dominant or principal character and theme are the
exhibition or description of specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas.
      (9)   "Nude or seminude model studio" means any place where a person, who
regularly appears in a state of nudity or seminudity, is provided for money or
any other form of consideration to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted,
sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by other persons. A modeling
class or studio is not a nude or seminude model studio and is not subject to
this chapter if it is operated in any of the following ways:
         A.   By a college or university supported entirely or partly by
taxation;
         B.   By a private college or university that maintains and operates
educational programs, the credits for which are transferable to a college or
university supported entirely or partly by taxation;
         C.   In a structure that has no sign visible from the exterior of the
structure and no other advertising indicating that a person appearing in a
state of nudity or seminudity is available for viewing, if in order to
participate in a class in the structure, a student must enroll at least three
days in advance of the class and if not more than one nude or seminude model is
on the premises at any one time.
      (10)   "Nudity", "nude", or "state of nudity" means the showing of the
human male or female genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, anal cleft, or cleavage
with less than a fully opaque covering; or the showing of the female breasts
with less than a fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple.
      (11)   "Regularly features" or "regularly shown" means a consistent or
substantial course of conduct, such that the films or performances exhibited
constitute a substantial portion of the films or performances offered as a part
of the ongoing business of the adult entertainment establishment.
      (12)   "Seminude" or "state of seminudity" means a state of dress in
which opaque clothing covers not more than the genitals, pubic region, and
nipple of the female breast, as well as portions of the body covered by
supporting straps or devices.
      (13)   "Sexual encounter establishment".
         A.   Means a business or commercial establishment that, as one of its
principal business purposes, offers for any form of consideration a place where
either of the following occur:
            1.   Two or more persons may congregate, associate, or consort for
the purpose of engaging in specified sexual activities.
            2.   Two or more persons appear nude or seminude for the purpose of
displaying their nude or seminude bodies for their receipt of consideration or
compensation in any type or form.
         B.   An establishment where a medical practitioner, psychologist,
psychiatrist, or similar professional person licensed by the state engages in
medically approved and recognized therapy, including, but not limited to,
massage therapy, as regulated pursuant to Ohio R.C. 4731.15, is not a "sexual
encounter establishment".
      (14)   "Specified anatomical areas" means the cleft of the buttocks,
anus, male or female genitals, or the female breast.
      (15)   "Specified sexual activity" means any of the following:
         A.   Sex acts, normal or perverted, or actual or simulated, including
intercourse, oral copulation, masturbation, or sodomy;
         B.   Excretory functions as a part of or in connection with any of the
activities described in subsection A. of this definition.
   (b)   No person knowingly shall allow an individual, including, but not
limited to, a patron, customer, or employee, who is under 18 years of age on
the premises of an adult entertainment establishment.
   (c)   No individual who is under 18 years of age knowingly shall show or
give false information concerning the individual's name or age, or other false
identification, for the purpose of gaining entrance to an adult entertainment
establishment.
   (d)   A person shall not be found guilty of a violation of subsection (b) of
this section if the person raises as an affirmative defense and if the jury or,
in a nonjury trial, the court finds the person has established by a
preponderance of the evidence, all of the following:
      (1)   The individual gaining entrance to the adult entertainment
establishment exhibited to an operator, employee, agent, or independent
contractor of the adult entertainment establishment a driver's or commercial
driver's license or an identification card issued under Ohio R.C. 4507.50 and
4507.52 showing that the individual was then at least 18 years of age.
      (2)   The operator, employee, agent, or independent contractor made a
bona fide effort to ascertain the true age of the individual gaining entrance
to the adult entertainment establishment by checking the identification
presented, at the time of entrance, to ascertain that the description on the
identification compared with the appearance of the individual and that the
identification had not been altered in any way.
      (3)   The operator, employee, agent, or independent contractor had reason
to believe that the individual gaining entrance to the adult entertainment
establishment was at least 18 years of age.
   (e)   In any criminal action in which the affirmative defense described in
subsection (d) of this section is raised, the Registrar of Motor Vehicles or
the Deputy Registrar who issued a driver's or commercial driver's license or an
identification card under Ohio R.C. 4507.50 and 4507.52 shall be permitted to
submit certified copies of the records, in the Registrar's or Deputy
Registrar's possession, of the issuance of the license or identification card
in question, in lieu of the testimony of the personnel of the Bureau of Motor
Vehicles in the action.
   (f)   (1)   Whoever violates subsection (b) of this section is guilty of
permitting a juvenile on the premises of an adult entertainment establishment,
a misdemeanor of the first degree. Each day a person violates this subsection
constitutes a separate offense.
      (2)   Whoever violates subsection (c) of this section is guilty of use by
a juvenile of false information to enter an adult entertainment establishment,
a delinquent act that would be a misdemeanor of the fourth degree if committed
by an adult.
(ORC 2907.39)
§ 666.19  SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES; ILLEGAL OPERATION AND ACTIVITY.
   (a)   As used in this section:
      (1)   "Adult bookstore" or "adult video store" means a commercial
establishment that has as a significant or substantial portion of its stock in
trade or inventory in, derives a significant or substantial portion of its
revenues from, devotes a significant or substantial portion of its interior
business or advertising to, or maintains a substantial section of its sales or
display space for the sale or rental, for any form of consideration, of books,
magazines, periodicals, or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion
pictures, video cassettes, compact discs, slides, or other visual
representations, that are characterized by their emphasis upon the exhibition
or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
      (2)   "Adult cabaret" has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2907.39.
      (3)   "Adult motion picture theater" means a commercial establishment
where films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or similar photographic
reproductions that are characterized by their emphasis upon the display of
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas are regularly shown
to more than five individuals for any form of consideration.
      (4)   "Characterized by" means describing the essential character or
quality of an item.
      (5)   "Employee" means any individual who performs any service on the
premises of a sexually oriented business on a full-time, part-time, or contract
basis, regardless of whether the individual is denominated an employee,
independent contractor, agent, or otherwise, but does not include an individual
exclusively on the premises for repair or maintenance of the premises or for
the delivery of goods to the premises.
      (6)   "Nudity", "nude", or "state of nudity" has the same meaning as in
Ohio R.C. 2907.39.
      (7)   "Operator" means any individual on the premises of a sexually
oriented business who causes the business to function or who puts or keeps in
operation the business or who is authorized to manage the business or exercise
overall operational control of the business premises.
      (8)   "Patron" means any individual on the premises of a sexually
oriented business except for any of the following:
         A.   An operator or an employee of the sexually oriented business;
         B.   An individual who is on the premises exclusively for repair or
maintenance of the premises or for the delivery of goods to the premises;
         C.   A public employee or a volunteer firefighter emergency medical
services worker acting within the scope of the public employee's or volunteer's
duties as a public employee or volunteer.
      (9)   "Premises" means the real property on which the sexually oriented
business is located and all appurtenances to the real property, including, but
not limited, to the sexually oriented business, the grounds, private walkways,
and parking lots or parking garages adjacent to the real property under the
ownership, control, or supervision of the owner or operator of the sexually
oriented business.
      (10)   "Regularly" means consistently or repeatedly.
      (11)   "Seminude" or "state of seminudity" has the same meaning as in
Ohio R.C. 2907.39.
      (12)   "Sexual device" means any three-dimensional object designed and
marketed for stimulation of the male or female human genitals or anus or female
breasts or for sadomasochistic use or abuse of oneself or others, including,
but not limited to, dildos, vibrators, penis pumps, and physical
representations of the human genital organs, but not including devices
primarily intended for protection against sexually transmitted diseases or for
preventing pregnancy.
      (13)   "Sexual device shop" means a commercial establishment that
regularly features sexual devices, but not including any pharmacy, drug store,
medical clinic, or establishment primarily dedicated to providing medical or
healthcare products or services, and not including any commercial establishment
that does not restrict access to its premises by reason of age.
      (14)   "Sexual encounter center" means a business or commercial
enterprise that, as one of its principal business purposes, purports to offer
for any form of consideration physical contact in the form of wrestling or
tumbling between individuals of the opposite sex when one or more of the
individuals is nude or seminude.
      (15)   "Sexually oriented business" means an adult bookstore, adult video
store, adult cabaret, adult motion picture theater, sexual device shop, or
sexual encounter center, but does not include a business solely by reason of
its showing, selling, or renting materials that may depict sex.
      (16)   "Specified anatomical areas" includes human genitals, pubic
region, and buttocks and the human female breast below a point immediately
above the top of the areola.
      (17)   "Specified sexual activity" means sexual intercourse, oral
copulation, masturbation, or sodomy, or excretory functions as a part of or in
connection with any of these activities.
   (b)   No sexually oriented business shall be or remain open for business
between 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. on any day, except that a sexually
oriented business that holds a liquor permit pursuant to Ohio R.C. Chapter 4303
may remain open until the hour specified in that permit if it does not conduct,
offer, or allow sexually oriented entertainment activity in which the
performers appear nude.
   (c)   (1)   No patron who is not a member of the employee's immediate family
shall knowingly touch any employee while that employee is nude or seminude or
touch the clothing of any employee while that employee is nude or seminude.
      (2)   No employee who regularly appears nude or seminude on the premises
of a sexually oriented business, while on the premises of that sexually
oriented business and while nude or seminude, shall knowingly touch a patron
who is not a member of the employee's immediate family or another employee who
is not a member of the employee's immediate family or the clothing of a patron
who is not a member of the employee's immediate family or another employee who
is not a member of the employee's immediate family or allow a patron who is not
a member of the employee's immediate family or another employee who is not a
member of the employee's immediate family to touch the employee or the clothing
of the employee.
   (d)   Whoever violates subsection (b) of this section is guilty of illegally
operating a sexually oriented business, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
   (e)   Whoever violates subsection (c) of this section is guilty of illegal
sexually oriented activity in a sexually oriented business. If the offender
touches a specified anatomical area of the patron or employee, or the clothing
covering a specified anatomical area, a violation of subsection (c) of this
section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender does not touch a
specified anatomical area of the patron or employee, or the clothing covering a
specified anatomical area, a violation of subsection (c) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(ORC 2907.40)
Statutory reference:
   State indemnification for certain municipal liability stemming from local
adult business regulations, see Ohio R.C. 715.55
§ 666.99  SENTENCING FOR SEXUALLY ORIENTED OFFENSES; SEXUAL PREDATORS;
REGISTRATION.
   (a)   If an offender is being sentenced for a sexually oriented offense or
child-victim oriented offense that is a misdemeanor committed on or after
January 1, 1997, and the offender is a tier III sex offender/child-victim
offender relative to the offense or the offense is any offense listed in Ohio
R.C. 2901.07(D)(1) to (D)(3), the judge shall include in the offender's
sentence a statement that the offender is a tier III sex offender/child-victim
offender, shall comply with the requirements of Ohio R.C. 2950.03, and shall
require the offender to submit to a DNA specimen collection procedure pursuant
to Ohio R.C. 2901.07.
   (b)   If an offender is being sentenced for a sexually oriented offense or a
child-victim oriented offense that is a misdemeanor committed on or after
January 1, 1997, the judge shall include in the sentence a summary of the
offender's duties imposed under Ohio R.C. 2950.04, 2950.041, 2950.05, and
2950.06, and the duration of the duties. The judge shall inform the offender,
at the time of sentencing, of those duties and of their duration. If required
under Ohio R.C. 2950.03(A)(2), the judge shall perform the duties specified in
that section or, if required under Ohio R.C. 2950.03(A)(6), the judge shall
perform the duties specified in that subsection.
(ORC 2929.23)
CHAPTER 672:  WEAPONS AND EXPLOSIVES
Section
672.01   Definitions.
672.02   Carrying concealed weapons.
672.025   Possession of deadly weapon while under detention.
672.03   Using weapons while intoxicated.
672.04   Improperly handling firearms in a motor vehicle.
672.05   License or permit to possess dangerous ordnance.
672.06   Failure to secure dangerous ordnance.
672.07   Unlawful transactions in weapons.
672.08   Improperly furnishing firearms to a minor. (Repealed)
672.085   Underage purchase of a firearm or handgun.
672.09   Sale of explosives to minors. (Repealed)
672.095   Discharge of a firearm on or near prohibited premises.
672.10   Fireworks.
672.11   Fireworks display permits. (Repealed)
672.12   Pointing and discharging firearms and other weapons.
672.13   Endangering aircraft and airport operations.
672.14   Possessing criminal tools.
672.15   Possession of an object indistinguishable from a firearm in a school
safety zone.
672.16   Concealed handgun licenses: possession of a revoked or suspended
license; additional restrictions; posting of signs prohibiting possession.
672.17   Defaced firearms.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Arson - see GEN. OFF.
642.09
   Definitions generally - see GEN. OFF.
606.01
   Hunting limited - see GEN. OFF.
618.12
   Posting firearm warning signs - see GEN. OFF.
612.06
   Prohibiting sales of firearms and explosives in riot areas - see Ohio R.C.
3761.16
   Reporting gunshot wounds - see GEN. OFF.
606.12
   See section histories for similar state law
   Vehicles transporting explosives - see TRAF.
440.04
§ 672.01  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   (a)   “Active duty.”  Has the same meaning as defined in 10 U.S.C. § 101.
   (b)   “Alien registration number.” The number issued by the United States
Citizenship and Immigration Services Agency that is located on the alien’s
permanent resident card and may also be commonly referred to as the “USCIS
number” or the “alien number”.
   (c)   “Automatic firearm.” Any firearm designed or specially adapted to fire
a succession of cartridges with a single function of the trigger.
   (d)   “Ballistic knife.”  A knife with a detachable blade that is propelled
by a spring-operated mechanism.
   (e)   “Concealed handgun license” or “license to carry a concealed handgun.”
      (1)   Means, subject to division (2) of this definition, a license or
temporary emergency license to carry a concealed handgun issued under R.C. §
2923.125 or R.C. § 2923.1213 or a license to carry a concealed handgun issued
by another state with which the Attorney General has entered into a reciprocity
agreement under R.C. § 109.69.
      (2)   A reference in any provision of this Code to a concealed handgun
license issued under R.C. § 2923.125 or a license to carry a concealed handgun
issued under R.C. § 2923.125 means only a license of the type that is specified
in that section. A reference in any provision of this Code to a concealed
handgun license issued under R.C. § 2923.1213, a license to carry a concealed
handgun issued under R.C. § 2923.1213, or a license to carry a concealed
handgun on a temporary emergency basis means only a license of the type that is
specified in R.C. § 2923.1213. A reference in any provision of this Code to a
concealed handgun license issued by another state or a license to carry a
concealed handgun issued by another state means only a license issued by
another state with which the Attorney General has entered into a reciprocity
agreement under R.C. § 109.69.
   (f)   “Dangerous ordnance.”
      (1)   Any of the following, except as provided in subsection (2) of this
definition:
         A.   Any automatic or sawed-off firearm, zip-gun, or ballistic knife.
         B.   Any explosive device or incendiary device.
         C.   Nitroglycerin, nitrocellulose, nitrostarch, PETN, cyclonite, TNT,
picric acid, and other high explosives; amatol, tritonal, tetrytol, pentolite,
pecretol, cyclotol, and other high explosive compositions; plastic explosives;
dynamite, blasting gelatin, gelatin dynamite, sensitized ammonium nitrate,
liquid-oxygen blasting explosives, blasting powder, and other blasting agents;
and any other explosive substance having sufficient brisance or power to be
particularly suitable for use as a military explosive, or for use in mining,
quarrying, excavating, or demolitions.
         D.   Any firearm, rocket launcher, mortar, artillery piece, grenade,
mine, bomb, torpedo, or similar weapon, designed and manufactured for military
purposes, and the ammunition for that weapon.
         E.   Any firearm muffler or suppressor.
         F.   Any combination of parts that is intended by the owner for use in
converting any firearm or other device into a dangerous ordnance.
      (2)   “Dangerous ordnance” does not include any of the following:
         A.   Any firearm, including a military weapon and the ammunition for
that weapon, and regardless of its actual age, that employs a percussion cap or
other obsolete ignition system, or that is designed and safe for use only with
black powder.
         B.   Any pistol, rifle, or shotgun, designed or suitable for sporting
purposes, including a military weapon as issued or as modified, and the
ammunition for that weapon, unless the firearm is an automatic or sawed-off
firearm.
         C.   Any cannon or other artillery piece that, regardless of its
actual age, is of a type in accepted use prior to 1887, has no mechanical,
hydraulic, pneumatic, or other system for absorbing recoil and returning the
tube into battery without displacing the carriage, and is designed and safe for
use only with black powder.
         D.   Black powder, priming quills, and percussion caps possessed and
lawfully used to fire a cannon of a type defined in subsection (2)C. of this
definition during displays, celebrations, organized matches or shoots, and
target practice, and smokeless and black powder, primers, and percussion caps
possessed and lawfully used as a propellant or ignition device in small-arms or
small- arms ammunition.
         E.   Dangerous ordnance that is inoperable or inert and cannot readily
be rendered operable or activated, and that is kept as a trophy, souvenir,
curio, or museum piece.
         F.   Any device that is expressly excepted from the definition of a
destructive device pursuant to the Gun Control Act of 1968, 18 U.S.C. 921(a)
(4), as amended, and regulations issued under that Act.
   (g)   “Deadly weapon.”  Any instrument, device, or thing capable of
inflicting death, and designed or specially adapted for use as a weapon, or
possessed, carried, or used as a weapon.
   (h)   “Explosive.”  Any chemical compound, mixture, or device, the primary
or common purpose of which is to function by explosion. “Explosive” includes
all materials that have been classified as division 1.1, division 1.2, division
1.3, or division 1.4 explosives by the United States Department of
Transportation in its regulations and includes, but is not limited to,
dynamite, black powder, pellet powders, initiating explosives, blasting caps,
electric blasting caps, safety fuses, fuse igniters, squibs, cordeau detonant
fuses, instantaneous fuses, and igniter cords and igniters. “Explosives” does
not include “fireworks”, as defined in Ohio R.C. 3743.01, or any substance or
material otherwise meeting the definition of explosive set forth in this
section that is manufactured, sold, possessed, transported, stored, or used in
any activity described in Ohio R.C. 3743.80, provided the activity is conducted
in accordance with all applicable laws, rules, and regulations, including, but
not limited to, the provisions of Ohio R.C. 3743.80 and the rules of the Fire
Marshal adopted pursuant to Ohio R.C. 3737.82.
   (i)   “Explosive device.”  Any device designed or specially adapted to cause
physical harm to persons or property by means of an explosion, and consisting
of an explosive substance or agency and a means to detonate it. “Explosive
device” includes without limitation any bomb, any explosive demolition device,
any blasting cap or detonator containing an explosive charge, and any pressure
vessel that has been knowingly tampered with or arranged so as to explode.
   (j)   “Firearm.”
      (1)   Any deadly weapon capable of expelling or propelling one or more
projectiles by the action of an explosive or combustible propellant. “Firearm”
includes an unloaded firearm, and any firearm that is inoperable but that can
readily be rendered operable.
      (2)   When determining whether a firearm is capable of expelling or
propelling one or more projectiles by the action of an explosive or combustible
propellant, the trier of fact may rely upon circumstantial evidence, including,
but not limited to, the representations and actions of the individual
exercising control over the firearm.
   (k)   “Handgun.”  Means any of the following:
      (1)   Any firearm that has a short stock and is designed to be held and
fired by the use of a single hand;
      (2)   Any combination of parts from which a firearm of a type described
in subsection (1) of this definition can be assembled.
   (l)   “Incendiary device.”  Any firebomb, and any device designed or
specially adapted to cause physical harm to persons or property by means of
fire, and consisting of an incendiary substance or agent and a means to ignite
it.
   (m)   “Misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for a term exceeding one
year.” The phrase does not include any of the following:
      (1)   Any federal or state offense pertaining to antitrust violations,
unfair trade practices, restraints of trade, or other similar offenses relating
to the regulation of business practices;
      (2)   Any misdemeanor offense punishable by a term of imprisonment of two
years or less.
   (n)   “Sawed-off firearm.”  A shotgun with a barrel less than 18 inches
long, or a rifle with a barrel less than 16 inches long, or a shotgun or rifle
less than 26 inches long overall.
   (o)   “Semi-automatic firearm.”  Any firearm designed or specially adapted
to fire a single cartridge and automatically chamber a succeeding cartridge
ready to fire, with a single function of the trigger.
   (p)   “Valid concealed handgun license” or “valid license to carry a
concealed handgun.” A concealed handgun license that is currently valid, that
is not under a suspension under R.C. § 2923.128(A)(1), under R.C. § 2923.1213,
or under a suspension provision of the state other than this state in which the
license was issued, and that has not been revoked under R.C. § 2923.128(B)(1),
under R.C. § 2923.1213, or under a revocation provision of the state other than
this state in which the license was issued.
   (q)   “Zip-gun.”  Any of the following:
      (1)   Any firearm of crude and extemporized manufacture.
      (2)   Any device, including without limitation a starter’s pistol, not
designed as a firearm, but that is specially adapted for use as a firearm.
      (3)   Any industrial tool, signalling device, or safety device, not
designed as a firearm, but that as designed is capable of use as such, when
possessed, carried, or used as a firearm.
(ORC 2923.11)
§ 672.02  CARRYING CONCEALED WEAPONS.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly carry or have, concealed on the person's
person or concealed ready at hand, any of the following:
      (1)   A deadly weapon other than a handgun;
      (2)   A handgun other than a dangerous ordnance;
      (3)   A dangerous ordnance.
   (b)   No person who has been issued a concealed handgun license shall do any
of the following:
      (1)   If the person is stopped for a law enforcement purpose, and is
carrying a concealed handgun, fail to promptly inform any law enforcement
officer who approaches the person after the person has been stopped that the
person has been issued a concealed handgun license and that the person then is
carrying a concealed handgun;
      (2)   If the person is stopped for a law enforcement purpose and is
carrying a concealed handgun, knowingly fail to keep the person’s hands in
plain sight at any time after any law enforcement officer begins approaching
the person while stopped and before the law enforcement officer leaves, unless
the failure is pursuant to and in accordance with directions given by a law
enforcement officer;
      (3)   If the person is stopped for a law enforcement purpose, if the
person is carrying a concealed handgun, and if the person is approached by any
law enforcement officer while stopped, knowingly remove or attempt to remove
the loaded handgun from the holster, pocket, or other place in which the person
is carrying it, knowingly grasp or hold the loaded handgun, or knowingly have
contact with the loaded handgun by touching it with the person’s hands or
fingers at any time after the law enforcement officer begins approaching and
before the law enforcement officer leaves, unless the person removes, attempts
to remove, grasps, holds, or has contact with the loaded handgun pursuant to
and in accordance with directions given by the law enforcement officer;
      (4)   If the person is stopped for a law enforcement purpose and is
carrying a concealed handgun, knowingly disregard or fail to comply with any
lawful order of any law enforcement officer given while the person is stopped,
including, but not limited to, a specific order to the person to keep the
person’s hands in plain sight.
   (c)   (1)   This section does not apply to any of the following:
         A.   An officer, agent, or employee of this or any other state or the
United States, or to a law enforcement officer, who is authorized to carry
concealed weapons or dangerous ordnance or is authorized to carry handguns and
is acting within the scope of the officer’s, agent’s, or employee’s duties;
         B.   Any person who is employed in this state, who is authorized to
carry concealed weapons or dangerous ordnance or is authorized to carry
handguns, and who is subject to and in compliance with the requirements of Ohio
R.C. 109.801, unless the appointing authority of the person has expressly
specified that the exemption provided in this subsection (c)(1)B. does not
apply to the person;
         C.   A person’s transportation or storage of a firearm, other than a
firearm described in Ohio R.C. 2923.11(G) to (M), in a motor vehicle for any
lawful purpose if the firearm is not on the actor’s person;
         D.   A person’s storage or possession of a firearm, other than a
firearm described in Ohio R.C. 2923.11(G) to (M), in the actor’s own home for
any lawful purpose.
      (2)   Division (a)(2) of this section does not apply to any person who,
at the time of the alleged carrying or possession of a handgun, either is
carrying a valid concealed handgun license or is an active duty member of the
armed forces of the United States and is carrying a valid military
identification card and documentation of successful completion of firearms
training that meets or exceeds the training requirements described in R.C. §
2923.125(G)(1), unless the person knowingly is in a place described in R.C. §
2923.126(B).
   (d)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under subsection (a)(1) of
this section of carrying or having control of a weapon other than a handgun and
other than a dangerous ordnance, that the actor was not otherwise prohibited by
law from having the weapon, and that any of the following applies:
      (1)   The weapon was carried or kept ready at hand by the actor for
defensive purposes, while the actor was engaged in or was going to or from the
actor’s lawful business or occupation, which business or occupation was of a
character or was necessarily carried on in a manner or at a time or place as to
render the actor particularly susceptible to criminal attack, such as would
justify a prudent person in going armed.
      (2)   The weapon was carried or kept ready at hand by the actor for
defensive purposes, while the actor was engaged in a lawful activity and had
reasonable cause to fear a criminal attack upon the actor, a member of the
actor’s family, or the actor’s home, such as would justify a prudent person in
going armed.
      (3)   The weapon was carried or kept ready at hand by the actor for any
lawful purpose and while in the actor’s own home.
   (e)   No person who is charged with a violation of this section shall be
required to obtain a concealed handgun license as a condition for the dismissal
of the charge.
   (f)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of carrying concealed
weapons. Except as otherwise provided in this subsection or subsections (f)(2),
(f)(6), and (f)(7) of this section, carrying concealed weapons in violation of
subsection (a) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. Except as
otherwise provided in this subsection or subsections (f)(2), (f)(6), and (f)(7)
of this section, if the offender previously has been convicted of a violation
of this section or any substantially equivalent state law or municipal
ordinance or of any offense of violence, if the weapon involved is a firearm
that is either loaded or for which the offender has ammunition ready at hand,
or if the weapon involved is dangerous ordnance, carrying concealed weapons in
violation of subsection (a) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law. Except as otherwise provided in subsections (f)(2), (f)
(6), and (f)(7) of this section, if the offense is committed aboard an
aircraft, or with purpose to carry a concealed weapon aboard an aircraft,
regardless of the weapon involved, carrying concealed weapons in violation of
subsection (a) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
      (2)   Except as provided in subsection (f)(6) of this section, if a
person being arrested for a violation of division (a)(2) of this section
promptly produces a valid concealed handgun license, and if at the time of the
violation the person was not knowingly in a place described in R.C. § 2923.126
(B), the officer shall not arrest the person for a violation of that division.
If the person is not able to promptly produce any concealed handgun license,
and if the person is not in a place described in that section, the officer may
arrest the person for a violation of that division, and the offender shall be
punished as follows:
         A.   The offender shall be guilty of a minor misdemeanor if both of
the following apply:
            1.   Within ten days after the arrest, the offender presents a
concealed handgun license, which license was valid at the time of the arrest to
the law enforcement agency that employs the arresting officer.
            2.   At the time of the arrest, the offender was not knowingly in a
place described in Ohio R.C. 2923.126(B).
         B.   The offender shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined
five hundred dollars ($500) if all of the following apply:
            1.   The offender previously had been issued a concealed handgun
license, and that license expired within the two years immediately preceding
the arrest.
            2.   Within 45 days after the arrest, the offender presents a
concealed handgun license to the law enforcement agency that employed the
arresting officer, and the offender waives in writing the offender’s right to a
speedy trial on the charge of the violation that is provided in Ohio R.C.
2945.71.
            3.   At the time of the commission of the offense, the offender was
not knowingly in a place described in Ohio R.C. 2923.126(B).
         C.   If divisions (f)(2)A. and (f)(2)B. and (f)(6) of this section do
not apply, the offender shall be punished under division (f)(1) or (f)(7) of
this section.
      (3)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, carrying concealed
weapons in violation of division (b)(1) of this section is a misdemeanor of the
first degree, and, in addition to any other penalty or sanction imposed for a
violation of division (b)(1) of this section, the offender’s concealed handgun
license shall be suspended pursuant to R.C. § 2923.128(A)(2). If, at the time
of the stop of the offender for a law enforcement purpose that was the basis of
the violation, any law enforcement officer involved with the stop had actual
knowledge that the offender has been issued a concealed handgun license,
carrying concealed weapons in violation of division (b)(1) of this section is a
minor misdemeanor, and the offender’s concealed handgun license shall not be
suspended pursuant to R.C. § 2923.128(A)(2).
      (4)   Carrying concealed weapons in violation of subsection (b)(2) or (b)
(4) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree or, if the offender
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of subsection
(b)(2) or (b)(4) of this section or any substantially equivalent state law or
municipal ordinance, a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. In
addition to any other penalty or sanction imposed for a misdemeanor violation
of subsection (b)(2) or (b)(4) of this section, the offender’s concealed
handgun license shall be suspended pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2923.128(A)(2).
      (5)   Carrying concealed weapons in violation of subsection (b)(3) of
this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (6)   If a person being arrested for a violation of division (a)(2) of
this section is an active duty m ember of the armed forces of the United States
and is carrying a valid military identification card and documentation of
successful completion of firearms training that meets or exceeds the training
requirements described in R.C. § 2923.125(G)(1), and if at the time of the
violation the person was not knowingly in a place described in R.C. 2923.126
(B), the officer shall not arrest the person for a violation of that division.
If the person is not able to promptly produce a valid military identification
card and documentation of successful completion of firearms training that meets
or exceeds the training requirements described in R.C. § 2923.125(G)(1) and if
the person is not in a place described in R.C. § 2923.126(B), the officer shall
issue a citation and the offender shall be assessed a civil penalty of not more
than five hundred dollars ($500.00). The citation shall be automatically
dismissed and the civil penalty shall not be assessed if both of the following
apply:
         A.   Within ten days after the issuance of the citation, the offender
presents a valid military identification card and documentation of successful
completion of firearms training that meets or exceeds the training requirements
described in R.C. § 2923.125(G)(1), which were both valid at the time of the
issuance of the citation to the law enforcement agency that employs the citing
officer.
         B.   At the time of the citation, the offender was not knowingly in a
place described in R.C. § 2923.126(B).
      (7)   If a person being arrested for a violation of division (a)(2) of
this section is knowingly in a place described in R.C. § 2923.126(B)(5) and is
not authorized to carry a handgun or have a handgun concealed on the person’s
person or concealed ready at hand under that division, the penalty shall be as
follows:
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in this division, if the person
produces a valid concealed handgun license within ten days after the arrest and
has not previously been convicted or pleaded guilty to a violation of division
(a)(2) of this section or any substantially equivalent state law or municipal
ordinance, the person is guilty of a minor misdemeanor;
         B.   Except as otherwise provided in this division, if the person has
previously been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of division (a)
(2) of this section or any substantially equivalent state law or municipal
ordinance, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree;
         C.   Except as otherwise provided in this division, if the person has
previously been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two violations of division
(a)(2) of this section or any substantially equivalent state law or municipal
ordinance, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree;
         D.   Except as otherwise provided in this division, if the person has
previously been convicted of or pleaded guilty to three or more violations of
division (a)(2) of this section or any substantially equivalent state law or
municipal ordinance, or convicted of or pleaded guilty to any offense of
violence, if the weapon involved is a firearm that is either loaded or for
which the offender has ammunition ready at hand, or if the weapon involved is a
dangerous ordnance, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree.
   (g)   If a law enforcement officer stops a person to question the person
regarding a possible violation of this section, for a traffic stop, or for any
other law enforcement purpose, if the person surrenders a firearm to the
officer, either voluntarily or pursuant to a request or demand of the officer,
and if the officer does not charge the person with a violation of this section
or arrest the person for any offense, the person is not otherwise prohibited by
law from possessing the firearm, and the firearm is not contraband, the officer
shall return the firearm to the person at the termination of the stop.  If a
court orders a law enforcement officer to return a firearm to a person pursuant
to the requirement set forth in this division, Ohio R.C. 2923.163(B) applies.
(ORC 2923.12)
Statutory reference:
   Carrying concealed handguns, licensing through county sheriff, see Ohio R.C.
2923.124 et seq.
   Conveyance or possession of deadly weapons or dangerous ordnance on school
premises, felony offense, see Ohio R.C. 2923.122
   Conveyance, possession, or control of deadly weapon or dangerous ordinance
in a courthouse, felony offense, see Ohio R.C. 2923.123
   Possession of deadly weapon while under detention, felony offense, see Ohio
R.C. 2923.131
   Possession of firearm in liquor permit premises, felony offense, see Ohio
R.C. 2923.121
§ 672.025  POSSESSION OF DEADLY WEAPON WHILE UNDER DETENTION.
   (a)   "Detention" and "detention facility" have the same meanings as in Ohio
R.C. 2921.01.
   (b)   No person under detention at a detention facility shall possess a
deadly weapon.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of possession of a deadly
weapon while under detention.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in subsection (c)(2) of this section,
possession of a deadly weapon while under detention is a felony to be
prosecuted under state law.
      (2)   If the offender, at the time of the commission of the offense, was
under detention as an alleged or adjudicated delinquent child or unruly child
and if at the time the offender commits the act for which the offender was
under detention it would not be a felony if committed by an adult, possession
of a deadly weapon while under detention is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(ORC 2923.131)
Statutory reference:
   Possession of deadly weapon while under detention, felony offenses, see Ohio
R.C. 2923.131
§ 672.03  USING WEAPONS WHILE INTOXICATED.
   (a)   No person, while under the influence of alcohol or any drug of abuse,
shall carry or use any firearm or dangerous ordnance.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of using weapons while
intoxicated, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(ORC 2923.15)
§ 672.04  IMPROPERLY HANDLING FIREARMS IN A MOTOR VEHICLE.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly discharge a firearm while in or on a motor
vehicle.
   (b)   No person shall knowingly transport or have a loaded firearm in a
motor vehicle in such a manner that the firearm is accessible to the operator
or any passenger without leaving the vehicle.
   (c)   No person shall knowingly transport or have a firearm in a motor
vehicle, unless the person may lawfully possess that firearm under applicable
law of this state or the United States, the firearm is unloaded, and the
firearm is carried in one of the following ways:
      (1)   In a closed package, box, or case.
      (2)   In a compartment that can be reached only by leaving the vehicle.
      (3)   In plain sight and secured in a rack or holder made for the
purpose.
      (4)   If the firearm is at least 24 inches in overall length as measured
from the muzzle to the part of the stock furthest from the muzzle and if the
barrel is at least 18 inches in length, either in plain sight with the action
open or the weapon stripped, or, if the firearm is of a type on which the
action will not stay open or which cannot easily be stripped, in plain sight.
   (d)   No person shall knowingly transport or have a loaded handgun in a
motor vehicle if, at the time of that transportation or possession, any of the
following applies:
      (1)   The person is under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a
combination of them.
      (2)   The person's whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine
contains a concentration of alcohol, a listed controlled substance, or a listed
metabolite of a controlled substance prohibited for persons operating a
vehicle, as specified in Ohio R.C. 4511.19(A), regardless of whether the person
at the time of the transportation or possession as described in this subsection
is the operator of or a passenger in the motor vehicle.
   (e)   No person who has been issued a concealed handgun license or who is an
active duty member of the armed forces of the United States and is carrying a
valid military identification card and documentation of successful completion
of firearms training that meets or exceeds the training requirements described
in R.C. § 2923.125(G)(1), who is the driver or an occupant of a motor vehicle
that is stopped as a result of a traffic stop or a stop for another law
enforcement purpose or is the driver or an occupant of a commercial motor
vehicle that is stopped by an employee of the motor carrier enforcement unit
for the purposes defined in Ohio R.C. 5503.34, and who is transporting or has a
loaded handgun in the motor vehicle or commercial motor vehicle in any manner,
shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Fail to promptly inform any law enforcement officer who approaches
the vehicle while stopped that the person has been issued a concealed handgun
license or is authorized to carry a concealed handgun as an active duty member
of the armed forces of the United States and that the person then possesses or
has a loaded handgun in the motor vehicle;
      (2)   Fail to promptly inform the employee of the unit who approaches the
vehicle while stopped that the person has been issued a concealed handgun
license or is authorized to carry a concealed handgun as an active duty member
of the armed forces of the United States and that the person then possesses or
has a loaded handgun in the commercial motor vehicle;
      (3)   Knowingly fail to remain in the motor vehicle while stopped, or
knowingly fail to keep the person’s hands in plain sight at any time after any
law enforcement officer begins approaching the person while stopped and before
the law enforcement officer leaves, unless the failure is pursuant to and in
accordance with directions given by a law enforcement officer;
      (4)   Knowingly have contact with the loaded handgun by touching it with
the person’s hands or fingers in the motor vehicle at any time after the law
enforcement officer begins approaching and before the law enforcement officer
leaves, unless the person has contact with the loaded handgun pursuant to and
in accordance with directions given by the law enforcement officer;
      (5)   Knowingly disregard or fail to comply with any lawful order of any
law enforcement officer given while the motor vehicle is stopped, including but
not limited to a specific order to the person to keep the person’s hands in
plain sight.
   (f)   (1)   Divisions (a), (b), (c), and (e) of this section do not apply to
any of the following:
         A.   An officer, agent, or employee of this or any other state or the
United States, or a law enforcement officer, when authorized to carry or have
loaded or accessible firearms in motor vehicles and acting within the scope of
the officer’s, agent’s, or employee’s duties;
         B.   Any person who is employed in this state, who is authorized to
carry or have loaded or accessible firearms in motor vehicles, and who is
subject to and in compliance with the requirements of Ohio R.C. 109.801, unless
the appointing authority of the person has expressly specified that the
exemption provided in this subsection (f)(1)B. does not apply to the person.
      (2)   Division (a) of this section does not apply to a person if all of
the following circumstances apply:
         A.   The person discharges a firearm from a motor vehicle at a coyote
or groundhog, the discharge is not during the deer gun hunting season as set by
the Chief of the Division of Wildlife of the Department of Natural Resources,
and the discharge at the coyote or groundhog, but for the operation of this
section, is lawful.
         B.   The motor vehicle from which the person discharges the firearm is
on real property that is located in an unincorporated area of a township and
that is either zoned for agriculture or is used for agriculture.
         C.   The person owns the real property described in subsection (f)
(2)B. of this section, is the spouse or a child of another person who owns that
real property, is a tenant of another person who owns that real property, or is
the spouse or a child of a tenant of another person who owns that real
property.
         D.   The person does not discharge the firearm in any of the following
manners:
            1.   While under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or
alcohol and a drug of abuse;
            2.   In the direction of a street, highway or other public or
private property used by the public for vehicular traffic or parking;
            3.   At or into an occupied structure that is a permanent or
temporary habitation;
            4.   In the commission of any violation of law, including but not
limited to a felony that includes, as an essential element, purposely or
knowingly causing or attempting to cause the death of or physical harm to
another and that was committed by discharging a firearm from a motor vehicle.
      (3)   Division (a) of this section does not apply to a person if all of
the following apply:
         A.   The person possesses a valid all-purpose vehicle permit issued
under R.C. § 1533.103 by the Chief of the Division of Wildlife.
         B.   The person discharges a firearm at a wild quadruped or game bird
as defined in Ohio R.C. 1531.01 during the open hunting season for the
applicable wild quadruped or game bird.
         C.   The person discharges a firearm from a stationary all-purpose
vehicle as defined in R.C. § 1531.01 from private or publicly owned lands or
from a motor vehicle that is parked on a road that is owned or administered by
the Division of Wildlife.
         D.   The person does not discharge the firearm in any of the following
manners:
            1.   While under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or
alcohol and a drug of abuse;
            2.   In the direction of a street, a highway, or other public or
private property that is used by the public for vehicular traffic or parking;
            3.   At or into an occupied structure that is a permanent or
temporary habitation;
            4.   In the commission of any violation of law, including, but not
limited to, a felony that includes, as an essential element, purposely or
knowingly causing or attempting to cause the death of or physical harm to
another and that was committed by discharging a firearm from a motor vehicle.
      (4)   Divisions (b) and (c) of this section do not apply to a person if
all of the following circumstances apply:
         A.   At the time of the alleged violation of either of those
subsections, the person is the operator of or a passenger in a motor vehicle.
         B.   The motor vehicle is on real property that is located in an
unincorporated area of a township and that is either zoned for agriculture or
is used for agriculture.
         C.   The person owns the real property described in subsection (f)
(4)B. of this section, is the spouse or a child of another person who owns that
real property, is a tenant of another person who owns that real property, or is
the spouse or a child of a tenant of another person who owns that real
property.
         D.   The person, prior to arriving at the real property described in
subsection (f)(4)B. of this section, did not transport or possess a firearm in
the motor vehicle in a manner prohibited by subsection (b) or (c) of this
section while the motor vehicle was being operated on a street, highway or
other public or private property used by the public for vehicular traffic or
parking.
      (5)   Divisions (b) and (c) of this section do not apply to a person who
transports or possesses a handgun in a motor vehicle if, at the time of that
transportation or possession, both of the following apply:
         A.   The person transporting or possessing the handgun is either
carrying a valid concealed handgun license or is an active duty member of the
armed forces of the United States and is carrying a valid military
identification card and documentation of successful completion of firearms
training that meets or exceeds the training requirements described in R.C. §
2923.125(G)(1).
         B.   The person transporting or possessing the handgun is not
knowingly in a place described in Ohio R.C. 2923.126(B).
      (6)   Divisions (b) and (c) of this section do not apply to a person if
all of the following apply:
         A.   The person possesses a valid all-purpose vehicle permit issued
under R.C. § 1533.103 by the Chief of the Division of Wildlife.
         B.   The person is on or in an all-purpose vehicle as defined in R.C.
§ 1531.01 or a motor vehicle during the open hunting season for a wild
quadruped or game bird.
         C.   The person is on or in an all-purpose vehicle as defined in R.C.
§ 1531.01 on private or publicly owned lands or on or in a motor vehicle that
is parked on a road that is owned or administered by the Division of Wildlife.
   (g)   (1)   The affirmative defenses authorized in Ohio R.C. 2923.12(D)(1)
and (D)(2) are affirmative defenses to a charge under subsection (b) or (c) of
this section that involves a firearm other than a handgun.
      (2)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under subsection (b) or
(c) of this section of improperly handling firearms in a motor vehicle that the
actor transported or had the firearm in the motor vehicle for any lawful
purpose and while the motor vehicle was on the actor’s own property, provided
that this affirmative defense is not available unless the person, immediately
prior to arriving at the actor’s own property, did not transport or possess the
firearm in a motor vehicle in a manner prohibited by subsection (b) or (c) of
this section while the motor vehicle was being operated on a street, highway,
or other public or private property used by the public for vehicular traffic.
   (h)   (1)   No person who is charged with a violation of subsection (b),
(c), or (d) of this section shall be required to obtain a concealed handgun
license as a condition for the dismissal of the charge.
      (2)   A.   If a person is convicted of, was convicted of, pleads guilty
to, or has pleaded guilty to a violation of subsection (e) of this section as
it existed prior to September 30, 2011 and if the conduct that was the basis of
the violation no longer would be a violation of subsection (e) of this section
on or after September 30, 2011, the person may file an application under Ohio
R.C. 2953.37 requesting the expungement of the record of conviction.
         B.   If a person is convicted of, was convicted of, pleads guilty to,
or has pleaded guilty to a violation of subsection (b) or (c) of this section
as the division existed prior to September 30, 2011 and if the conduct that was
the basis of the violation no longer would be a violation of subsection (b) or
(c) of this section on or after September 30, 2011 due to the application of
subsection (f)(5) of this section as it exists on and after September 30, 2011,
the person may file an application under Ohio R.C. 2953.37 requesting the
expungement of the record of conviction.
   (i)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of improperly handling
firearms in a motor vehicle. Violation of subsection (a) of this section is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. Violation of subsection
(c) of this section is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. A violation of
subsection (d) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law and, if the loaded handgun is concealed on the person’s person, it is
also a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. Except as otherwise
provided in this division, a violation of subsection (e)(1) or (e)(2) of this
section is a misdemeanor of the first degree, and, in addition to any other
penalty or sanction imposed for the violation, the offender’s concealed handgun
license shall be suspended pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2923.128(A)(2). If at the time
of the stop of the offender for a traffic stop, for another law enforcement
purpose, or for a purpose defined in Ohio R.C. 5503.34 that was the basis of
the violation any law enforcement officer involved with the stop or the
employee of the motor carrier enforcement unit who made the stop had actual
knowledge of the offender’s status as a licensee, a violation of division (e)
(1) or (e)(2) of this section is a minor misdemeanor, and the offender’s
concealed handgun license shall not be suspended pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2923.128
(A)(2).  A violation of subsection (e)(4) of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law. A violation of subsection (e)(3) or (e)
(5) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree or, if the offender
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of subsection
(e)(3) or (e)(5) of this section or any substantially equivalent state law or
municipal ordinance, a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. In
addition to any other penalty or sanction imposed for a misdemeanor violation
of subsection (e)(3) or (e)(5) of this section, the offender’s concealed
handgun license shall be suspended pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2923.128(A)(2). A
violation of subsection (b) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
   (j)   If a law enforcement officer stops a motor vehicle for a traffic stop
or any other purpose, if any person in the motor vehicle surrenders a firearm
to the officer, either voluntarily or pursuant to a request or demand of the
officer, and if the officer does not charge the person with a violation of this
section or arrest the person for any offense, the person is not otherwise
prohibited by law from possessing the firearm, and the firearm is not
contraband, the officer shall return the firearm to the person at the
termination of the stop.  If a court orders a law enforcement officer to return
a firearm to a person pursuant to the requirement set forth in this division,
Ohio R.C. 2923.163(B) applies.
   (k)   As used in this section:
      (1)   “Agriculture” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 519.01.
      (2)   “Commercial motor vehicle” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C.
4506.25(A).
      (3)   “Motor carrier enforcement unit” means the Motor Carrier
Enforcement Unit in the Department of Public Safety, Division of state Highway
Patrol, that is created by Ohio R.C. 5503.34.
      (4)   “Motor vehicle”, “street” and “highway” have the same meaning as in
Ohio R.C. 4511.01.
      (5)   “Occupied structure” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2909.01.
      (6)   “Tenant” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 1531.01.
      (7)   “Unloaded.”
         A.   With respect to a firearm other than a firearm described in
division D. of this definition, means that no ammunition is in the firearm in
question, no magazine or speed loader containing ammunition is inserted into
the firearm, and one of the following applies:
            1.   There is no ammunition in a magazine or speed loader that is
in the vehicle in question and that may be used with the firearm in question.
            2.   Any magazine or speed loader that contains ammunition and that
may be used with the firearm in question is stored in a compartment within the
vehicle in question that cannot be accessed without leaving the vehicle or is
stored in a container that provides complete and separate enclosure.
         B.   For the purposes of division A.2. of this definition, a
“container that provides complete and separate enclosure” includes, but is not
limited to, any of the following:
            1.   A package, box, or case with multiple compartments, as long as
the loaded magazine or speed loader and the firearm in question either are in
separate compartments within the package, box, or case, or, if they are in the
same compartment, the magazine or speed loader is contained within a separate
enclosure in that compartment that does not contain the firearm and that closes
using a snap, button, buckle, zipper, hook and loop closing mechanism, or other
fastener that must be opened to access the contents or the firearm is contained
within a separate enclosure of that nature in that compartment that does not
contain the magazine or speed loader;
            2.   A pocket or other enclosure on the person of the person in
question that closes using a snap, button, buckle, zipper, hook and loop
closing mechanism, or other fastener that must be opened to access the
contents.
         C.   For the purposes of divisions A. and B. of this definition,
ammunition held in stripper-clips or in en-bloc clips is not considered
ammunition that is loaded into a magazine or speed loader.
         D.   “Unloaded” means, with respect to a firearm employing a
percussion cap, flintlock, or other obsolete ignition system, when the weapon
is uncapped or when the priming charge is removed from the pan.
   (l)   Divisions A. and B. of the definition of “unloaded” in division (k) of
this section do not affect the authority of a person who is carrying a valid
concealed handgun license to have one or more magazines or speed loaders
containing ammunition anywhere in a vehicle, without being transported as
described in those divisions, as long as no ammunition is in a firearm, other
than a handgun, in the vehicle other than as permitted under any other
provision of this chapter. A person who is carrying a valid concealed handgun
license may have one or more magazines or speed loaders containing ammunition
anywhere in a vehicle without further restriction, as long as no ammunition is
in a firearm, other than a handgun, in the vehicle other than as permitted
under any provision of this chapter.
(ORC 2923.16)
Statutory reference:
   Return of surrendered firearms by law enforcement, see Ohio R.C. 2923.163
§ 672.05  LICENSE OR PERMIT TO POSSESS DANGEROUS ORDNANCE.
   (a)   Upon application to the Sheriff of the County or Safety Director or
Police Chief of the municipality where the applicant resides or has his or her
principal place of business, and upon payment of the fee specified in
subsection (b) of this section, a license or temporary permit shall be issued
to qualified applicants to acquire, possess, carry or use a dangerous ordnance
for the following purposes:
      (1)   Contractors, wreckers, quarry workers, mine operators and other
persons regularly employing explosives in the course of a legitimate business,
with respect to explosives and explosive devices acquired, possessed, carried
or used in the course of such business.
      (2)   Farmers, with respect to explosives and explosive devices acquired,
possessed, carried or used for agricultural purposes on lands farmed by them.
      (3)   Scientists, engineers, and instructors, with respect to a dangerous
ordnance acquired, possessed, carried or used in the course of bona fide
research or instruction.
      (4)   Financial institutions and armored car company guards, with respect
to automatic firearms lawfully acquired, possessed, carried or used by any such
person while acting within the scope of his or her duties.
      (5)   In the discretion of the issuing authority, any responsible person,
with respect to a dangerous ordnance lawfully acquired, possessed, carried or
used for a legitimate research, scientific, educational, industrial or other
proper purpose.
   (b)   Application for a license or temporary permit under this section shall
be in writing under oath to the Sheriff of the County or Safety Director or
Police Chief of the municipality where the applicant resides or has his or her
principal place of business. The application shall be accompanied by an
application fee as stated in the Fee Schedule in §
236.07 of the City of Kirtland Codified Ordinances when the application is for
a license, and an application fee as stated in the Fee Schedule in §
236.07 of the City of Kirtland Codified Ordinances when the application is for
a temporary permit. The fees shall be paid into the general revenue fund of the
County or municipality. The application shall contain the following
information:  (Ord. 17-O-20, passed 7-3-2017)
      (1)   The name, age, address, occupation and business address of the
applicant, if he or she is a natural person, or the name, address, and
principal place of business of the applicant if the applicant is a corporation.
      (2)   A description of the dangerous ordnance for which a permit is
requested.
      (3)   A description of the places where and the manner in which the
dangerous ordnance is to be kept, carried, and used.
      (4)   A statement of the purposes for which the dangerous ordnance is to
be acquired, possessed, carried or used.
      (5)   Such other information as the issuing authority may require in
giving effect to this section.
   (c)   Upon investigation, the issuing authority shall issue a license or
temporary permit only if all of the following apply:
      (1)   The applicant is not otherwise prohibited by law from acquiring,
having, carrying or using a dangerous ordnance.
      (2)   The applicant is 21 years of age or over, if the applicant is a
natural person.
      (3)   It appears that the applicant has sufficient competence to safely
acquire, possess, carry or use the dangerous ordnance, and that proper
precautions will be taken to protect the security of the dangerous ordnance and
ensure the safety of persons and property.
      (4)   It appears that the dangerous ordnance will be lawfully acquired,
possessed, carried and used by the applicant for a legitimate purpose.
   (d)   The license or temporary permit shall identify the person to whom it
is issued, identify the dangerous ordnance involved and state the purposes for
which the license or temporary permit is issued, state the expiration date, if
any, and list such restrictions on the acquisition, possession, carriage, or
use of the dangerous ordnance as the issuing authority considers advisable to
protect the security of the dangerous ordnance and ensure the safety of persons
and property.
   (e)   A temporary permit shall be issued for the casual use of explosives
and explosive devices, and other consumable dangerous ordnance, and shall
expire within 30 days of its issuance. A license shall be issued for the
regular use of a consumable dangerous ordnance, which license need not specify
an expiration date, but the issuing authority may specify such expiration date,
not earlier than one year from the date of issuance, as it considers advisable
in view of the nature of the dangerous ordnance and the purposes for which the
license is issued.
   (f)   The dangerous ordnance specified in a license or temporary permit may
be obtained by the holder anywhere in the state. Pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2923.18
(F), the holder of a license may use such dangerous ordnance anywhere in the
state. The holder of a temporary permit may use such dangerous ordnance only
within the territorial jurisdiction of the issuing authority.
   (g)   The issuing authority shall forward to the state Fire Marshal a copy
of each license or temporary permit issued pursuant to this section, and a copy
of each record of a transaction in a dangerous ordnance and of each report of a
lost or stolen dangerous ordnance, given to the local law enforcement authority
as required by Ohio R.C. 2923.20(A)(4) and (5) or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance. The state Fire Marshal will keep a permanent file of all
licenses and temporary permits issued pursuant to this section, and of all
records of transactions in, and losses or thefts of a dangerous ordnance
forwarded by local law enforcement authorities pursuant to this section.
(ORC 2923.18)
§ 672.06  FAILURE TO SECURE DANGEROUS ORDNANCE.
   (a)   No person, in acquiring, possessing, carrying, or using any dangerous
ordnance, shall negligently fail to take proper precautions:
      (1)   To secure the dangerous ordnance against theft, or against its
acquisition or use by any unauthorized or incompetent person.
      (2)   To ensure the safety of persons and property.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of failure to a secure
dangerous ordnance, a misdemeanor of the second degree.
(ORC 2923.19)
§ 672.07  UNLAWFUL TRANSACTIONS IN WEAPONS.
   (a)   No person shall:
      (1)   Recklessly sell, lend, give or furnish any firearm to any person
prohibited by Ohio R.C. 2923.13 or 2923.15, or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, from acquiring or using any firearm, or recklessly sell,
lend, give or furnish any dangerous ordnance to any person prohibited by Ohio
R.C. 2923.13, 2923.15 or 2923.17, or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, from acquiring or using any dangerous ordnance;
      (2)   Possess any firearm or dangerous ordnance with purpose to dispose
of it in violation of subsection (a)(1) of this section;
      (3)   Manufacture, possess for sale, sell, or furnish to any person other
than a law enforcement agency for authorized use in police work, any brass
knuckles, cestus, billy, blackjack, sandbag, switchblade knife, springblade
knife, gravity knife, or similar weapon;
      (4)   When transferring any dangerous ordnance to another, negligently
fail to require the transferee to exhibit such identification, license, or
permit showing him or her to be authorized to acquire dangerous ordnance
pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2923.17, or negligently fail to take a complete record of
the transaction and forthwith forward a copy of the record to the sheriff of
the county or Safety Director or Police Chief of the municipality where the
transaction takes place;
      (5)   Knowingly fail to report to law enforcement authorities forthwith
the loss or theft of any firearm or dangerous ordnance in the person's
possession and under his or her control.
   (b)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of unlawful transactions in
weapons. A violation of subsection (a)(1) or (2) of this section is a felony to
be prosecuted under appropriate state law. A violation of subsection (a)(3) or
(4) of this section is a misdemeanor of the second degree. A violation of
subsection (a)(5) of this section is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(ORC 2923.20)
§ 672.08  IMPROPERLY FURNISHING FIREARMS TO A MINOR. (Repealed)
Editor's note:
   Section
672.08 was repealed as part of the 1996 revision of this Model Ohio Municipal
Code because a violation of substantially equivalent state law (Ohio R.C.
2923.21) was made a felony by the Ohio General Assembly.
§ 672.085  UNDERAGE PURCHASE OF A FIREARM OR HANDGUN.
   (a)   No person under 18 years of age shall purchase or attempt to purchase
a firearm.
   (b)   No person under 21 years of age shall purchase or attempt to purchase
a handgun; provided, that this subsection does not apply to the purchase or
attempted purchase of a handgun by a person 18 years of age or older and under
21 years of age, if either of the following applies:
      (1)   The person is a law enforcement officer and has received firearms
training approved by the Ohio Peace Officer Training Council or equivalent
firearms training.
      (2)   The person is an active or reserve member of the armed services of
the United States or the Ohio National Guard, or was honorably discharged from
military service in the active or reserve armed services of the United States
or the Ohio National Guard, and the person has received firearms training from
the armed services or the national guard or equivalent firearms training.
   (c)   Whoever violates subsection (a) of this section is guilty of underage
purchase of a firearm, a delinquent act that would be a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law if it could be committed by an adult. Whoever
violates subsection (b) of this section is guilty of underage purchase of a
handgun, a misdemeanor of the second degree.
(ORC 2923.211)
§ 672.09  SALE OF EXPLOSIVES TO MINORS.(Repealed)
Editor's note:
   Section
672.09 was repealed as part of the 1983 updating and revision of these Codified
Ordinances because substantially identical state law (Ohio R.C. 3743.02) was
repealed by the Ohio General Assembly, effective July 1, 1979.
§ 672.095  DISCHARGE OF A FIREARM ON OR NEAR PROHIBITED PREMISES.
   (a)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Without permission from the proper officials and subject to
subsection (b)(1) of this section, discharge a firearm upon or over a cemetery
or within 100 yards of a cemetery;
      (2)   Subject to subsection (b)(2) of this section, discharge of a
firearm on a lawn, park, pleasure ground, orchard, or other ground appurtenant
to a schoolhouse, church, or inhabited dwelling, the property of another, or a
charitable institution;
      (3)   Discharge a firearm upon or over a public road or highway.
   (b)   (1)   Division (a)(1) of this section does not apply to a person who
while on the person's own land, discharges a firearm.
      (2)   Division (a)(2) of this section does not apply to a person who owns
any type of property described in that subsection and who, while on the
person's own enclosure, discharges a firearm.
   (c)   Whoever violates subsection (a) of this section is guilty of discharge
of a firearm on or near prohibited premises. A violation of subsection (a)(1)
or (a)(2) of this section is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. A violation of
subsection (a)(3) of this section  shall be punished as follows:
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in subsection (c)(2) of this section,
a violation of subsection (a)(3) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
      (2)   If the violation created a substantial risk of physical harm to any
person, caused serious physical harm to property, caused physical harm to any
person, or caused serious physical harm to any person, a violation of
subsection (a)(3) is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(ORC 2923.162)
§ 672.10  FIREWORKS.
   (a)   Definitions. As used in this section, unless otherwise provided:
      (1)   "1.3G fireworks."  Display fireworks consistent with regulations of
the United States Department of Transportation as expressed using the
designation "Division 1.3" in Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations.
      (2)   "1.4G fireworks."  Consumer fireworks consistent with regulations
of the United States Department of Transportation as expressed using the
designation "Division 1.4" in Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations.
      (3)   "Beer" and "intoxicating liquor."  Have the same meaning as in Ohio
R.C. 4301.01.
      (4)   "Booby trap."  A small tube that has a string protruding from both
ends that has a friction-sensitive composition and that is ignited by pulling
the ends of the string.
      (5)   "Cigarette load."  A small wooden peg that is coated with a small
quantity of explosive composition and that is ignited in a cigarette.
      (6)   "Controlled substance."  Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C.
3719.01.
      (7)   "Discharge site." An area immediately surrounding the mortars used
to fire aerial shells.
      (8)   "Explosive."  Any chemical compound, mixture, or device, the
primary or common purpose of which is to function by explosion. "Explosive"
includes all materials that have been classified as division 1.1, division 1.2,
division 1.3, or division 1.4 explosives by the United States Department of
Transportation in its regulations and includes, but is not limited to,
dynamite, black powder, pellet powders, initiating explosives, blasting caps,
electric blasting caps, safety fuses, fuse igniters, squibs, cordeau detonant
fuses, instantaneous fuses, and igniter cords and igniters. "Explosives" does
not include "fireworks" as defined in Ohio R.C. 3743.01, or any substance or
material otherwise meeting the definition of explosive set forth in this
section that is manufactured, sold, possessed, transported, stored, or used in
any activity described in Ohio R.C. 3743.80, provided the activity is conducted
in accordance with all applicable laws, rules, and regulations, including, but
not limited to, the provisions of Ohio R.C. 3743.80 and the rules of the state
Fire Marshal adopted pursuant to Ohio R.C. 3737.82.
(ORC 2923.11)
      (9)   "Fireworks."  Any composition or device prepared for the purpose of
producing a visible or an audible effect by combustion, deflagration, or
detonation, except ordinary matches and except as provided in Ohio R.C.
3743.80.
      (10)   "Fireworks incident."  Any action or omission that occurs at a
fireworks exhibition that results in injury or death, or a substantial risk of
injury or death, to any person, and that involves either of the following:
         A.   The handling or other use, or the results of the handling or
other use, of fireworks or associated equipment or other materials;
         B.   The failure of any person to comply with any applicable
requirement imposed by this section or Ohio R.C. Chapter 3743, or any
applicable rule adopted under this section or Ohio R.C. Chapter 3743.
      (11)   "Fireworks incident site."  A discharge site or other location at
a fireworks exhibition where a fireworks incident occurs, a location where an
injury or death associated with a fireworks incident occurs, or a location
where evidence of a fireworks incident or an injury or death associated with a
fireworks incident is found.
      (12)   "Fireworks plant."  All buildings and other structures in which
the manufacturing of fireworks, or the storage or sale of manufactured
fireworks by a manufacturer, takes place.
      (13)   "Highway."  Any public street, road, alley, way, lane or other
public thoroughfare.
      (14)   "Licensed building."  A building on the licensed premises of a
licensed manufacturer or wholesaler of fireworks that is approved for occupancy
by the building official having jurisdiction.
      (15)   "Licensed exhibitor of fireworks" or "licensed exhibitor."  A
person licensed pursuant to Ohio R.C. 3743.50 through 3743.55.
      (16)   "Licensed manufacturer of fireworks" or "licensed manufacturer." 
A person licensed pursuant to Ohio R.C. 3743.02 through 3743.08.
      (17)   "Licensed premises."  The real estate upon which a licensed
manufacturer or wholesaler of fireworks conducts business.
      (18)   "Licensed wholesaler of fireworks" or "licensed wholesaler."  A
person licensed pursuant to Ohio R.C. 3743.15 through 3743.21.
      (19)   "Manufacturing of fireworks."  The making of fireworks from raw
materials, none of which in and of themselves constitute fireworks, or the
processing of fireworks.
      (20)   "Novelties" and "trick noisemakers."
         A.   Devices that produce a small report intended to surprise the
user, including but not limited to booby traps, cigarette loads, party poppers,
and snappers;
         B.   Snakes or glow worms;
         C.   Smoke devices;
         D.   Trick matches.
      (21)   "Party popper."  A small plastic or paper item that contains not
more than 16 milligrams of friction-sensitive explosive composition that is
ignited by pulling a string protruding from the item, and from which paper
streamers are expelled when the item is ignited.
      (22)   "Processing of fireworks."  The making of fireworks from materials
all or part of which in and of themselves constitute fireworks, but does not
include the mere packaging or repackaging of fireworks.
      (23)   "Railroad."  Any railway or railroad that carries freight or
passengers for hire, but does not include auxiliary tracks, spurs, and sidings
installed and primarily used in serving a mine, quarry or plant.
      (24)   "Retail sale" or "sell at retail."  A sale of fireworks to a
purchaser who intends to use the fireworks and not to resell them.
      (25)   "Smoke device."  A tube or sphere that contains pyrotechnic
composition that, upon ignition, produces white or colored smoke as the primary
effect.
      (26)   "Snake" or "glow worm."  A device that consists of a pressed
pellet of pyrotechnic composition that produces a large snake-like ash upon
burning, which ash expands in length as the pellet burns.
      (27)   "Snapper."  A small paper-wrapped item that contains a minute
quantity of explosive composition coated on small bits of sand and that, when
dropped, implodes.
      (28)   "Storage location." A single parcel or contiguous parcels of real
estate approved by the Fire Marshal pursuant to Ohio R.C. 3743.04(I) or Ohio
R.C. 3743.17(G) that are separate from a licensed premises containing a retail
showroom, and which parcel or parcels a licensed manufacturer or wholesaler of
fireworks may use only for the distribution, possession, and storage of
fireworks in accordance with this chapter.
      (29)   "Trick match."  A kitchen or book match that is coated with a
small quantity of explosive composition and that, upon ignition, produces a
small report or a shower of sparks.
      (30)   "Wholesale sale" or "sell at wholesale."  A sale of fireworks to a
purchaser who intends to resell the fireworks so purchased.
      (31)   "Wire sparkler."  A sparkler consisting of a wire or stick coated
with a nonexplosive pyrotechnic mixture that produces a shower of sparks upon
ignition and that contains no more than 100 grams of this mixture.
(ORC 3743.01)
   (b)   Manufacturing.
      (1)   No licensed manufacturer of fireworks shall knowingly fail to
comply with the rules adopted by the state Fire Marshal pursuant to Ohio R.C.
3743.05 or the requirements of Ohio R.C. 3743.06.
      (2)   No licensed manufacturer of fireworks shall fail to maintain
complete inventory, wholesale sale and retail records as required by Ohio R.C.
3743.07, or to permit an inspection of these records or the premises of a
fireworks plant or the wholesaler pursuant to Ohio R.C. 3743.08.
      (3)   No licensed manufacturer of fireworks shall fail to comply with an
order of the state Fire Marshal issued pursuant to Ohio R.C. 3743.08(B)(1)
within the specified period of time.
      (4)   No licensed manufacturer of fireworks shall fail to comply with an
order of the state Fire Marshal issued pursuant to Ohio R.C. 3743.08(B)(2)
until the nonconformities are eliminated, corrected or otherwise remedied or
the 72-hour period specified in those subsections has expired, whichever occurs
first.
      (5)   No person shall smoke or shall carry a pipe, cigarette, or cigar,
or a match, lighter, other flame-producing item, or open flame on, or shall
carry a concealed source of ignition into, the premises of a fireworks plant,
except as smoking is authorized in specified lunchrooms or restrooms by a
manufacturer pursuant to Ohio R.C. 3743.06(C).
      (6)   No person shall have possession or control of, or be under the
influence of, any intoxicating liquor, beer, or controlled substance while on
the premises of a fireworks plant.
(ORC 3743.60(E) - (J))
   (c)   Wholesaling.
      (1)   No licensed wholesaler of fireworks shall knowingly fail to comply
with the rules adopted by the state Fire Marshal pursuant to Ohio R.C. 3743.18
or the requirements of Ohio R.C. 3743.19.
      (2)   No licensed wholesaler of fireworks shall fail to maintain complete
inventory, wholesale sale and retail records as required by Ohio R.C. 3743.20,
or to permit an inspection of these records or the premises of a fireworks
plant or the wholesaler pursuant to Ohio R.C. 3743.21.
      (3)   No licensed wholesaler of fireworks shall fail to comply with an
order of the state Fire Marshal issued pursuant to Ohio R.C. 3743.21(B)(1)
within the specified period of time.
      (4)   No licensed wholesaler of fireworks shall fail to comply with an
order of the state Fire Marshal issued pursuant to Ohio R.C. 3743.21(B)(2)
until the nonconformities are eliminated, corrected or otherwise remedied or
the 72-hour period specified in those subsections has expired, whichever occurs
first.
      (5)   No person shall smoke or shall carry a pipe, cigarette, or cigar,
or a match, lighter, other flame-producing item, or open flame on, or shall
carry a concealed source of ignition into, the premises of a wholesaler of
fireworks, except as smoking is authorized in specified lunchrooms or restrooms
by a wholesaler pursuant to Ohio R.C. 3743.19(D).
      (6)   No person shall have possession or control of, or be under the
influence of, any intoxicating liquor, beer, or controlled substance while on
the premises of a wholesaler of fireworks.
(ORC 3743.61(E) - (J))
   (d)   Purchasing and transporting.
      (1)   No person who resides in another state and purchases fireworks in
this state shall obtain possession of the fireworks in this state unless the
person complies with Ohio R.C. 3743.44.
      (2)   No person who resides in another state and who purchases fireworks
in this state shall obtain possession of fireworks in this state other than
from a licensed manufacturer or wholesaler, or fail, when transporting 1.3G
fireworks, to transport them directly out of this state within 72 hours after
the time of their purchase. No such person shall give or sell to any other
person in this state fireworks that the person has acquired in this state.
      (3)   No person who resides in this state and purchases fireworks in this
state shall obtain possession of the fireworks in this state unless the person
complies with Ohio R.C. 3743.45.
      (4)   No person who resides in this state and who purchases fireworks in
this state under Ohio R.C. 3743.45 shall obtain possession of the fireworks in
this state other than from a licensed manufacturer or licensed wholesaler, or
fail, when transporting the fireworks, to transport them directly out of this
state within 48 hours after the time of their purchase. No such person shall
give or sell to any other person in this state fireworks that the person has
acquired in this state.
(ORC 3743.63)
   (e)   Prohibited activities by exhibitors.
      (1)   An exhibitor of fireworks licensed under Ohio R.C. 3743.50 through
3743.55 who wishes to conduct a public fireworks exhibition shall apply for
approval to conduct the exhibition to the Fire Chief or fire prevention officer
and to the Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer, or the
designee of the Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer,
having jurisdiction over the premises.
      (2)   The approval required by subsection (e)(1) of this section shall be
evidenced by the Fire Chief or fire prevention officer and by the Police Chief
or other similar chief law enforcement officer, or the designee of the Police
Chief or similar chief law enforcement officer, signing a permit for the
exhibition. Any exhibitor of fireworks who wishes to conduct a public fireworks
exhibition may obtain a copy of the form from the state Fire Marshal or, if
available, from the Fire Chief, a fire prevention officer, the Police Chief or
other similar chief law enforcement officer, or a designee of the Police Chief
or other similar chief law enforcement officer.
      (3)   Before a permit is signed and issued to a licensed exhibitor of
fireworks, the Fire Chief or fire prevention officer, in consultation with the
Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer, or the designee of
the Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer, shall inspect
the premises on which the exhibition will take place and shall determine that,
in fact, the applicant for the permit is a licensed exhibitor of fireworks.
Each applicant shall show his or her license as an exhibitor of fireworks to
the Fire Chief or fire prevention officer.
      (4)   The Fire Chief or fire prevention officer and the Police Chief or
other similar chief law enforcement officer, or the designee of the Police
Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer, shall give approval to
conduct a public fireworks exhibition only if satisfied, based on the
inspection, that the premises on which the exhibition will be conducted allow
the exhibitor to comply with the rules adopted by the state Fire Marshal
pursuant to Ohio R.C. 3743.53(B) and (E) and that the applicant is, in fact, a
licensed exhibitor of fireworks. The Fire Chief or fire prevention officer, in
consultation with  the Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement
officer or with the designee of the Police Chief or other similar chief law
enforcement officer, may inspect the premises immediately prior to the
exhibition to determine if the exhibitor has complied with the rules, and may
revoke a permit for noncompliance with the rules.
      (5)   If the Council has prescribed a fee for the issuance of a permit
for a public fireworks exhibition, the Fire Chief or fire prevention officer
and Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer, or their
designee, shall not issue a permit until the exhibitor pays the requisite fee.
      (6)   Each exhibitor shall provide an indemnity bond in the amount of at
least one million dollars with surety satisfactory to the Fire Chief or fire
prevention officer and to the Police Chief or other similar chief law
enforcement officer, or the designee of the Police Chief or other similar chief
law enforcement officer, conditioned for the payment of all final judgments
that may be rendered against the exhibitor on account of injury, death, or loss
to person or property emanating from the fireworks exhibitor, or proof of
insurance coverage of at least one million dollars for liability arising from
injury, death, or loss of persons or property emanating from the fireworks
exhibition. The Council may require the exhibitor to provide an indemnity bond
or proof of insurance coverage in amounts greater than those required by this
subsection. The Fire Chief or fire prevention officer and Police Chief or other
similar chief law enforcement officer, or their designee, shall not issue a
permit until the exhibitor provides the bond or proof of the insurance coverage
required by this subsection or by the Council.
      (7)   Each permit for a fireworks exhibition issued by the Fire Chief or
fire prevention officer and by the Police Chief or other similar chief law
enforcement officer, or the designee of the Police Chief or other similar chief
law enforcement officer, shall contain a distinct number, designate the
municipality, and identify the certified fire safety inspector, Fire Chief, or
fire prevention officer who will be present before, during and after the
exhibition, where appropriate. A copy of each permit issued shall be forwarded
by the Fire Chief or fire prevention officer and by the Police Chief or other
similar chief law enforcement officer, or designee of the Police Chief or other
similar chief law enforcement officer, issuing it to the state Fire Marshal. A
permit is not transferable or assignable.
      (8)   The Fire Chief or fire prevention officer and Police Chief or other
similar chief law enforcement officer, or designee of the Police Chief or other
similar chief law enforcement officer, shall keep a record of issued permits
for fireworks exhibitions. In this list, the Fire Chief, fire prevention
officer, Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer, or
designee of the Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer,
shall list the name of the exhibitor, his or her license number, the premises
on which the exhibition will be conducted, the date and time of the exhibition,
and the number and political subsubsection designation of the permit issued to
the exhibitor for the exhibition.
      (9)   The Council shall require that a certified fire safety inspector,
Fire Chief or fire prevention officer be present before, during and after the
exhibition, and shall require the certified fire safety inspector, Fire Chief
or fire prevention officer to inspect the premises where the exhibition is to
take place and determine whether the exhibition is in compliance with this
section and Ohio R.C. Chapter 3743.
(ORC 3743.54)
      (10)   No licensed exhibitor of fireworks shall fail to comply with the
applicable requirements of the rules adopted by the state Fire Marshal pursuant
to Ohio R.C. 3743.53(B) and (E) or to comply with Ohio R.C. 3743.53(C) and (D).
      (11)   No licensed exhibitor of fireworks shall conduct a fireworks
exhibition unless a permit has been secured for the exhibition pursuant to Ohio
R.C. 3743.54 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, or if a permit
so secured is revoked by a Fire Chief or fire prevention officer, in
consultation with a Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement
officer, or with a designee of a Police Chief or other similar chief law
enforcement officer, pursuant to those sections.
      (12)   No licensed exhibitor of fireworks shall acquire fireworks for use
at a fireworks exhibition other than in accordance with Ohio R.C. 3743.54 and
3743.55, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
      (13)   No licensed exhibitor of fireworks or other person associated with
the conduct of a fireworks exhibition shall have possession or control of, or
be under the influence of, any intoxicating liquor, beer, or controlled
substance while on the premises on which the exhibition is being conducted.
      (14)   No licensed exhibitor of fireworks shall permit an employee to
assist the licensed exhibitor in conducting fireworks exhibitions unless the
employee is registered with the state Fire Marshal under Ohio R.C. 3743.56.
(ORC 3743.64)
   (f)   Possession, sale, discharge and advertising; falsification.
      (1)   No person shall possess fireworks in this municipality or shall
possess for sale or sell fireworks in this municipality, except a licensed
manufacturer of fireworks as authorized by Ohio R.C. 3743.02 through 3743.08, a
licensed wholesaler of fireworks as authorized by Ohio R.C. 3743.15 through
3743.21, a shipping permit holder as authorized by Ohio R.C. 3743.40, an out-
of-state resident as authorized by Ohio R.C. 3743.44, a resident of this state
as authorized by Ohio R.C. 3743.45, or a licensed exhibitor of fireworks as
authorized by Ohio R.C. 3743.50 through 3743.55, or as authorized by any
municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to any of these statutes,
and except as provided in Ohio R.C. 3743.80 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance.
      (2)   Except as provided in Ohio R.C. 3743.80 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, and except for licensed exhibitors of fireworks
authorized to conduct a fireworks exhibition pursuant to Ohio R.C. 3743.50
through 3743.55 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, no person
shall discharge, ignite, or explode any fireworks in this municipality.
      (3)   No person shall use in a theater or public hall what is technically
known as fireworks showers, or a mixture containing potassium chlorate and
sulphur.
      (4)   No person shall sell fireworks of any kind to a person under 18
years of age.  No person under 18 years of age shall enter a fireworks sales
showroom unless that person is accompanied by a parent, legal guardian, or
other responsible adult. No person under 18 years of age shall touch or possess
fireworks on a licensed premises without the consent of the licensee. A
licensee may eject any person from a licensed premises that is in any way
disruptive to the safe operation of the premises.
      (5)   Except as otherwise provided in Ohio R.C. 3743.44, no person, other
than a licensed manufacturer, licensed wholesaler, licensed exhibitor, or
shipping permit holder shall possess 1.3G fireworks in this municipality.
(ORC 3743.65(A) - (E))
   (g)   Transporting and shipping.
      (1)   No person shall transport fireworks in this municipality except in
accordance with the rules adopted by the state Fire Marshal pursuant to Ohio
R.C. 3743.58.
      (2)   As used in this subsection, "fireworks" includes only 1.3G and 1.4G
fireworks. No person shall ship fireworks into this municipality by mail,
parcel post, or common carrier unless the person possesses a valid shipping
permit issued under Ohio R.C. 3743.40, and the fireworks are shipped directly
to the holder of a license issued under Ohio R.C. 3743.03, 3743.16 or 3743.51.
      (3)   No person shall ship fireworks within this municipality by mail,
parcel post, or common carrier unless the fireworks are shipped directly to the
holder of a license issued under Ohio R.C. 3743.01, 3743.16 or 3743.51.
(ORC 3743.66)
   (h)   Exceptions. This section does not prohibit or apply to the following:
      (1)   The manufacture, sale, possession, transportation, storage, or use
in emergency situations of pyrotechnic signaling devices and distress signals
for marine, aviation, or highway use;
      (2)   The manufacture, sale, possession, transportation, storage or use
of fusees, torpedoes, or other signals necessary for the safe operation of
railroads;
      (3)   The manufacture, sale, possession, transportation, storage or use
of blank cartridges in connection with theaters or shows, or in connection with
athletics as signals for ceremonial purposes;
      (4)   The manufacture for, the transportation, storage, possession or use
by, or the sale to the armed forces of the United States and the militia of
this state of pyrotechnic devices;
      (5)   The manufacture, sale, possession, transportation, storage or use
of toy pistols, toy canes, toy guns, or other devices in which paper or plastic
caps containing 0.25 grains or less of explosive material are used, provided
that they are constructed so that a hand cannot come into contact with a cap
when it is in place for explosion, or apply to the manufacture, sale,
possession, transportation, storage or use of those caps;
      (6)   The manufacture, sale, possession, transportation, storage or use
of novelties and trick noisemakers, auto burglar alarms, or model rockets and
model rocket motors designed, sold, and used for the purpose of propelling
recoverable aero models;
      (7)   The manufacture, sale, possession, transportation, storage or use
of wire sparklers;
      (8)   The conduct of radio-controlled special effect exhibitions that use
an explosive black powder charge of not more than one-quarter pound per charge,
and that are not connected in any manner to propellant charges; provided, that
the exhibition complies with all of the following:
         A.   No explosive aerial display is conducted in the exhibition;
         B.   The exhibition is separated from spectators by not less than 200
feet;
         C.   The person conducting the exhibition complies with regulations of
the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms of the United States Department of
the Treasury and the United States Department of Transportation with respect to
the storage and transport of the explosive black powder used in the exhibition.
(ORC 3743.80)
   (i)   Forfeiture and disposal. Fireworks manufactured, sold, possessed,
transported, or used in violation of this section shall be forfeited by the
offender. The Fire Marshal's office or certified fire safety inspector's office
shall dispose of seized fireworks pursuant to the procedures specified in Ohio
R.C. 2981.11 to 2981.13 for the disposal of forfeited property by law
enforcement agencies, and the Fire Marshal or that office is not liable for
claims for the loss of or damages to the seized fireworks.
(ORC 3743.68(B))
   (j)   Penalty.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in subsection (j)(2) or (j)(3) of this
section, whoever violates any provisions of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (2)   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty
to a violation of Ohio R.C. 3743.60(I) or Ohio R.C. 3743.61(I), or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, a violation of subsection (b)(5)
of this section or subsection (c)(5) of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (3)   Whoever violates subsection (e)(10) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree. In addition to any other penalties that may be
imposed on a licensed exhibitor of fireworks under this subsection and unless
the third sentence of this subsection applies, the person's license as an
exhibitor of fireworks or as an assistant exhibitor of fireworks shall be
suspended, and the person is ineligible to apply for either type of license,
for a period of five years. If the violation of subsection (e)(10) of this
section results in serious physical harm to persons or serious physical harm to
property, the person's license as an exhibitor of fireworks or as an assistant
exhibitor of fireworks shall be revoked, and that person is ineligible to apply
for a license as or to be licensed as an exhibitor of fireworks or as an
assistant exhibitor of fireworks in this state.
(ORC 3743.99(C), (D))
§ 672.11  FIREWORKS DISPLAY PERMITS.(Repealed)
Editor's note:
   Section
672.11 was repealed as part of the 1987 updating and revision of these Codified
Ordinances because substantially identical state law (Ohio R.C. 3743.33) was
repealed by Am. S.B. No. 61, effective May 30, 1986, December 1, 1986, and
January 1, 1987.  See §
672.10.
§ 672.12  POINTING AND DISCHARGING FIREARMS AND OTHER WEAPONS.
   (a)   Except as provided in subsections (c) and (d) of this section, no
person shall discharge any air gun, rifle, shotgun, revolver, pistol or other
firearm, or make use of any sling or arrow, within the corporate limits of the
municipality.
   (b)   No person shall, intentionally and without malice, point or aim a
firearm at or toward another or discharge a firearm so pointed or aimed.
   (c)   This section does not extend to cases in which firearms, slings or
arrows are used in self-defense, in the discharge of official duty or in
justifiable homicide.
   (d)   This section does not extend to cases in which BB guns and other air
guns, or slings or arrows, are used in the confines of dwellings, provided such
use is under adult supervision and is approved by the Chief of Police.
   (e)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
§ 672.13  ENDANGERING AIRCRAFT AND AIRPORT OPERATIONS.
   (a)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   "Air gun." A hand pistol or rifle that propels its projectile by
means of releasing compressed air, carbon dioxide, or other gas.
      (2)   "Airport operational surface."  Any surface of land or water that
is developed, posted, or marked so as to give an observer reasonable notice
that the surface is designed and developed for the purpose of storing, parking,
taxiing, or operating aircraft, or any surface of land or water that is
actually being used for any of those purposes.
      (3)   "Firearm."  Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2923.11.
      (4)   "Spring-operated gun."  A hand pistol or rifle that propels a
projectile not less than four or more than five millimeters in diameter by
means of a spring.
   (b)   No person shall do either of the following:
      (1)   Knowingly throw an object at, or drop an object upon, any moving
aircraft.
      (2)   Knowingly shoot with a bow and arrow, or knowingly discharge a
firearm, air gun, or spring-operated gun, at or toward any aircraft.
   (c)   No person shall knowingly or recklessly shoot with a bow and arrow, or
shall knowingly or recklessly discharge a firearm, air gun, or spring-operated
gun, upon or over any airport operational surface. This subsection does not
apply to the following:
      (1)   An officer, agent, or employee of this or any other state or of the
United States, or a law enforcement officer, authorized to discharge firearms
and acting within the scope of his or her duties.
      (2)   A person who, with the consent of the owner or operator of the
airport operational surface or the authorized agent of either, is lawfully
engaged in any hunting or sporting activity or is otherwise lawfully
discharging a firearm.
   (d)   Whoever violates subsection (b) of this section is guilty of
endangering aircraft, a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the violation
creates any risk of physical harm to any person, or if the aircraft that is the
subject of the violation is occupied, endangering aircraft is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (e)   Whoever violates subsection (c) of this section is guilty of
endangering airport operations, a misdemeanor of the second degree. If the
violation creates a risk of physical harm to any person or substantial risk of
serious harm to any person, endangering airport operations is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law. In addition to any other penalty or
sanction imposed for the violation, the hunting license or permit of a person
who violates subsection (c) of this section while hunting shall be suspended or
revoked pursuant to Ohio R.C. 1533.68.
(ORC 2909.08(A) - (E))
§ 672.14  POSSESSING CRIMINAL TOOLS.
   (a)   No person shall possess or have under his or her control any
substance, device, instrument, or article, with purpose to use it criminally.
   (b)   Each of the following constitutes prima facie evidence of criminal
purpose:
      (1)   Possession or control of any dangerous ordnance, or the materials
or parts for making a dangerous ordnance, in the absence of circumstances
indicating the dangerous ordnance, materials or parts are intended for a
legitimate use.
      (2)   Possession or control of any substance, device, instrument, or
article designed or specially adapted for criminal use.
      (3)   Possession or control of any substance, device, instrument, or
article commonly used for criminal purposes, under circumstances indicating the
item is intended for criminal use.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of possessing criminal tools.
Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, possessing criminal tools is a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If the circumstances indicate that the
substance, device, instrument, or article involved in the offense was intended
for use in the commission of a felony, possessing criminal tools is a felony to
be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(ORC 2923.24)
§ 672.15  POSSESSION OF AN OBJECT INDISTINGUISHABLE FROM A FIREARM IN A SCHOOL
SAFETY ZONE.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly possess an object in a school safety zone if
both of the following apply:
      (1)   The object is indistinguishable from a firearm, whether or not the
object is capable of being fired.
      (2)   The person indicates that the person possesses the object and that
it is a firearm, or the person knowingly displays or brandishes the object and
indicates that it is a firearm.
   (b)   (1)   This section does not apply to any of the following:
         A.   An officer, agent, or employee of this or any other state or the
United States who is authorized to carry deadly weapons or dangerous ordnance
and is acting within the scope of the officer’s, agent’s, or employee’s duties,
a law enforcement officer who is authorized to carry deadly weapons or
dangerous ordnance, a security officer employed by a board of education or
governing body of a school during the time that the security officer is on duty
pursuant to that contract of employment, or any other person who has written
authorization from the board of education or governing body of a school to
convey deadly weapons or dangerous ordnance into a school safety zone or to
possess a deadly weapon or dangerous ordnance in a school safety zone and who
conveys or possesses the deadly weapon or dangerous ordnance in accordance with
that authorization;
         B.   Any person who is employed in this state, who is authorized to
carry deadly weapons or dangerous ordnance, and who is subject to and in
compliance with the requirements of Ohio R.C. 109.801, unless the appointing
authority of the person has expressly specified that the exemption provided in
this subsection (b)(1)B. does not apply to the person.
      (2)   This section does not apply to premises upon which home schooling
is conducted. This section also does not apply to a school administrator,
teacher or employee who possesses an object that is indistinguishable from a
firearm for legitimate school purposes during the course of employment, a
student who uses an object that is indistinguishable from a firearm under the
direction of a school administrator, teacher or employee, or any other person
who, with the express prior approval of a school administrator, possesses an
object that is indistinguishable from a firearm for a legitimate purpose,
including the use of the object in a ceremonial activity, a play, re-enactment
or other dramatic presentation, school safety training, or a ROTC activity or
another similar use of the object.
      (3)   This section does not apply to a person who conveys or attempts to
convey a handgun into, or possesses a handgun in, a school safety zone if, at
the time of that conveyance, attempted conveyance, or possession of the
handgun, all of the following apply:
         A.   The person does not enter into a school building or onto school
premises and is not at a school activity.
         B.   The person is carrying a valid concealed handgun license or the
person is an active duty member of the armed forces of the United States and is
carrying a valid military identification card and documentation of successful
completion of firearms training that meets or exceeds the training requirements
described in R.C. § 2923.125(G)(1).
         C.   The person is in the school safety zone in accordance with 18
U.S.C. 922(q)(2)(B).
         D.   The person is not knowingly in a place described in Ohio R.C.
2923.126(B)(1) or (B)(3) to (B)(8).
      (4)   This section does not apply to a person who conveys or attempts to
convey a handgun into, or possesses a handgun in, a school safety zone if at
the time of that conveyance, attempted conveyance, or possession of the handgun
all of the following apply:
         A.   The person is carrying a valid concealed handgun license or the
person is an active duty member of the armed forces of the United States and is
carrying a valid military identification card and documentation of successful
completion of firearms training that meets or exceeds the training requirements
described in R.C. § 2923.125(G)(1).
         B.   The person leaves the handgun in a motor vehicle.
         C.   The handgun does not leave the motor vehicle.
         D.   If the person exits the motor vehicle, the person locks the motor
vehicle.
   (c)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of illegal possession of an
object indistinguishable from a firearm in a school safety zone. Except as
otherwise provided in this subsection, illegal possession of an object
indistinguishable from a firearm in a school safety zone is a misdemeanor of
the first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of a violation
of this section, illegal possession of an object indistinguishable from a
firearm in a school safety zone is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
   (d)   (1)   In addition to any other penalty imposed upon a person who is
convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of this section, and subject to
subsection (d)(2) of this section, if the offender has not attained 19 years of
age, regardless of whether the offender is attending or is enrolled in a school
operated by a board of education or for which the state Board of Education
prescribes minimum standards under Ohio R.C. 3301.07, the court shall impose
upon the offender a class four suspension of the offender's probationary
driver's license, restricted license, driver's license, commercial driver's
license, temporary instruction permit, or probationary commercial driver's
license that then is in effect from the range specified in Ohio R.C. 4510.02(A)
(4) and  shall deny the offender the issuance of any permit or license of that
type during the period of the suspension. If the offender is not a resident of
this state, the court shall impose a class four suspension of the nonresident
operating privilege of the offender from the range specified in Ohio R.C.
4510.02(A)(4).
      (2)   If the offender shows good cause why the court should not suspend
one of the types of licenses, permits or privileges specified in subsection (d)
(1) of this section or deny the issuance of one of the temporary instruction
permits specified in subsection (d)(1) of this section, the court in its
discretion may choose not to impose the suspension, revocation or denial
required in subsection (d)(1) of this section, but the court, in its
discretion, instead may require the offender to perform community service for a
number of hours determined by the court.
   (e)   As used in this section, "object that is indistinguishable from a
firearm" means an object made, constructed or altered so that, to a reasonable
person without specialized training in firearms, the object appears to be a
firearm.
(ORC 2923.122(C) - (G))
Statutory reference:
   Conveyance or possession of deadly weapons or dangerous ordnance in a school
safety zone, felony offense, see Ohio R.C. 2923.122(A), (B)
§ 672.16  CONCEALED HANDGUN LICENSES: POSSESSION OF A REVOKED OR SUSPENDED
LICENSE; ADDITIONAL RESTRICTIONS; POSTING OF SIGNS PROHIBITING POSSESSION.
   (a)   Possession of a revoked or suspended concealed handgun license.
      (1)   No person, except in the performance of official duties, shall
possess a concealed handgun license that was issued and that has been revoked
or suspended.
      (2)   Whoever violates this subsection (a) is guilty of possessing a
revoked or suspended concealed handgun license, a misdemeanor of the third
degree.
(ORC 2923.1211(B), (C))
   (b)   Additional restrictions. Pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2923.126:
      (1)   A.   A concealed handgun license that is issued under R.C. §
2923.125 shall expire five years after the date of issuance. A licensee who has
been issued a license under that section shall be granted a grace period of 30
days after the licensee’s license expires during which the licensee’s license
remains valid. Except as provided in divisions (b)(2) and (b)(3) of this
section, a licensee who has been issued a concealed handgun license under R.C.
§ 2923.125 or 2923.1213 may carry a concealed handgun anywhere in this state if
the licensee also carries a valid license and valid identification when the
licensee is in actual possession of a concealed handgun. The licensee shall
give notice of any change in the licensee’s residence address to the Sheriff
who issued the license within 45 days after that change.
         B.   If a licensee is the driver or an occupant of a motor vehicle
that is stopped as the result of a traffic stop or a stop for another law
enforcement purpose and if the licensee is transporting or has a loaded handgun
in the motor vehicle at that time, the licensee shall promptly inform any law
enforcement officer who approaches the vehicle while stopped that the licensee
has been issued a concealed handgun license and that the licensee currently
possesses or has a loaded handgun; the licensee shall not knowingly disregard
or fail to comply with lawful orders of a law enforcement officer given while
the motor vehicle is stopped, knowingly fail to remain in the motor vehicle
while stopped, or knowingly fail to keep the licensee’s hands in plain sight
after any law enforcement officer begins approaching the licensee while stopped
and before the officer leaves, unless directed otherwise by a law enforcement
officer; and the licensee shall not knowingly have contact with the loaded
handgun by touching it with the licensee’s hands or fingers, in any manner in
violation of R.C. § 2923.16(E), after any law enforcement officer begins
approaching the licensee while stopped and before the officer leaves.
Additionally, if a licensee is the driver or an occupant of a commercial motor
vehicle that is stopped by an employee of the motor carrier enforcement unit
for the purposes defined in R.C. § 5503.34 and if the licensee is transporting
or has a loaded handgun in the commercial motor vehicle at that time, the
licensee shall promptly inform the employee of the unit who approaches the
vehicle while stopped that the licensee has been issued a concealed handgun
license and that the licensee currently possesses or has a loaded handgun.
         C.   If a licensee is stopped for a law enforcement purpose and if the
licensee is carrying a concealed handgun at the time the officer approaches,
the licensee shall promptly inform any law enforcement officer who approaches
the licensee while stopped that the licensee has been issued a concealed
handgun license and that the licensee currently is carrying a concealed
handgun; the licensee shall not knowingly disregard or fail to comply with
lawful orders of a law enforcement officer given while the licensee is stopped
or knowingly fail to keep the licensee’s hands in plain sight after any law
enforcement officer begins approaching the licensee while stopped and before
the officer leaves, unless directed otherwise by a law enforcement officer; and
the licensee shall not knowingly remove, attempt to remove, grasp, or hold the
loaded handgun or knowingly have contact with the loaded handgun by touching it
with the licensee’s hands or fingers, in any manner in violation of Ohio R.C.
2923.12(B), after any law enforcement officer begins approaching the licensee
while stopped and before the officer leaves.
      (2)   A valid concealed handgun license does not authorize the licensee
to carry a concealed handgun in any manner prohibited under Ohio R.C. 2923.12
(B) or in any manner prohibited under Ohio R.C. 2923.16. A valid license does
not authorize the licensee to carry a concealed handgun into any of the
following places:
         A.   A police station, sheriff’s office, or state highway patrol
station, premises controlled by the bureau of criminal identification and
investigation; a state correctional institution, jail, workhouse, or other
detention facility; any area of an airport passenger terminal that is beyond a
passenger or property screening checkpoint or to which access is restricted
through security measures by the airport authority or a public agency; or an
institution that is maintained, operated, managed, and governed pursuant to
R.C. § 5119.14(A) or R.C. § 5123.03(A)(1);
         B.   A school safety zone, if the licensee’s carrying the concealed
handgun is in violation of Ohio R.C. 2923.122;
         C.   A courthouse or another building or structure in which a
courtroom is located, in violation of Ohio R.C. 2923.123;
         D.   Any premises or open air arena for which a D permit has been
issued under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4303 if the licensee’s carrying the concealed
handgun is in violation of Ohio R.C. 2923.121;
         E.   Any premises owned or leased by any public or private college,
university, or other institution of higher education, unless the handgun is in
a locked motor vehicle or the licensee is in the immediate process of placing
the handgun in a locked motor vehicle or unless the licensee is carrying the
concealed handgun pursuant to a written policy, rule, or other authorization
that is adopted by the institution’s board of trustees or other governing body
and that authorizes specific individuals or classes of individuals to carry a
concealed handgun on the premises;
         F.   Any church, synagogue, mosque, or other place of worship, unless
the church, synagogue, mosque, or other place of worship posts or permits
otherwise;
         G.   Any building that is  a government facility of this state or a
political subdivision of this state and that is not a building that is used
primarily as a shelter, restroom, parking facility for motor vehicles, or rest
facility and is not a courthouse or other building or structure in which a
courtroom is located that is subject to division (b)(2)C. of this section,
unless the governing body with authority over the building has enacted a
statute, ordinance, or policy that permits a licensee to carry a concealed
handgun into the building;
         H.   A place in which Federal law prohibits the carrying of handguns.
      (3)   A.   Nothing in this subsection (b) shall negate or restrict a
rule, policy, or practice of a private employer that is not a private college,
university, or other institution of higher education concerning or prohibiting
the presence of firearms on the private employer’s premises or property,
including motor vehicles owned by the private employer. Nothing in this
subsection (b) shall require a private employer of that nature to adopt a rule,
policy, or practice concerning or prohibiting the presence of firearms on the
private employer’s premises or property, including motor vehicles owned by the
private employer.
         B.   1.   A private employer shall be immune from liability in a civil
action for any injury, death, or loss to person or property that allegedly was
caused by or related to a licensee bringing a handgun onto the premises or
property of the private employer, including motor vehicles owned by the private
employer, unless the private employer acted with malicious purpose. A private
employer is immune from liability in a civil action for any injury, death, or
loss to person or property that allegedly was caused by or related to the
private employer’s decision to permit a licensee to bring, or prohibit a
licensee from bringing, a handgun onto the premises or property of the private
employer.
            2.   A political subsubsection shall be immune from liability in a
civil action, to the extent and in the manner provided in Ohio R.C. Chapter
2744, for any injury, death, or loss to person or property that allegedly was
caused by or related to a licensee bringing a handgun onto any premises or
property owned, leased, or otherwise under the control of the political
subsubsection. As used in this subsection, “political subsubsection” has the
same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2744.01.
            3.   An institution of higher education shall be immune from
liability in a civil action for any injury, death, or loss to person or
property that allegedly was caused by or related to a licensee bringing a
handgun onto the premises of the institution, including motor vehicles owned by
the institution, unless the institution acted with malicious purpose. An
institution of higher education is immune from liability in a civil action for
any injury, death, or loss to person or property that allegedly was caused by
or related to the institution’s decision to permit a licensee or class of
licensees to bring a handgun onto the premises of the institution.
         C.   1.   a.   Except as provided in division (b)(3)C.2. of this
section, the owner or person in control of private land or premises, and a
private person or entity leasing land or premises owned by the state, the
United States, or a political subdivision of the state or the United States,
may post a sign in a conspicuous location on that land or on those premises
prohibiting persons from carrying firearms or concealed firearms on or onto
that land or those premises. Except as otherwise provided in this division, a
person who knowingly violates a posted prohibition of that nature is guilty of
criminal trespass in violation of Ohio R.C. 2911.21(A)(4) and is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If a person knowingly violates a posted
prohibition of that nature and the posted land or premises primarily was a
parking lot or other parking facility, the person is not guilty of criminal
trespass under R.C. § 2911.21 or under any other criminal law of this state or
criminal law, ordinance, or resolution of a political subdivision of this
state, and instead is subject only to a civil cause of action for trespass
based on the violation.
               b.   If a person knowingly violates a posted prohibition of the
nature described in this division and the posted land or premises is a child
day-care center, type A family day-care home, or type B family day-care home,
unless the person is a licensee who resides in a type A family day-care home or
type B family day-care home, the person is guilty of aggravated trespass in
violation of R.C. § 2911.211. Except as otherwise provided in this division,
the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the person
previously has been convicted of a violation of this division or any
substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, or of any offense of
violence, if the weapon involved is a firearm that is either loaded or for
which the offender has ammunition ready at hand, or if the weapon involved is
dangerous ordnance, the offender is guilty of a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
            2.   A landlord may not prohibit or restrict a tenant who is a
licensee and who on or after September 9, 2008 enters into a rental agreement
with the landlord for the use of residential premises, and the tenant’s guest
while the tenant is present, from lawfully carrying or possessing a handgun on
those residential premises.
            3.   As used in division (b)(3)C. of this section:
               a.   “Residential premises” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C.
5321.01, except “residential premises” does not include a dwelling unit that is
owned or operated by a college or university.
               b.   “Landlord”, “tenant”, and “rental agreement” have the same
meanings as in Ohio R.C. 5321.01.
      (4)   A person who holds a valid concealed handgun license issued by
another state that is recognized by the Attorney General pursuant to a
reciprocity agreement entered into pursuant to Ohio R.C. 109.69 or a person who
holds a valid concealed handgun license under the circumstances described in
R.C. § 109.69(B)  has the same right to carry a concealed handgun in this state
as a person who was issued a concealed handgun license under Ohio R.C. 2923.125
and is subject to the same restrictions that apply to a person who carries a
license issued under that section.
      (5)   A.   A peace officer has the same right to carry a concealed
handgun in this state as a person who was issued a concealed handgun license
under Ohio R.C. 2923.125. For purposes of reciprocity with other states, a
peace officer shall be considered to be a licensee in this state.
         B.   An active duty member of the armed forces of the United States
who is carrying a valid military identification card and documentation of
successful completion of firearms training that meets or exceeds the training
requirements described in R.C. § 2923.125(G)(1) has the same right to carry a
concealed handgun in this state as a person who was issued a concealed handgun
license under R.C. § 2923.125 and is subject to the same restrictions as
specified in this division (b).
         C.   A tactical medical professional who is qualified to carry
firearms while on duty under R.C. § 109.771 has the same right to carry a
concealed handgun in this state as a person who was issued a concealed handgun
license under R.C. § 2923.125.
      (6)   A.   A qualified retired peace officer who possesses a retired
peace officer identification card issued pursuant to subsection (b)(6)B. of
this section and a valid firearms requalification certification issued pursuant
to subsection (b)(6)C. of this section has the same right to carry a concealed
handgun in this state as a person who was issued a concealed handgun license
under Ohio R.C. 2923.125 and is subject to the same restrictions that apply to
a person who carries a license issued under that section. For purposes of
reciprocity with other states, a qualified retired peace officer who possesses
a retired peace officer identification card issued pursuant to subsection (b)
(6)B. of this section and a valid firearms requalification certification issued
pursuant to subsection (b)(6)C. of this section shall be considered to be a
licensee in this state.
         B.   1.   Each public agency of this state or of a political
subsubsection of this state that is served by one or more peace officers shall
issue a retired peace officer identification card to any person who retired
from service as a peace officer with that agency, if the issuance is in
accordance with the agency’s policies and procedures and if the person, with
respect to the person’s service with that agency, satisfies all of the
following:
               a.   The person retired in good standing from service as a peace
officer with the public agency, and the retirement was not for reasons of
mental instability.
               b.   Before retiring from service as a peace officer with that
agency, the person was authorized to engage in or supervise the prevention,
detection, investigation, or prosecution of, or the incarceration of any person
for, any violation of law and the person had statutory powers of arrest.
               c.   At the time of the person’s retirement as a peace officer
with that agency, the person was trained and qualified to carry firearms in the
performance of the peace officer’s duties.
               d.   Before retiring from service as a peace officer with that
agency, the person was regularly employed as a peace officer for an aggregate
of 15 years or more, or, in the alternative, the person retired from service as
a peace officer with that agency, after completing any applicable probationary
period of that service, due to a service-connected disability, as determined by
the agency.
            2.   A retired peace officer identification card issued to a person
under subsection (b)(6)B.1. of this section shall identify the person by name,
contain a photograph of the person, identify the public agency of this state or
of the political subsubsection of this state from which the person retired as a
peace officer and that is issuing the identification card, and specify that the
person retired in good standing from service as a peace officer with the
issuing public agency and satisfies the criteria set forth in subsections (b)
(6)B.1.a. to (b)(6)B.1.d. of this section. In addition to the required content
specified in this subsection, a retired peace officer identification card
issued to a person under subsection (b)(6)B.1. of this section may include the
firearms requalification certification described in subsection (b)(6)C. of this
section, and if the identification card includes that certification, the
identification card shall serve as the firearms requalification certification
for the retired peace officer. If the issuing public agency issues credentials
to active law enforcement officers who serve the agency, the agency may comply
with subsection (b)(6)B.1. of this section by issuing the same credentials to
persons who retired from service as a peace officer with the agency and who
satisfy the criteria set forth in subsections (b)(6)B.1.a. to (b)(6)B.1.d. of
this section, provided that the credentials so issued to retired peace officers
are stamped with the word “RETIRED”.
            3.   A public agency of this state or of a political subsubsection
of this state may charge persons who retired from service as a peace officer
with the agency a reasonable fee for issuing to the person a retired peace
officer identification card pursuant to subsection (b)(6)B.1. of this section.
         C.   1.   If a person retired from service as a peace officer with a
public agency of this state or of a political subsubsection of this state and
the person satisfies the criteria set forth in subsections (b)(6)B.1.a. to (b)
(6)B.1.d. of this section, the public agency may provide the retired peace
officer with the opportunity to attend a firearms requalification program that
is approved for purposes of firearms requalification required under Ohio R.C.
109.801. The retired peace officer may be required to pay the cost of the
course.
            2.   If a retired peace officer who satisfies the criteria set
forth in subsections (b)(6)B.1.a. to (b)(6)B.1.d. of this section attends a
firearms requalification program that is approved for purposes of firearms
requalification required under Ohio R.C. 109.801, the retired peace officer’s
successful completion of the firearms requalification program requalifies the
retired peace officer for purposes of subsection (b)(6) of this section for
five years from the date on which the program was successfully completed, and
the requalification is valid during that five-year period. If a retired peace
officer who satisfies the criteria set forth in subsections (b)(6)B.1.a. to (b)
(6)B.1.d. of this section satisfactorily completes such a firearms
requalification program, the retired peace officer shall be issued a firearms
requalification certification that identifies the retired peace officer by
name, identifies the entity that taught the program, specifies that the retired
peace officer successfully completed the program, specifies the date on which
the course was successfully completed, and specifies that the requalification
is valid for five years from that date of successful completion. The firearms
requalification certification for a retired peace officer may be included in
the retired peace officer identification card issued to the retired peace
officer under subsection (b)(6)B. of this section.
            3.   A retired peace officer who attends a firearms requalification
program that is approved for purposes of firearms requalification required
under Ohio R.C. 109.801 may be required to pay the cost of the program.
      (7)   As used in subsection (b)(6) of this section:
         A.   “Governing body” has the same meaning as in R.C. § 154.01.
         B.   “Government facility of this State or a political subdivision of
this State” means any of the following:
            1.   A building or part of a building that is owned or leased by
the government of this State or a political subdivision of this State and where
employees of the government of this State or the political subdivision
regularly are present for the purpose of performing their official duties as
employees of the State or political subdivision;
            2.   The office of a deputy registrar serving pursuant to Ohio R.C.
Chapter 4503 that is used to perform deputy registrar functions.
         C.   “Qualified retired peace officer” means a person who satisfies
all of the following:
            1.   The person satisfies the criteria set forth in subsections (b)
(6)B.1.a. to (b)(6)B.1.d. of this section.
            2.   The person is not under the influence of alcohol or another
intoxicating or hallucinatory drug or substance.
            3.   The person is not prohibited by Federal law from receiving
firearms.
         D.   “Retired peace officer identification card” means an
identification card that is issued pursuant to subsection (b)(6)B. of this
section to a person who is a retired peace officer.
         E.   “Tactical medical professional” has the same meaning as in R.C. §
109.71.
(ORC 2923.126)
   (c)   Posting of signs prohibiting possession. Pursuant to Ohio R.C.
2923.1212:
      (1)   The following persons, boards, and entities, or designees, shall
post in the following locations a sign that contains a statement in
substantially the following form: “Unless otherwise authorized by law, pursuant
to the Ohio Revised Code, no person shall knowingly possess, have under the
person’s control, convey, or attempt to convey a deadly weapon or dangerous
ordnance onto these premises.”
         A.   The Director of Public Safety or the person or board charged with
the erection, maintenance, or repair of police stations, municipal jails, and
the municipal courthouse and courtrooms in a conspicuous location at all police
stations, municipal jails, and municipal courthouses and courtrooms;
         B.   The Sheriff or Sheriff’s designee who has charge of the Sheriff’s
office in a conspicuous location in that office;
         C.   The Superintendent of the state Highway Patrol or the
Superintendent’s designee in a conspicuous location at all state Highway Patrol
stations;
         D.   Each sheriff, chief of police, or person in charge of every
county, multi-county, municipal, municipal-county, or multi-county/municipal
jail or workhouse, community-based correctional facility, halfway house,
alternative residential facility, or other local or state correctional
institution or detention facility within the state, or that person’s designee,
in a conspicuous location at that facility under that person’s charge;
         E.   The board of trustees of a regional airport authority, chief
administrative officer of an airport facility, or other person in charge of an
airport facility in a conspicuous location at each airport facility under that
person’s control;
         F.   The officer or officer’s designee who has charge of a courthouse
or the building or structure in which a courtroom is located in a conspicuous
location in that building or structure;
         G.   The Superintendent of the Bureau of Criminal Identification and
Investigation or the Superintendent’s designee in a conspicuous location in all
premises controlled by that Bureau;
         H.   The owner, administrator or operator of a child day-care center,
a type A family day-care home, or a type B family day-care home;
         I.   The officer of this State or of a political subdivision of this
State, or the officer’s designee, who has charge of a building that is a
government facility of this State or the political subdivision of this State,
as defined in Ohio R.C. 2923.126, and that is not a building that is used
primarily as a shelter, restroom, parking facility for motor vehicles, or rest
facility and is not a courthouse or other building or structure in which a
courtroom is located that is subject to Ohio R.C. 2923.126(B)(3).
      (2)   The following boards, bodies, and persons, or designees, shall post
in the following locations a sign that contains a statement in substantially
the following form: “Unless otherwise authorized by law, pursuant to Ohio R.C.
2923.122, no person shall knowingly possess, have under the person’s control,
convey, or attempt to convey a deadly weapon or dangerous ordnance into a
school safety zone.”
         A.   A board of education of a city, local, exempted village, or joint
vocational school district or that board’s designee in a conspicuous location
in each building and on each parcel of real property owned or controlled by the
board;
         B.   A governing body of a school for which the state Board of
Education prescribes minimum standards under Ohio R.C. 3301.07 or that body’s
designee in a conspicuous location in each building and on each parcel of real
property owned or controlled by the school;
         C.   The principal or chief administrative officer of a nonpublic
school in a conspicuous location on property owned or controlled by that
nonpublic school.
(ORC 2923.1212)
§ 672.17  DEFACED FIREARMS.
   (a)   No person shall do either of the following:
      (1)   Change, alter, remove, or obliterate the name of the manufacturer,
model, manufacturer's serial number, or other mark of identification on a
firearm.
      (2)   Possess a firearm knowing or having reasonable cause to believe
that the name of the manufacturer, model, manufacturer's serial number, or
other mark of identification on the firearm has been changed, altered, removed,
or obliterated.
   (b)   (1)   Whoever violates subsection (a)(1) of this section is guilty of
defacing identification marks of a firearm. Except as otherwise provided in
this subsection, defacing identification marks of a firearm is a misdemeanor of
the first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of subsection (a)(1) of this section, defacing
identification marks of a firearm is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
      (2)   Whoever violates subsection (a)(2) of this section is guilty of
possessing a defaced firearm. Except as otherwise provided in this subsection,
possessing a defaced firearm is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the
offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of
subsection (a)(2) of this section, possessing a defaced firearm is a felony to
be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (c)   Division (a) of this section does not apply to any firearm on which no
manufacturer's serial number was inscribed at the time of its manufacture.
(ORC 2923.201)
CHAPTER 698:  PENALTIES AND SENTENCING
Section
698.01   Definitions.
698.02   Penalties for misdemeanor.
698.03   Imposing sentence for misdemeanor.
698.04   Organizational penalties.
698.05   Multiple sentences.
698.06   Modification of sentence. (Repealed)
698.07   Suspension of driver's license.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Administration, enforcement and public service - see GEN. OFF.
Ch. 606
   Burden and degree of proof - see Ohio R.C. 2901.05
   Classification of offenses - see GEN. OFF.
606.03
   Criminal law jurisdiction - see GEN. OFF.
606.055
   Criteria for probation; conditions for probation - see Ohio R.C. 2951.02
   Culpable mental states - see GEN. OFF.
606.02
   Definition of "imprisoned" - see Ohio R.C. 1.05
   Definitions generally - see GEN. OFF.
606.01
   Degree of offense; charge and verdict; prior conviction - see Ohio R.C.
2945.75
   General provisions; administration and enforcement - see GEN. OFF.
Ch. 606
   Limitation on prosecutions - see GEN. OFF.
606.06
   Obstructing justice - see GEN. OFF.
606.15
   Offenses defined - see GEN. OFF.
606.04
   Organizational criminal liability - see GEN. OFF.
606.08
   Payment of costs and expenses on change of venue - see Ohio R.C. 2931.31
   Personal accountability for organizational conduct - see GEN. OFF.
606.09
   Procedure on change of venue - see Ohio R.C. 2931.29
   Requirements for criminal liability - see GEN. OFF.
606.07
   Rules of construction - see GEN. OFF.
606.05
   Satisfaction of fine; credit for time served - see Ohio R.C. 2947.14
   See section histories for similar state law
   Sentencing for sexually oriented offenses; sexual predators; registration -
see GEN. OFF.
666.99
   Transfer of prisoner on change of venue - see Ohio R.C. 2931.30
   Treatment of drug dependent persons in lieu of conviction - see Ohio R.C.
2951.041
   Venue - see Ohio R.C. 2901.12
§ 698.01  DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this chapter:
   (a)   "Dangerous offender" means a person who has committed an offense,
whose history, character and condition reveal a substantial risk that he or she
will be a danger to others, and whose conduct has been characterized by a
pattern of repetitive, compulsive or aggressive behavior with heedless
indifference to the consequences.
   (b)   "Repeat offender" means a person who has a history of persistent
criminal activity and whose character and condition reveal a substantial risk
that he or she will commit another offense. It is prima facie evidence that a
person is a repeat offender if any of the following applies:
      (1)   Having been convicted of one or more offenses of violence, as
defined in Ohio R.C. 2901.01, and having been imprisoned pursuant to sentence
for one or more of those offenses, the person commits a subsequent offense of
violence;
      (2)   Having been convicted of one or more sexually oriented offenses, as
defined in Ohio R.C. 2950.01, and having been imprisoned pursuant to sentence
for one or more of those offenses, the person commits a subsequent sexually
oriented offense;
      (3)   Having been convicted of one or more theft offenses, as defined in
Ohio R.C. 2913.01, and having been imprisoned pursuant to sentence for one or
more of those offenses, the person commits a subsequent theft offense;
      (4)   Having been convicted of one or more felony drug abuse offenses, as
defined in Ohio R.C. 2925.01, and having been imprisoned pursuant to sentence
for one or more of those offenses, the person commits a subsequent felony drug
abuse offense;
      (5)   Having been convicted of two or more felonies, and having been
imprisoned pursuant to sentence for any such offense, the person commits a
subsequent offense;
      (6)   Having been convicted of three or more offenses of any type or
degree other than traffic offenses, alcoholic intoxication offenses, or minor
misdemeanors, and having been imprisoned pursuant to sentence for any such
offense, the person commits a subsequent offense.
(ORC 2935.36(E))
§ 698.02  PENALTIES FOR MISDEMEANOR.
   (a)   Considerations in misdemeanor sentencing.
      (1)   A court that sentences an offender for a misdemeanor or minor
misdemeanor violation of any provision of the Ohio Revised Code, or of any
municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to a misdemeanor or minor
misdemeanor violation of a provision of the Ohio Revised Code, shall be guided
by the overriding purposes of misdemeanor sentencing. The overriding purposes
of misdemeanor sentencing are to protect the public from future crime by the
offender and others and to punish the offender. To achieve those purposes, the
sentencing court shall consider the impact of the offense upon the victim and
the need for changing the offender's behavior, rehabilitating the defender, and
making restitution to the victim of the offense, the public, or the victim and
the public.
      (2)   A sentence imposed for a misdemeanor or minor misdemeanor violation
of an Ohio Revised Code provision or for a violation of a municipal ordinance
that is subject to subsection (a)(1) of this section shall be reasonably
calculated to achieve the two overriding purposes of misdemeanor sentencing set
forth in subsection (a)(1) of this section, commensurate with and not demeaning
to the seriousness of the offender's conduct and its impact upon the victim,
and consistent with sentences imposed for similar offenses committed by similar
offenders.
      (3)   A court that imposes a sentence upon an offender for a misdemeanor
or minor misdemeanor violation of an Ohio Revised Code provision or for a
violation of a municipal ordinance that is subject to subsection (a)(1) of this
section shall not base the sentence upon the race, ethnic background, gender,
or religion of the offender.
      (4)   Divisions (a)(1) and (a)(2) of this section shall not apply to any
offense that is disposed of by a traffic violations bureau of any court
pursuant to Traffic Rule 13 and shall not apply to any violation of any
provision of the Ohio Revised Code that is a minor misdemeanor and that is
disposed of without a court appearance. Divisions (a)(1) to (a)(3) of this
section do not affect any penalties established by the municipality for a
violation of its ordinances that are not substantially equivalent to a
misdemeanor or minor misdemeanor violation of a provision of the Ohio Revised
Code.
(ORC 2929.21)
   (b)   Misdemeanor jail terms.
      (1)   Except as provided in §§
666.99 or
698.03 of this Code or Ohio R.C. 2929.22 or 2929.23 or division (b)(5) or (b)
(6) of this section and unless another term is required or authorized pursuant
to law, if the sentencing court imposing a sentence upon an offender for a
misdemeanor elects or is required to impose a jail term on the offender
pursuant to this chapter, the court shall impose a definite jail term that
shall be one of the following:
         A.   For a misdemeanor of the first degree, not more than 180 days;
         B.   For a misdemeanor of the second degree, not more than 90 days;
         C.   For a misdemeanor of the third degree, not more than 60 days;
         D.   For a misdemeanor of the fourth degree, not more than 30 days.
      (2)   A.   A court that sentences an offender to a jail term under
subsection (b) of this section may permit the offender to serve the sentence in
intermittent confinement or may authorize a limited release of the offender as
provided in subsection (d)(2) of this section.  The court retains jurisdiction
over every offender sentenced to jail to modify the jail sentence imposed at
any time, but the court shall not reduce any mandatory jail term.
         B.   1.   If a prosecutor, as defined in Ohio R.C. 2935.01, has filed
a notice with the court that the prosecutor wants to be notified about a
particular case and if the court is considering modifying the jail sentence of
the offender in that case, the court shall notify the prosecutor that the court
is considering modifying the jail sentence of the offender in that case. The
prosecutor may request a hearing regarding the court’s consideration of
modifying the jail sentence of the offender in that case, and, if the
prosecutor requests a hearing, the court shall notify the eligible offender of
the hearing.
            2.   If the prosecutor requests a hearing regarding the court’s
consideration of modifying the jail sentence of the offender in that case, the
court shall hold the hearing before considering whether or not to release the
offender from the offender’s jail sentence.
      (3)   If a court sentences an offender to a jail term under subsection
(b) of this section and the court assigns the offender to a County Jail that
has established a County Jail Industry Program pursuant to Ohio R.C. 5147.30,
the court shall specify, as part of the sentence, whether the offender may be
considered for participation in the program. During the offender's term in the
County Jail, the court retains jurisdiction to modify its specification
regarding the offender's participation in the County Jail Industry Program.
      (4)   If a person sentenced to a jail term pursuant to subsection (b) of
this section, the court may impose as part of the sentence pursuant to Ohio
R.C. 2929.28 a reimbursement sanction, and, if the local detention facility in
which the term is to be served is covered by a policy adopted pursuant to Ohio
R.C.  307.93, 341.14, 341.19, 341.21, 341.23, 753.02, 753.04, 753.16, 2301.56,
or 2947.19 and Ohio R.C. 2929.37, both of the following apply:
         A.   The court shall specify both of the following as part of the
sentence:
            1.   If the person is presented with an itemized bill pursuant to
Ohio R.C. 2929.37 for payment of the costs of confinement, the person is
required to pay the bill in accordance with that section.
            2.   If the person does not dispute the bill described in
subsection (b)(4)A.1. of this section and does not pay the bill by the times
specified in Ohio R.C. 2929.37, the Clerk of the Court may issue a certificate
of judgment against the person as described in that section.
         B.   The sentence automatically includes any certificate of judgment
issued as described in subsection (b)(4)A.2. of this section.
      (5)   If an offender who is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation
of Ohio R.C. 4511.19(B), or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance,
also is convicted of or also pleads guilty to a specification of the type
described in Ohio R.C. 2941.1414 and if the court imposes a jail term on the
offender for the underlying offense, the court shall impose upon the offender
an additional definite jail term of not more than six months. The additional
jail term shall not be reduced pursuant to any provision of the Ohio Revised
Code. The offender shall serve the additional jail term consecutively to and
prior to the jail term imposed for the underlying offense and consecutively to
any other mandatory term imposed in relation to the offense.
      (6)   A.   If an offender is convicted of or pleads guilty to a
misdemeanor violation of Ohio R.C. 2907.23, 2907.24, 2907.241, or 2907.25, or
any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, and to a specification of the
type described in Ohio R.C. 2941.1421 and if the court imposes a jail term on
the offender for the misdemeanor violation, the court may impose upon the
offender an additional definite jail term as follows:
            1.   Subject to division (b)(6)A.2. of this section, an additional
definite jail term of not more than 60 days;
            2.   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one or more misdemeanor or felony violations of Ohio R.C. 2907.22,
2907.23, 2907.24, 2907.241, or 2907.25, or any substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, and also was convicted of or pleaded guilty to a
specification of the type described in Ohio R.C. 2941.1421 regarding one or
more of those violations, an additional definite jail term of not more than 120
days.
         B.   In lieu of imposing an additional definite jail term under
division (b)(6)A. of this section, the court may directly impose on the
offender a sanction that requires the offender to wear a real-time processing,
continual tracking electronic monitoring device during the period of time
specified by the court. The period of time specified by the court shall equal
the duration of an additional jail term that the court could have imposed upon
the offender under division (b)(6)A. of this section. A sanction imposed under
this division shall commence on the date specified by the court, provided that
the sanction shall not commence until after the offender has served the jail
term imposed for the misdemeanor violation of Ohio R.C. 2907.23, 2907.24,
2907.241, or 2907.25, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, and
any residential sanction imposed for the violation under division (d) of this
section or Ohio R.C. 2929.26. A sanction imposed under this division shall be
considered to be a community control sanction for purposes of division (c) or
this section or Ohio R.C. 2929.25, and all provisions of this Code and the Ohio
Revised Code that pertain to community control sanctions shall apply to a
sanction imposed under this division, except to the extent that they would by
their nature be clearly inapplicable. The offender shall pay all costs
associated with a sanction imposed under this division, including the cost of
the use of the monitoring device.
      (7)   If an offender is convicted of or pleads guilty to a misdemeanor
violation of Ohio R.C. 2903.13 and also is convicted of or pleads guilty to a
specification of the type described in Ohio R.C. 2941.1423 that charges that
the victim of the violation was a woman whom the offender knew was pregnant at
the time of the violation, the court shall impose on the offender a mandatory
jail term that is a definite term of at least 30 days.
(ORC 2929.24)
      (8)   If a court sentences an offender to a jail term under this
subsection (b), the sentencing court retains jurisdiction over the offender and
the jail term. Upon motion of either party or upon the court’s own motion, the
court, in the court’s sole discretion and as the circumstances warrant, may
substitute one or more community control sanctions under subsections (d) or (e)
of this section for any jail days that are not mandatory jail days.
   (c)   Misdemeanor community control sanctions.
      (1)   A.   Except as provided in §§
666.99 and
698.03 of this Code or Ohio R.C. 2929.22 and 2929.23 or when a jail term is
required by law, in sentencing an offender for a misdemeanor, other than a
minor misdemeanor, the sentencing court may do either of the following:
            1.   Directly impose a sentence that consists of one or more
community control sanctions authorized by subsections (d), (e), or (f) of this
section. The court may impose any other conditions of release under a community
control sanction that the court considers appropriate. If the court imposes a
jail term upon the offender, the court may impose any community control
sanction or combination of community control sanctions in addition to the jail
term.
            2.   Impose a jail term under subsection (b) of this section from
the range of jail terms authorized under that subsection for the offense,
suspend all or a portion of the jail term imposed, and place the offender under
a community control sanction or combination of community control sanctions
authorized under subsections (d), (e), or (f) of this section.
         B.   The duration of all community control sanctions imposed upon an
offender and in effect for an offender at any time shall not exceed five years.
         C.   At sentencing, if a court directly imposes a community control
sanction or combination of community control sanctions pursuant to subsection
(c)(1)A.1. of this section, the court shall state the duration of the community
control sanctions imposed and shall notify the offender that if any of the
conditions of the community control sanctions are violated the court may do any
of the following:
            1.   Impose a longer time under the same community control sanction
if the total time under all of the offender's community control sanctions does
not exceed the five-year limit specified in subsection (c)(1)B. of this
section;
            2.   Impose a more restrictive community control sanction under
subsection (d), (e), or (f) of this section, but the court is not required to
impose any particular sanction or sanctions;
            3.   Impose a definite jail term from the range of jail terms
authorized for the offense under subsection (b) of this section.
      (2)   If a court sentences an offender to any community control sanction
or combination of community control sanctions pursuant to subsection (c)(1)A.1.
of this section, the sentencing court retains jurisdiction over the offender
and the period of community control for the duration of the period of community
control. Upon the motion of either party or on the court’s own motion, the
court, in the court’s sole discretion and as the circumstances warrant, may
modify the community control sanctions or conditions of release previously
imposed, substitute a community control sanction or condition of release for
another community control sanction or condition of release previously imposed,
or impose an additional community control sanction or condition of release.
      (3)   A.   If a court sentences an offender to any community control
sanction or combination of community control sanctions authorized under
subsection (d), (e), or (f) of this section, the court shall place the offender
under the general control and supervision of the court or of a department of
probation in the jurisdiction that serves the court for purposes of reporting
to the court a violation of any of the conditions of the sanctions imposed. If
the offender resides in another jurisdiction and a department of probation has
been established to serve the Municipal Court or County Court in that
jurisdiction, the sentencing court may request the Municipal Court or the
County Court to receive the offender into the general control and supervision
of that department of probation for purposes of reporting to the sentencing
court a violation of any of the conditions of the sanctions imposed. The
sentencing court retains jurisdiction over any offender whom it sentences for
the duration of the sanction or sanctions imposed.
         B.   The sentencing court shall require as a condition of any
community control sanction that the offender abide by the law and not leave the
state without the permission of the court or the offender's probation officer.
In the interests of doing justice, rehabilitating the offender, and ensuring
the offender's good behavior, the court may impose additional requirements on
the offender. The offender's compliance with the additional requirements also
shall be a condition of the community control sanction imposed upon the
offender.
      (4)   A.   If the court imposing sentence upon an offender sentences the
offender to any community control sanction or combination of community control
sanctions authorized under subsection (d), (e), or (f) of this section, and the
offender violates any of the conditions of the sanctions, the public or private
person or entity that supervises or administers the program or activity that
comprises the sanction shall report the violation directly to the sentencing
court or to the department of probation or probation officer with general
control and supervision over the offender. If the public or private person or
entity reports the violation to the department of probation or probation
officer, the department or officer shall report the violation to the sentencing
court.
         B.   If an offender violates any condition of a community control
sanction, the sentencing court may impose upon the violator one or more of the
following penalties:
            1.   A longer time under the same community control sanction if the
total time under all of the community control sanctions imposed on the violator
does not exceed the five-year limit specified in subsection (c)(1)B. of this
section;
            2.   A more restrictive community control sanction;
            3.   A combination of community control sanctions, including a jail
term.
         C.   If an offender was acting pursuant to R.C. § 2925.11(B)(2)(b), or
any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, and in so doing violated the
conditions of a community control sanction based on a minor drug possession
offense, as defined in R.C. § 2925.11, the sentencing court may consider the
offender’s conduct in seeking or obtaining medical assistance for another in
good faith or for self or may consider the offender being the subject of
another person seeking or obtaining medical assistance in accordance with that
division as a mitigating factor before imposing any of the penalties described
in division (c)(4)B. of this section.
         D.   If the court imposes a jail term upon a violator pursuant to
subsection (c)(4)B. of this section, the total time spent in jail for the
misdemeanor offense and the violation of a condition of the community control
sanction shall not exceed the maximum jail term available for the offense for
which the sanction that was violated was imposed. The court may reduce the
longer period of time that the violator is required to spend under the longer
sanction or the more restrictive sanction imposed under subsection (c)(4)B. of
this section by all or part of the time the violator successfully spent under
the sanction that was initially imposed.
      (5)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, if an offender,
for a significant period of time, fulfills the conditions of a community
control sanction imposed pursuant to subsection (d), (e), or (f) of this
section in an exemplary manner, the court may reduce the period of time under
the community control sanction or impose a less restrictive community control
sanction. Fulfilling the conditions of a community control sanction does not
relieve the offender of a duty to make restitution under subsection (f) of this
section.
(ORC 2929.25)
   (d)   Community residential sanction.
      (1)   Except when a mandatory jail term is required by law, the court
imposing a sentence for a misdemeanor, other than a minor misdemeanor, may
impose upon the offender any community residential sanction or combination of
community residential sanctions under this subsection (d). Community
residential sanctions include, but are not limited to, the following:
         A.   A term of up to 180 days in a halfway house or a term in a
halfway house not to exceed the longest jail term available for the offense,
whichever is shorter, if the political subsubsection that would have
responsibility for paying the costs of confining the offender in a jail has
entered into a contract with the halfway house for use of the facility for
misdemeanor offenders;
         B.   If the offender is an eligible offender, as defined in Ohio R.C.
307.932, a term in a community alternative sentencing center or district
community alternative sentencing center established and operated in accordance
with that section, in the circumstances specified in that section, with one of
the conditions of the sanction being that the offender successfully complete
the portion of the sentence to be served in the center.
      (2)   A sentence to a community residential sanction under division (d)
(1)B. of this section shall be in accordance with Ohio R.C. 307.932. In all
other cases, the court that sentences an offender to a community residential
sanction under this subsection (d) may do either or both of the following:
         A.   Permit the offender to serve the offender's sentence in
intermittent confinement, overnight, on weekends or at any other time or times
that will allow the offender to continue at the offender' occupation or care
for the offender' family;
         B.   Authorize the offender to be released so that the offender may
seek or maintain employment, receive education or training, receive treatment,
perform community service, or otherwise fulfill an obligation imposed by law or
by the court. A release pursuant to this subsection shall be only for the
duration of time that is needed to fulfill the purpose of the release and for
travel that reasonably is necessary to fulfill the purposes of release.
      (3)   The court may order that a reasonable portion of the income earned
by the offender upon a release pursuant to subsection (d)(2) of this section be
applied to any financial sanction imposed under subsection (f) of this section.
      (4)   No court shall sentence any person to a prison term for a
misdemeanor or minor misdemeanor or to a jail term for a minor misdemeanor.
      (5)   If a court sentences a person who has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a misdemeanor to a community residential sanction as described in
subsection (d)(1) of this section, at the time of reception and at other times
the person in charge of the operation of the halfway house, community
alternative sentencing center, district community alternative sentencing
center,  or other place at which the offender will serve the residential
sanction determines to be appropriate, the person in charge of the operation of
the halfway house, community alternative sentencing center, district community
alternative sentencing center,  or other place may cause the convicted offender
to be examined and tested for tuberculosis, HIV infection, hepatitis,
including, but not limited to, hepatitis A, B, and C, and other contagious
diseases. The person in charge of the operation of the halfway house, community
alternative sentencing center, district community alternative sentencing
center,  or other place at which the offender will serve the residential
sanction may cause a convicted offender in the halfway house, community
alternative sentencing center, district community alternative sentencing
center,  or other place who refuses to be tested or treated for tuberculosis,
HIV infection, hepatitis, including, but not limited to, hepatitis A, B, and C,
or another contagious disease to be tested and treated involuntarily.
      (6)   The municipality may enter into a contract with a halfway house for
use of the halfway house to house misdemeanor offenders under a sanction
imposed under subsection (d)(1)A. of this section.
(ORC 2929.26)
   (e)   Nonresidential sanction where jail term is not mandatory.
      (1)   Except when a mandatory jail term is required by law, the court
imposing a sentence for a misdemeanor, other than a minor misdemeanor, may
impose upon the offender any nonresidential sanction or combination of
nonresidential sanctions authorized under this subsection. Nonresidential
sanctions include, but are not limited to, the following:
         A.   A term of day reporting;
         B.   A term of house arrest with electronic monitoring or continuous
alcohol monitoring or both electronic monitoring and continuous alcohol
monitoring, a term of electronic monitoring or continuous alcohol monitoring
without house arrest, or a term of house arrest without electronic monitoring
or continuous alcohol monitoring;
         C.   A term of community service of up to 500 hours for misdemeanor of
the first degree or 200 hours for a misdemeanor of the second, third, or fourth
degree;
         D.   A term in a drug treatment program with a level of security for
the offender as determined necessary by the court;
         E.   A term of intensive probation supervision;
         F.   A term of basic probation supervision;
         G.   A term of monitored time;
         H.   A term of drug and alcohol use monitoring, including random drug
testing;
         I.   A curfew term;
         J.   A requirement that the offender obtain employment;
         K.   A requirement that the offender obtain education or training;
         L.   Provided the court obtains the prior approval of the victim, a
requirement that the offender participate in victim-offender mediation;
         M.   If authorized by law, suspension of the offender's privilege to
operate a motor vehicle, immobilization or forfeiture of the offender's motor
vehicle, a requirement that the offender obtain a valid motor vehicle
operator's license, or any other related sanction;
         N.   A requirement that the offender obtain counseling if the offense
is a violation of Ohio R.C. 2919.25 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance or a violation of Ohio R.C.  2903.13 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance involving a person who was a family or household member at
the time of the violation, if the offender committed the offense in the
vicinity of one or more children who are not victims of the offense, and if the
offender or the victim of the offense is a parent, guardian, custodian, or
person in loco parentis of one or more of those children. This subsection does
not limit the court in requiring that the offender obtain counseling for any
offense or in any circumstance not specified in this subsection.
      (2)   If the court imposes a term of community service pursuant to
subsection (e)(1)C. of this section, the offender may request that the court
modify the sentence to authorize the offender to make a reasonable
contribution, as determined by the court, to the general fund of the county,
municipality, or other local entity that provides funding to the court. The
court may grant the request if the offender demonstrates a change in
circumstances from the date the court imposes the sentence or that the
modification would otherwise be in the interests of justice. If the court
grants the request, the offender shall make a reasonable contribution to the
court, and the clerk of the court shall deposit that contribution into the
general fund of the county, municipality, or other local entity that provides
funding to the court. If more than one entity provides funding to the court,
the clerk shall deposit a percentage of the reasonable contribution equal to
the percentage of funding the entity provides to the court in that entity’s
general fund.
      (3)   In addition to the sanctions authorized under subsection (e)(1) of
this section, the court imposing a sentence for a misdemeanor, other than a
minor misdemeanor, upon an offender who is not required to serve a mandatory
jail term may impose any other sanction that is intended to discourage the
offender or other persons from committing a similar offense if the sanction is
reasonably related to the overriding purposes and principles of misdemeanor
sentencing.
      (4)   The court imposing a sentence for a minor misdemeanor may impose a
term of community service in lieu of all or part of a fine. The term of
community service imposed for a minor misdemeanor shall not exceed 30 hours. 
After imposing a term of community service, the court may modify the sentence
to authorize a reasonable contribution, as determined by the court, to the
appropriate general fund as provided in subsection (e)(2) of this section.
(ORC 2929.27)
   (f)   Financial sanctions.
      (1)   In addition to imposing court costs pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2947.23,
the court imposing a sentence upon an offender for a misdemeanor, including a
minor misdemeanor, may sentence the offender to any financial sanction or
combination of financial sanctions authorized under this subsection (f). If the
court in its discretion imposes one or more financial sanctions, the financial
sanctions that may be imposed pursuant to this section include, but are not
limited to, the following:
         A.   Restitution.
            1.   Unless the misdemeanor offense is a minor misdemeanor or could
be disposed of by the Traffic Violations Bureau serving the court under Traffic
Rule 13, restitution by the offender to the victim of the offender's crime or
any survivor of the victim, in an amount based upon the victim's economic loss.
The court may not impose restitution as a sanction pursuant to this subsection
if the offense is a minor misdemeanor or could be disposed of by the Traffic
Violations Bureau serving the court under Traffic Rule 13. If the court
requires restitution, the court shall order that the restitution be made to the
victim in open court or to the adult probation department that serves the
jurisdiction or the clerk of the court on behalf of the victim.
            2.   If the court imposes restitution, the court shall determine
the amount of restitution to be paid by the offender. If the court imposes
restitution, the court may base the amount of restitution it orders on an
amount recommended by the victim, the offender, a presentence investigation
report, estimates or receipts indicating the cost of repairing or replacing
property, and other information, provided that the amount the court orders as
restitution shall not exceed the amount of economic loss suffered by the victim
as a direct and proximate result of the commission of the offense. If the court
decides to impose restitution, the court shall hold an evidentiary hearing on
restitution if the offender, victim, or survivor disputes the amount of
restitution. If the court holds an evidentiary hearing, at the hearing the
victim or survivor has the burden to prove by a preponderance of the evidence
the amount of restitution sought from the offender.
            3.   All restitution payments shall be credited against any
recovery of economic loss in a civil action brought by the victim or any
survivor of the victim against the offender.  No person may introduce evidence
of an award of restitution under this section in a civil action for purposes of
imposing liability against an insurer under Ohio R.C. 3937.18.
            4.   If the court imposes restitution, the court may order that the
offender pay a surcharge, of not more than 5 percent of the amount of the
restitution otherwise ordered, to the entity responsible for collecting and
processing restitution payments.
            5.   The victim or survivor of the victim may request that the
prosecutor in the case file a motion, or the offender may file a motion, for
modification of the payment terms of any restitution ordered. If the court
grants the motion, it may modify the payment terms as it determines
appropriate.
         B.   Fines. A fine of the type described in subsections (f)(1)B.1. and
2. of this section payable to the appropriate entity as required by law:
            1.   A fine in the following amount:
               a.   For a misdemeanor of the first degree, not more than one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00);
               b.   For a misdemeanor of the second degree, not more than seven
hundred fifty dollars ($750.00);
               c.   For a misdemeanor of the third degree, not more than five
hundred dollars ($500.00);
               d.   For a misdemeanor of the fourth degree, not more than two
hundred fifty dollars ($250.00);
               e.   For a minor misdemeanor, not more than one hundred fifty
dollars ($150.00).
            2.   A state fine or cost as defined in Ohio R.C. 2949.111.
         C.   Reimbursement.
            1.   Reimbursement by the offender of any or all of the costs of
sanctions incurred by the government, including, but not limited to, the
following:
               a.   All or part of the costs of implementing any community
control sanction, including a supervision fee under Ohio R.C. 2951.021;
               b.   All or part of the costs of confinement in a jail or other
residential facility, including, but not limited to, a per diem fee for room
and board, the costs of medical and dental treatment, and the costs of
repairing property damaged by the offender while confined;
               c.   All or part of the cost of purchasing and using an
immobilizing or disabling device, including a certified ignition interlock
device, or a remote alcohol monitoring device that a court orders an offender
to use under Ohio R.C. 4510.13.
            2.   The amount of reimbursement under subsection (f)(1)C.1. of
this section shall not exceed the total amount of reimbursement the offender is
able to pay and shall not exceed the actual cost of the sanctions. The court
may collect any amount of reimbursement the offender is required to pay under
that subsection. If the court does not order reimbursement under that
subsection, confinement costs may be assessed pursuant to a repayment policy
adopted under Ohio R.C. 2929.37. In addition, the offender may be required to
pay the fees specified in Ohio R.C. 2929.38 in accordance with that section.
      (2)   A.   If the court determines a hearing is necessary, the court may
hold a hearing to determine whether the offender is able to pay the financial
sanction imposed pursuant to this subsection (f) or court costs or is likely in
the future to be able to pay the sanction or costs.
         B.   If the court determines that the offender is indigent and unable
to pay the financial sanction or court costs, the court shall consider imposing
and may impose a term of community service under subsection (e)(1) of this
section in lieu of imposing a financial sanction or court costs. If the court
does not determine that the offender is indigent, the court may impose a term
of community service under subsection (e)(1) of this section in lieu of or in
addition to imposing a financial sanction under this subsection (f) and in
addition to imposing court costs. The court may order community service for a
minor misdemeanor pursuant to subsection (e)(4) of this section in lieu of or
in addition to imposing a financial sanction under this section and in addition
to imposing court costs. If a person fails to pay a financial sanction or court
costs, the court may order community service in lieu of the financial sanction
or court costs.
      (3)   A.   The offender shall pay reimbursements imposed upon the
offender pursuant to subsection (f)(1)C. of this section to pay the costs
incurred by a county pursuant to any sanction imposed under subsection (d),
(e), or (f) of this section or in operating a facility used to confine
offenders pursuant to a sanction imposed under subsection (d) of this section
to the County Treasurer. The County Treasurer shall deposit the reimbursements
in the County's General Fund. The County shall use the amounts deposited in the
fund to pay the costs incurred by the County pursuant to any sanction imposed
under subsection (d), (e), or (f) of this section or in operating a facility
used to confine offenders pursuant to a sanction imposed under subsection (d)
of this section.
         B.   The offender shall pay reimbursements imposed upon the offender
pursuant to subsection (f)(1)C. of this section to pay the costs incurred by a
municipal corporation pursuant to any sanction imposed under subsection  (d),
(e), or (f) of this section or in operating a facility used to confine
offenders pursuant to a sanction imposed under subsection (d) of this section
to the Treasurer of the municipal corporation. The Treasurer shall deposit the
reimbursements in the municipal corporation's General Fund. The municipal
corporation shall use the amounts deposited in the fund to pay the costs
incurred by the municipal corporation pursuant to any sanction imposed under
subsection (d), (e), or (f) of this section or in operating a facility used to
confine offenders pursuant to a sanction imposed under subsection (d) of this
section.
         C.   The offender shall pay reimbursements imposed pursuant to
subsection (f)(1)C. of this section for the costs incurred by a private
provider pursuant to a sanction imposed under subsection (d), (e), or (f) of
this section to the provider.
      (4)   In addition to any other fine that is or may be imposed under this
division (f), the court imposing sentence upon an offender for misdemeanor
domestic violence or menacing by stalking may impose a fine of not less than
seventy dollars ($70.00)  nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), which
shall be transmitted to the Treasurer of Ohio to be credited to the address
confidentiality program fund created by R.C. § 111.48.
      (5)   A.   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection (f)(5), a
financial sanction imposed under subsection (f)(1) of this section is a
judgment in favor of the state or the political subsubsection that operates the
court that imposed the financial sanction, and the offender subject to the
financial sanction is the judgment debtor. A financial sanction of
reimbursement imposed pursuant to subsection (f)(1)C.1.a. of this section upon
an offender is a judgment in favor of the entity administering the community
control sanction, and the offender subject to the financial sanction is the
judgment debtor. A financial sanction of reimbursement imposed pursuant to
subsection (f)(1)C.1.b. of this section upon an offender confined in a jail or
other residential facility is a judgment in favor of the entity operating the
jail or other residential facility, and the offender subject to the financial
sanction is the judgment debtor. A financial sanction of restitution imposed
pursuant to subsection (f)(1)A. of this section is an order in favor of the
victim of the offender’s criminal act that can be collected through a
certificate of judgment as described in subsection (f)(5) B.1. of this section,
through execution as described in subsection (f)(5) B.2. of this section or
through an order as described in subsection (f)(5) B.3. of this section and the
offender shall be considered for purposes of the collection as a judgment
debtor.
         B.   Once a financial sanction is imposed as a judgment or order under
this subsection, the victim, private provider, state, or political subdivision
may bring an action to do any of the following:
            1.   Obtain from the clerk of the court in which the judgment was
entered a certificate of judgment that shall be in the same manner and form as
a certificate of judgment issued in a civil action;
            2.   Obtain execution of the judgment or order through any
available procedure, including any of the procedures identified in Ohio R.C.
2929.18(D)(1) and (D)(2) or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
            3.   Obtain an order for the assignment of wages of the judgment
debtor under Ohio R.C. 1321.33 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance.
      (6)   The civil remedies authorized under subsection (f)(5) of this
section for the collection of the financial sanction supplement, but do not
preclude, enforcement of the criminal sentence.
      (7)   Each court imposing a financial sanction upon an offender under
this subsection (f) may designate the Clerk of the Court or another person to
collect the financial sanction. The Clerk, or another person authorized by law
or the court to collect the financial sanction may do the following:
         A.   Enter into contracts with one or more public agencies or private
vendors for the collection of amounts due under the sanction. Before entering
into a contract for the collection of amounts due from an offender pursuant to
any financial sanction imposed pursuant to this subsection (f), a court shall
comply with Ohio R.C. 307.86 to 307.92.
         B.   Permit payment of all or any portion of the sanction in
installments, by financial transaction device if the court is a County Court or
a Municipal Court operated by a county, or by any other reasonable method, in
any time, and on any terms that the court considers just, except that the
maximum time permitted for payment shall not exceed five years. If the court is
a County Court or a Municipal Court operated by a county, the acceptance of
payments by any financial transaction device shall be governed by the policy
adopted by the Board of County Commissioners of the county pursuant to Ohio
R.C. 301.28. If the court is a Municipal Court not operated by a county, the
Clerk may pay any fee associated with processing an electronic transfer out of
public money or may charge the fee to the offender.
         C.   To defray administrative costs, charge a reasonable fee to an
offender who elects a payment plan rather than a lump sum payment of any
financial sanction.
      (8)   No financial sanction imposed under this subsection (f) shall
preclude a victim from bringing a civil action against the offender.
(ORC 2929.28)
§ 698.03  IMPOSING SENTENCE FOR MISDEMEANOR.
   (a)   (1)   Unless a mandatory jail term is required to be imposed by Ohio
R.C. 1547.99(G), 4510.14(B), or 4511.19(G), or any other provision of the
Revised Code, or any municipal ordinance, a court that imposes a sentence under
this chapter upon an offender for a misdemeanor or minor misdemeanor has
discretion to determine the most effective way to achieve the purposes and
principles of sentencing set forth in §
698.02.
      (2)   Unless a specific sanction is required to be imposed or is
precluded from being imposed by the section setting forth an offense or the
penalty for an offense or by any provision of §§
666.99 or
698.02 of this Code or Ohio R.C. 2929.23 to 2929.28, a court that imposes a
sentence upon an offender for a misdemeanor may impose on the offender any
sanction or combination of sanctions under §
698.02(b) to (f). The court shall not impose a sentence that imposes an
unnecessary burden on local government resources.
   (b)   (1)   In determining the appropriate sentence for a misdemeanor, the
court shall consider all of the following factors:
         A.   The nature and circumstances of the offense or offenses;
         B.   Whether the circumstances regarding the offender and the offense
or offenses indicate that the offender has a history of persistent criminal
activity and that the offender's character and condition reveal a substantial
risk that the offender will commit another offense;
         C.   Whether the circumstances regarding the offender and the offense
or offenses indicate that the offender's history, character, and condition
reveal a substantial risk that the offender will be a danger to others and that
the offender's conduct has been characterized by a pattern of repetitive,
compulsive, or aggressive behavior with heedless indifference to the
consequences;
         D.   Whether the victim's youth, age, disability, or other factor made
the victim particularly vulnerable to the offense or made the impact of the
offense more serious;
         E.   Whether the offender is likely to commit future crimes in
general, in addition to the circumstances described in subsections (b)(1)B. and
C. of this section;
         F.   Whether the offender has an emotional, mental, or physical
condition that is traceable to the offender’s service in the armed forces of
the United States and that was a contributing factor in the offender’s
commission of the offense or offenses;
         G.   The offender’s military service record.
      (2)   In determining the appropriate sentence for a misdemeanor, in
addition to complying with subsection (b)(1) of this section, the court may
consider any other factors that are relevant to achieving the purposes and
principles of sentencing set forth in §
698.02(a).
   (c)   Before imposing a jail term as a sentence for a misdemeanor, a court
shall consider the appropriateness of imposing a community control sanction or
a combination of community control sanctions under §
698.02(c), (d), (e), and (f). A court may impose the longest jail term
authorized under §
698.02(b) only upon offenders who commit the worst forms of the offense or upon
offenders whose conduct and response to prior sanctions for prior offenses
demonstrate that the imposition of the longest jail term is necessary to deter
the offender from committing a future crime.
   (d)   (1)   A sentencing court shall consider any relevant oral or written
statement made by the victim, the defendant, the defense attorney, or the
prosecuting authority regarding sentencing for a misdemeanor. This subsection
does not create any rights to notice other than those rights authorized by Ohio
R.C. Chapter 2930.
      (2)   At the time of sentencing for a misdemeanor or as soon as possible
after sentencing, the court shall notify the victim of the offense of the
victim's right to file an application for an award of reparations pursuant to
Ohio R.C. 2743.51 to 2743.72.
(ORC 2929.22)
§ 698.04  ORGANIZATIONAL PENALTIES.
   (a)   Regardless of the other penalties provided in §
698.02, an organization convicted of an offense pursuant to §
606.09 shall be fined by the court as follows:
      (1)   For a misdemeanor of the first degree, not more than five thousand
dollars ($5,000.00);
      (2)   For a misdemeanor of the second degree, not more than four thousand
dollars ($4,000.00);
      (3)   For a misdemeanor of the third degree, not more than three thousand
dollars ($3,000.00);
      (4)   For a misdemeanor of the fourth degree, not more than two thousand
dollars ($2,000.00);
      (5)   For a minor misdemeanor, not more than one thousand dollars
($1,000.00);
      (6)   For a misdemeanor not specifically classified, not more than two
thousand dollars ($2,000.00);
      (7)   For a minor misdemeanor not specifically classified, not more than
one thousand dollars ($1,000.00).
   (b)   When an organization is convicted of an offense not specifically
classified, and the section defining the offense or penalty plainly indicates a
purpose to impose the penalty provided for violation upon organizations, then
such penalty shall be imposed in lieu of the penalty provided in this section.
   (c)   When an organization is convicted of an offense not specifically
classified, and the penalty provided includes a higher fine than that provided
in this section, then the penalty imposed shall be pursuant to the penalty
provided for violation of the section defining the offense.
   (d)   This section does not prevent the imposition of available civil
sanctions against an organization convicted of an offense pursuant to §
606.09, either in addition to or in lieu of a fine imposed pursuant to this
section.
(ORC 2929.31)
§ 698.05  MULTIPLE SENTENCES.
   (a)   Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, Ohio R.C.
2929.14(C), or Ohio R.C. 2971.03(D) or (E), a prison term, jail term, or 
sentence of imprisonment shall be served concurrently with any other prison
term, jail term, or sentence of imprisonment imposed by a court of this
municipality, the state, another state, or the United States. Except as
provided in subsection (b)(2) of this section, a jail term or sentence of
imprisonment for misdemeanor shall be served concurrently with a prison term or
sentence of imprisonment for felony served in a state or Federal correctional
institution.
   (b)   (1)   A jail term or sentence of imprisonment for a misdemeanor shall
be served consecutively to any other prison term, jail term, or sentence of
imprisonment when the trial court specifies that it is to be served
consecutively or when it is imposed for a misdemeanor violation of Ohio R.C.
2907.322, 2921.34 or 2923.131. When consecutive sentences are imposed for
misdemeanors under this subsection, the term to be served is the aggregate of
the consecutive terms imposed, except that the aggregate term to be served
shall not exceed 18 months.
      (2)   A jail term or sentence of imprisonment imposed for a misdemeanor
violation of Ohio R.C. 4510.14, 4510.16, 4510.21, or 4511.19, or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, shall be served consecutively to
a prison term that is imposed for a felony violation of Ohio R.C. 2903.06,
2903.07, 2903.08 or 4511.19 or a felony violation of Ohio R.C. 2903.04
involving the operation of a motor vehicle by the offender and that is served
in a state correctional institution when the trial court specifies that it is
to be served consecutively. When consecutive jail terms or sentences of
imprisonment and prison terms are imposed for one or more misdemeanors and one
or more felonies under this subsection, the term to be served is the aggregate
of the consecutive terms imposed, and the offender shall serve all terms
imposed for a felony before serving any term imposed for a misdemeanor.
(ORC 2929.41)
§ 698.06  MODIFICATION OF SENTENCE. (REPEALED)
Editor's note:
   Section
698.06 was repealed as part of the 2003 updating and revision of this Model
Ohio Municipal Code because substantially equivalent state law (Ohio R.C.
2929.51) was repealed by the Ohio General Assembly.
§ 698.07  SUSPENSION OF DRIVER'S LICENSE.
   Except as otherwise provided in Ohio R.C. 4510.07 or in any other provision
of the Revised Code, whenever an offender is convicted of or pleads guilty to a
violation of any provision of this Code of Ordinances that is substantially
equivalent to a provision of the Revised Code, and a court is permitted or
required to suspend a person's driver's or commercial driver's license or
permit for a violation of that provision, a court, in addition to any other
penalties authorized by law, may suspend the offender's driver's or commercial
driver's license or permit or nonresident operating privileges for the period
of time the court determines appropriate, but the period of suspension imposed
for the violation of the provision of this Code of Ordinances shall not exceed
the period of suspension that is permitted or required to be imposed for the
violation of the provision of the Revised Code to which the provision of this
Code of Ordinances is substantially equivalent.
(ORC 4510.05)
PART EIGHT - BUSINESS REGULATIONS AND TAXATION CODE
   Chapter
      TITLE TWO - BUSINESS REGULATION
         
802.   Business Licenses in General.
         
818.   Cable Television Systems.
         
822.   Canvassers and Solicitors.
         
824.   Peddlers, Solicitors and Transient Merchants.
         
826.   Casual Sales.
         
834.   Game Rooms and Amusement Devices.
         
836.   Gas and Oil Wells.
         
870.   Sexually Oriented Businesses.
         
872.   Video Service Provider.
      TITLE FOUR - TAXATION
         
880.   Transient Guest Registration.
         
882.   Earned Income Tax Regulations Effective Through December 31, 2015.
         
883.   Earned Income Tax Regulations Effective Beginning January 1, 2016.
         
884.   Motor Vehicle License Tax.
         
885.   Transient Guest Tax.
TITLE TWO - BUSINESS REGULATION
CHAPTER 802:  BUSINESS LICENSES IN GENERAL
Section
802.01   Licenses required.
802.02   Application; fee.
802.03   Issuance.
802.04   Real party in interest; transferability.
802.05   Exhibition of license certificates.
802.06   Revocation or suspension.
802.07   Appeals to Council.
802.08   Conflicts.
802.99   Penalty.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Power to license manufacturers, dealers, peddlers and amusements - see Ohio
R.C. 715.61 et seq.
   Soliciting business from motorists - see TRAF.
416.06
§ 802.01  LICENSES REQUIRED.
   No person shall engage in any trade, business, commercial use or profession
without applying for and obtaining a license issued pursuant to this chapter.
However, a license to do business issued pursuant to this chapter shall not be
necessary if a license has otherwise been secured and obtained by the applicant
pursuant to
Chapter 826,
834 or
836.
(Ord. 87-O-52, passed 10-19-1987)
§ 802.02  APPLICATION; FEE.
   (a)   All original applications for licenses required by this chapter shall
be made to the City Clerk, in writing, upon forms to be furnished by the City
Clerk and shall contain the following information:
      (1)   The applicant's present occupation, trade or business and place of
business;
      (2)   If an individual or partnership, the applicant's place of residence
and place of business for the five years next preceding the date of the
application;
      (3)   If a corporation, the applicant's place of business for the five
years next preceding the date of the application;
      (4)   The nature and location of the intended business or enterprise;
      (5)   The number of employees expected in the next year;
      (6)   A description of the merchandise to be sold, if for a vendor;
      (7)   The employer's tax identification number or social security number;
and
      (8)   Such other information concerning the applicant and the applicant's
business as may be reasonable and proper, having regard to the nature of the
license desired.
   (b)   With each application, the applicant shall deposit a fee as stated in
the Fee Schedule in §
236.07 of the City of Kirtland Codified Ordinances.
   (c)   No person shall knowingly make any false statement or representation
in the license application.
(Ord. 87-O-52, passed 10-19-1987; Am. Ord. 17-O-20, passed 7-3-2017)
§ 802.03  ISSUANCE.
   Upon receipt of an application for a license required by this chapter,
accompanied by the proper fee, the City Clerk, by and with the written approval
of the Director of Public Service, if approved by another office or department
is not  required, shall forthwith deposit the fee in the Treasury and issue to
the applicant a proper license certificate signed by the City Clerk and the
Director. If for any reason the license is not issued, the fee, less five
dollars ($5.00) to cover expenses of considering such application, shall be
returned to the applicant.
(Ord. 87-O-52, passed 10-19-1987)
§ 802.04  REAL PARTY IN INTEREST; TRANSFERABILITY.
   Every license shall be issued to a real party in interest in the enterprise
or business and shall be for the specific location stated on the license.
Unless otherwise provided, no license shall be assigned, transferred or moved
to another location.
(Ord. 87-O-52, passed 10-19-1987)
§ 802.05  EXHIBITION OF LICENSE CERTIFICATES.
   Every licensee carrying on a business at a fixed location shall keep the
license certificate posted in a prominent place upon the licensed premises.
Other licensees shall carry their license certificates at all times and,
whenever requested by a city official, police officer or resident, shall
exhibit the same.
(Ord. 87-O-52, passed 10-19-1987)
§ 802.06  REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION.
   (a)   Any license issued under this chapter may be revoked by the Director
of Public Service at any time for conditions or considerations which, had they
existed at the time of issuance, would have been valid grounds for its denial;
for any misrepresentation of a material fact in the application discovered
after the issuance of the license; or for a violation of any of the provisions
of this chapter or other law or ordinance relating to the operation of the
business or enterprise for which the license has been issued.
   (b)   The revocation shall become effective upon notice served upon the 
licensee or posted upon the premises affected.
   (c)   As a preliminary to revocation, the Director may issue an order
suspending the license, which order shall become effective immediately upon
service of written notice to such licensee. This notice shall specify the
reason for the suspension and may provide conditions under which reinstatement
of the license may be obtained. Upon compliance with such conditions within the
time specified, the license may be restored.
(Ord. 87-O-52, passed 10-19-1987)
§ 802.07  APPEALS TO COUNCIL.
   If any applicant has been denied a license, or if a licensee has had his or
her license revoked or suspended, the applicant or licensee, as the case may
be, shall, within 30 business days, have the right to appeal to Council from
such denial, revocation or suspension. A notice of appeal shall be filed, in
writing, with the Clerk of Council, who shall fix the time and place for a
hearing which shall be held not later than 30 days thereafter. The Clerk of
Council shall notify the Mayor and all members of Council of the time and place
of such hearing not less than 72 hours in advance thereof. Five members of
Council shall constitute a quorum to hear such appeal. The appellant may appear
and be heard in person or by counsel. If, after such hearing, a majority of the
members of Council present at such meeting declare in favor of the applicant,
the license shall be issued or fully reinstated, as the case may be. Otherwise,
the order appealed from shall become final.
(Ord. 87-O-52, passed 10-19-1987)
§ 802.08  CONFLICTS.
   This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any portion of
the Zoning Code, but is deemed to be supplemental thereto. Whenever this
chapter and any other valid ordinance, building code or restriction are in
conflict, the more stringent restriction shall prevail. Whenever this chapter
or any other valid ordinance, building code or restriction overlap, all
overlapping ordinances shall be complied with.
(Ord. 87-O-52, passed 10-19-1987)
§ 802.99  PENALTY.
   Whoever violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of this
chapter  is guilty of a minor misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than one
hundred fifty dollars ($150.00).
(Ord. 87-O-52, passed 10-19-1987)
CHAPTER 818:  CABLE TELEVISION SYSTEMS
Section
818.01   Scope; application of chapter; amendments.
818.02   Filing and review of rate schedules.
818.03   Utilization of rate consultants; payment of costs of review by
operators.
818.04   Adoption of FCC Customer Service Standards.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Cable television contracts - see Ohio R.C. 505.93 et seq.
   Interrupting or impairing television service - see Ohio R.C. 2909.04
   "Property" defined to include cable television service - see GEN. OFF.
606.01(p)
   Regulation of political broadcasts - see Ohio R.C. 3599.09
   "Services" defined to include cable television service - see GEN. OFF.
642.01(c), (11)
   Wireless communication facilities - see P. & Z.
Ch. 1292
§ 818.01  SCOPE; APPLICATION OF CHAPTER; AMENDMENTS.
   All rates and charges for basic cable service and any other cable
programming services, as defined by the Cable Television Consumer Protection
and Competition Act of 1992 ("the Act"), being 47 U.S.C. §§ 521 et seq. and
applicable Federal Communications Commission (FCC) regulations, shall, to the
extent permissible as provided in such Act and regulations, be subject to
regulation by the city in the manner provided by this chapter. This chapter
shall apply to all cable television system operators in the city. The operator
of a cable television system operating in the city shall be subject to the rate
regulation provisions provided for herein and those of the FCC provided in 47
C.F.R. part 79.601, subpart N.
   The city reserves the right to amend this chapter from time to time,
consistent with the requirements of the FCC and state and federal law.
(Ord. 93-O-53, passed 10-18-1993)
§ 818.02  FILING AND REVIEW OF RATE SCHEDULES.
   (a)   Adoption of FCC rules by city. The city hereby adopts and shall follow
the rules relating to cable television rate regulation promulgated by the FCC
provided in 47 C.F.R. part 79.601, subpart N. Prior to approving or
disapproving any rates, the city shall provide an opportunity for consideration
of the views of interested parties.
   (b)   Notice to operators of city's certification. Upon adoption of this
chapter the City Clerk will send to each operator of a cable television system
in the city, via certified mail, return receipt requested, a written notice,
which shall include a copy of this chapter and notice that the city is
certified by the FCC to regulate the cable television rates authorized by this
chapter.
   (c)   Submission of rate and benchmark information; approval or disapproval
of rates. Within 30 days after receipt of the aforesaid notice, a cable
television operator shall have 30 days to respond with rate and benchmark
information utilizing FCC Form 393 - Determination of Maximum Initial Permitted
Rates for Regulated Cable Services and Actual Cost of Equipment.
      (1)   If the initial rates and/or any subsequent rate increases are
within the FCC's standards, the rates will be effective 30 days after
submission.
      (2)   If the city is unable to determine whether the rate at issue is
within the FCC's standards based on the material before it, or if the cable
operator has submitted a cost-of-service showing seeking to justify a rate
above the FCC's reasonable rate level, the city may take an additional period
of time to make a final determination and toll the effective date of the
proposed rates for a commensurate period.
         A.   The city may take an additional 90 days if it needs more time to
ensure that a rate is within the FCC's rate standards.
         B.   The city may take an additional 150 days to evaluate a cost-of-
service showing seeking to justify a rate above the reasonable rate level.
         C.   The city must issue a brief written decision regarding its
invocation of the additional time period.
      (3)   In all cases, the city will issue a written decision to approve the
rate schedule, disapprove the rate schedule or continue for review.
      (4)   If rates are in excess of the FCC's standards, the rates may be
reduced by the city pursuant to applicable FCC regulations.
   (d)   Filing of additional rate changes. After the initial rate schedule
procedures are followed as provided in this section, the cable operator shall,
in conjunction with each change in the rates and charges applicable to basic
cable service, conform to the standards of the FCC. Before any rate change is
effective, the cable operator shall notify the city of its requested rate
change by giving the city 30 days advance written notice before the change is
effective and by providing the city with its rates and applicable information
pursuant to FCC regulations.
   (e)   Appeals. To the extent specifically permitted by federal law and
applicable FCC rules, the cable operator shall be permitted to appeal to the
FCC for a review of the decision of the city.
(Ord. 93-O-53, passed 10-18-1993)
§ 818.03  UTILIZATION OF RATE CONSULTANTS; PAYMENT OF COSTS OF REVIEW BY
OPERATORS.
   (a)   The city may utilize a rate consultant to advise it on proposed rate
changes and to assist it in the procedures and the standards for review adopted
by the FCC. A rate consultant may be any person who has sufficient background
and experience, in the sole opinion of the city, to properly evaluate and
analyze rates and charges.
   (b)   All costs for the review of initial rates or rate changes shall be
paid by the cable operator upon demand of the city, unless contrary to
applicable rules of the FCC governing these procedures or unless otherwise
specifically preempted by state or federal law. The costs shall include, but
not be limited to, rate consultants, attorneys' fees and the reasonable value
of services (as determined by the city) rendered by the city or any city
employees, agents or representatives.
(Ord. 93-O-53, passed 10-18-1993)
§ 818.04  ADOPTION OF FCC CUSTOMER SERVICE STANDARDS.
   (a)   The city hereby adopts the customer service standards enacted by the
FCC on March 11, 1993, through FCC Order 93-15, MM Docket No. 92-263, Appendix
B, a copy of which is attached to original Ord. 93-O-44, passed August 30,
1993, and incorporated herein by reference. The standards shall be in addition
to the customer service regulations in the current franchise agreement with
Tele-Communications, Inc., and shall be made a part of the franchise agreement
as if rewritten therein. In the event of any conflict between FCC standards and
the customer service regulations contained in a current franchise agreement,
the more stringent standard or regulation shall govern.
   (b)   Any violation of the customer service standards adopted herein shall
be governed by the penalty provision of the current franchise agreement with
Tele-Communications, Inc.
   (c)   The Clerk of Council is directed to immediately notify Tele-
Communications, Inc., of the adoption of this section and the city's intent to
enforce the FCC customer service standards. Notice shall be in writing,
delivered by certified mail, in accordance with the notice provisions of the
FCC Regulations and the current franchise agreement with Tele-Communications,
Inc.
   (d)   The customer service standards adopted herein shall be in full force
and effect commencing on the ninety-first day following the aforesaid notice to
Tele-Communications, Inc.
   (e)   Adoption of these minimum customer service standards shall not
preclude the city from adopting additional reasonable customer service
regulations or consumer protection laws which the city may determine to be
necessary to ensure that the citizens of Kirtland who subscribe to cable
television are appropriately protected in their relationship with the city's
cable television franchise holder.
(Ord. 93-O-44, passed 8-30-1993)
CHAPTER 822:  CANVASSERS AND SOLICITORS
Section
822.01   Registration required.
822.02   Canvassing or soliciting prohibited at residences declining same.
822.03   List of residences declining; prohibitive signs.
822.04   Hours of business.
822.05   Soliciting on or adjacent to public ways.
822.99   Penalty.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Charitable solicitations - see Ohio R.C. Ch. 1716
   Frozen desserts - see Ohio R.C. 3717.51 et seq.
   Home solicitation sales - see Ohio R.C. 1345.21 et seq.
   Littering - see GEN. OFF.
660.03
   Trespass - see GEN. OFF.
642.12,
642.125
§ 822.01  REGISTRATION REQUIRED.
   No person shall engage in the activity of canvassing and/or soliciting
within the city, calling at residences, without the previous consent of the
occupant, for the purpose of soliciting orders, sales, subscriptions or
business of any kind or seeking donations or seeking or providing information,
without having first registered in the office of the Chief of Police. The
registrant shall give his or her complete identification, signature, name of
employer, the nature of the products, services or information in which the
registrant is interested, and, if applicable,  the name of the manufacturers of
such products and their addresses or of the organization the registrant is
representing, and a brief description of the method of proposed operation in
the city.
(Ord. 94-O-81, passed 1-16-1995)
§ 822.02  CANVASSING OR SOLICITING PROHIBITED AT RESIDENCES DECLINING SAME.
   No person shall engage in the activity of canvassing and/or soliciting at
any residence whose owner or occupants have requested of the city, in writing,
that such owner, occupant or resident desires the premises to be free from
canvassing or soliciting of orders, sales, subscriptions or business of any
kind, and/or from persons seeking donations or seeking or providing information
at residences. The City Clerk shall keep a list for public inspection of all
residences whose owners or occupants have requested, in writing, that they be
kept free from canvassing and/or soliciting.
(Ord. 94-O-81, passed 1-16-1995)
§ 822.03  LIST OF RESIDENCES DECLINING; PROHIBITIVE SIGNS.
   (a)   Each registrant under §
822.01 shall be provided with a list of those residences whose owners or
occupants have requested of the city, in writing, that such residence not be
canvassed and/or solicited, and such registrant may not canvass and/or solicit
at any residence on the list which is prepared pursuant to §
822.02.
   (b)   Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this chapter, no person
shall go upon any premises for the purpose of canvassing and/or soliciting
where the owner or occupant of such premises has posted a sign stating "No
Peddlers or Solicitors Allowed" or words to that effect.
(Ord. 94-O-81, passed 1-16-1995)
§ 822.04  HOURS OF BUSINESS.
   No person shall canvass and/or solicit before 9:00 a.m. or after sunset on
any day.
(Ord. 94-O-81, passed 1-16-1995)
§ 822.05  SOLICITING ON OR ADJACENT TO PUBLIC WAYS.
   No person shall, upon a public street or sidewalk or in any yard, area,
doorway or entranceway immediately abutting thereon, solicit the sale of a
subscription to any magazine or periodical for future delivery or solicit,
peddle, hawk, sell or offer to sell goods, wares or merchandise.
(Ord. 94-O-81, passed 1-16-1995)
§ 822.99  PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than one hundred fifty dollars
($150.00) for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each
day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
(Ord. 94-O-81, passed 1-16-1995)
CHAPTER 824:  PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS
Section
824.01   Purpose
824.02   Definitions.
824.03   License required.
824.04   Application for license.
824.05   Fees required.
824.06   Exemptions.
824.07   Investigation and issuance; notice of denial.
824.08   Expiration and duration of license.
824.09   Revocation of license; appeal.
824.10   Display of license.
824.11   Hours of business.
824.12   Sales from a vehicle.
824.13   Special regulations for temporary businesses.
824.14   Enforcement.
824.15   Practices prohibited.
824.16   Exclusion by residents.
824.99   Penalty.
§ 824.01  PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter shall be to protect the health, safety and
welfare of the citizens of the city by regulating solicitors, door to door
salespersons, roadside stands and other temporary businesses.
(Ord. 02-O-51, passed 11-4-2002)
§ 824.02  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this section the terms defined in this subsection have
the meanings ascribed to them as follows:
   (a)   Charitable solicitor. "Charitable Solicitor" shall mean any person who
requests donations, contributions, gifts, endorsements, signatures or other
valuable considerations or distributes flyers, books, information or other
objects in behalf of bona-fide tax-exempt organizations by traveling about the
city in residential districts as defined by the zoning code. "Charitable or
political solicitor" shall include persons promoting religious organizations or
beliefs.
   (b)   Peddler. "Peddler" means any person with no fixed place of business
who goes from house to house, from place to place or from street to street,
carrying or transporting goods, wares or merchandise and offering or exposing
the same for sale or making sales and deliveries to purchaser.
   (c)   Responsible official. "Responsible Official" shall mean the Chief of
Police in reference to solicitor's licenses. It shall mean the Zoning Inspector
in reference to temporary business licenses.
   (d)   Solicitor. "Solicitor" means any person who goes from house to house,
from place to place or from street to street soliciting or taking or attempting
to take orders for any goods, wares or merchandise, including books,
periodicals, magazines or personal property of any nature whatsoever for future
delivery. "Solicitor" does not include any person taking or attempting to take
orders to be filled by goods, wares or merchandise delivered to the purchaser
from other states.
   (e)   Temporary business. "Temporary Business" shall mean any place at which
goods, wares, merchandise or services are sold or offered for sale, other than
from a permanent structure duly approved for such use; and further means
roadside stands and locations established within buildings and enclosed malls,
such as tables or booths, including those erected for special events and shows,
at which goods, wares, merchandise or services are sold or offered for sale or
advertised.
   (f)   Transient merchant. "Transient merchant" means any person, firm or
corporation who engages temporarily in the business of selling and delivering
goods, wares or merchandise within the city, and who, in the furtherance of
such purpose, hires, leases, uses or occupies any building, structure, vacant
lot, motor vehicle, trailer or railroad car.
(Ord. 02-O-51, passed 11-4-2002)
§ 824.03  LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No peddler, solicitor or transient merchant shall sell or offer for sale any
goods, wares or merchandise within the city unless a license therefor shall
first be secured as provided in this section.
(Ord. 02-O-51, passed 11-4-2002)
§ 824.04  APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   (a)   Persons desiring to solicit within the city shall apply for
solicitor's license at the office of the Chief of Police. One application shall
be made to authorize one or more persons to solicit within the city, provided
that all such persons identified by the permit application are employed by the
same person, firm or corporation.
   (b)   Persons desiring to operate temporary businesses shall apply for
temporary business licenses at the office of the Zoning Inspector. One
application shall be made to authorize one or more temporary businesses,
provided that all such locations identified by the license application are
owned and operated by the same person, firm or corporation. In the case of
temporary businesses located in buildings or enclosed malls under the direction
of a promoter or organizer of a show or special event, it shall be the
responsibility of the promoter or organizer to apply for temporary business
licenses.
   (c)   The application for a solicitor's license or temporary business
license shall include the following information:
      (1)   The name and address of the applicant and of all persons associated
with him or her in his or her business. The name(s) of the corporation(s), firm
(s) or person(s) which the applicant proposes to represent; the name(s) of the
person(s) who shall solicit or operate temporary businesses within the city and
the name(s) of the person(s) having the management or supervision of the
solicitors or temporary businesses; the local and permanent addresses of the
aforementioned person(s); and the telephone numbers at which such person(s) can
be reached; the name or identification of the applicant, and all persons
associated with him or her in the business, shall include any other names or
aliases which the individual has used or by which the individual has been
known. In addition, the name and identification of any corporation, firm or
person which the applicant proposes to represent or who will solicit or operate
the business and/or have management or supervision of the solicitors, shall
include any other names or aliases which the individual, corporation or firm
has used or by which the individual, corporation or firm has been known;
      (2)   The type of business for which the license is desired but not to
exceed six months for a solicitor's license or six weeks for a temporary
business license;
      (3)   The place(s) in the city where the applicant proposes to carry on
the licensee's business;
      (4)   The length of time for which the license is desired;
      (5)   A brief description of the nature of the business and the kinds of
goods, services or property to be solicited or offered for sale by temporary
businesses; and the manner in which such business shall be conducted;
      (6)   Evidence of a current vendor's license issued by the State of Ohio;
      (7)   The federal identification number of the applicant's business and
the social security number(s) of the person(s) having the management or
supervision of the business and of all solicitors or employees of temporary
business identified on the license application;
      (8)   For temporary businesses, written permission of the owner of the
site, and a site plan showing ingress and egress from the site, parking areas,
merchandise set backs and locations of signs (except that temporary businesses
located within buildings or enclosed malls shall not be required to provide
such information for the purpose of this code);
      (9)   Whether or not the solicitors, peddlers or transient merchants or
employees of temporary businesses named in the application have been convicted
of a crime, misdemeanor or the violation of any municipal ordinance, the nature
of the offense and the punishment assessed therefor;
      (10)   Credentials from the person, firm or corporation for which the
applicant proposed to do business, authorizing the applicant to act as such
representative;
      (11)   Upon the issuance of a license the applicant, and/or any
representative of the applicant, shall submit to being photographed and
fingerprinted by the Kirtland Police Department before commencing any
solicitations, peddling or going upon residential property, or ringing a
doorbell, or knocking on a door of a private residence, including an apartment,
not having been first requested or invited to do so by the owner, occupant or
lessee of such private residence or apartment;
      (12)   The place of residence of the applicant for the five years next
preceding the date of application; and
      (13)   Such other reasonable information as to the identity or character
of the persons named in the application or the method or plan of doing the
applicant's business as the responsible official may deem proper to fulfill the
purpose of this ordinance in the protection of the public good.
(Ord. 02-O-51, passed 11-4-2002)
§ 824.05  FEES REQUIRED.
   The application shall be issued on payment of a fee as stated in the Fee
Schedule in §
236.07 of the City of Kirtland Codified Ordinances, which amount shall be
credited on the license fee if the license is granted. Every application shall
bear the written approval or disapproval of the Chief of Police or Mayor after
a review of the application and an investigation of the moral character of the
applicant. If the application is approved, a license shall be issued by the
Chief of Police or Mayor upon payment of the required fee.
(Ord. 02-O-51, passed 11-4-2002; Am. Ord. 17-O-20, passed 7-3-2017)
§ 824.06  EXEMPTIONS.
   (a)   This section shall not apply to sales made by commercial travelers or
selling agents in the usual course of business with bona fide dealers, nor bona
fide sales of articles by sample, for delivery at a future date, nor sales
conducted pursuant to statute or by order of any court nor to bona fide auction
sales conducted by an auctioneer duly licensed under the statute or by order of
any court nor to bona fide auction sales conducted by an auctioneer duly
licensed under the statutes of the State of Ohio, nor to persons selling or
peddling the products of the farm or garden cultivated by him or her.
   (b)   The following persons are exempted from the requirements of §§
824.04 and
824.05. Charitable solicitors, temporary businesses operated by and for tax-
exempt organizations, and any other persons otherwise exempted by law. The
following additional persons shall be exempted from the requirements of this
chapter: persons selling newspapers, commercial travelers or selling agents
calling upon commercial establishments in the usual course of business and real
estate licensees.
(Ord. 02-O-51, passed 11-4-2002)
§ 824.07  INVESTIGATION AND ISSUANCE; NOTICE OF DENIAL.
   (a)   Upon receipt of an application for a solicitor's or temporary business
license, the responsible official shall cause such investigation of such
person's or persons' business responsibility or moral character to be made as
they deem necessary for the protection of the public good. If, as a result of
such investigation, the applicant's character and business responsibility are
found to be unsatisfactory, the application shall be denied.
   (b)   In the case of temporary businesses not located within a building or
enclosed mall, the responsible official shall conduct an investigation relative
to the proposed location of the temporary business. If, as a result of such an
investigation, the responsible official determines that the proposed location
will adversely affect the health, safety or welfare by causing or creating
traffic hazard, traffic congestion or for any other reason, the application
shall be denied.
   (c)   The responsible official shall keep a full record in his or her office
of all licenses issued and shall submit a copy of such record to the Chief of
Police and the Finance Director. Such licenses shall contain a license number,
the date the same is issued, the nature of the business authorized to be
carried on, the amount of the license fee paid, the expiration date of the
license, the place where the business may be carried on under such permit, the
name or names of the person or persons authorized to carry on the same. Within
30 working days of receipt of an application the responsible official shall
either issue to the applicant the requested license or issue a written notice
of denial and the reasons therefor.
      Any license issued under the provisions of this section shall not
authorize any person or persons, except the identical person or persons named
in said license to engage in business thereunder and such license shall not be
transferable.
   (d)   Every licensee under this chapter doing business in the city, upon
making any sale of or taking any order for any goods, wares, merchandise,
articles, things or services for future delivery shall deliver to and leave
with the purchaser or person giving any such order a sales slip or copy of such
order contract containing a description of the goods, wares, merchandise,
articles, things or services ordered or contracted for, the agreed price
thereof, the amount of all delivery charges thereon, the date for the future
delivery thereof, the name and address of the solicitor and the name and
address of the person, firm or company, if any, for whom the solicitor is
acting.
(Ord. 02-O-51, passed 11-4-2002)
§ 824.08  EXPIRATION AND DURATION OF LICENSE.
   (a)   Solicitor's licenses issued under the provisions of this ordinance
shall expire six months after the date of issuance thereof unless a prior date
is set therein.
   (b)   Temporary business licenses shall expire as determined by the Zoning
Inspector and as shown on the licenses, but in no case later than six weeks
after issuance.
(Ord. 02-O-51, passed 11-4-2002)
§ 824.09  REVOCATION OF LICENSE; APPEAL.
   (a)   The licenses issued pursuant to this chapter may be revoked at any
time by the responsible official, or their duly appointed representative, for
any of the following causes:
      (1)   Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the
application for license;
      (2)   Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in connection
with the selling of goods wares, merchandise or services;
      (3)   Any violation of this chapter;
      (4)   Conviction of the applicant or other persons acting under the
authority of the applicant's license of any felony or of a misdemeanor
involving moral turpitude; or
      (5)   Conducting the business permitted under this ordinance in an
unlawful manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or
to constitute a menace to the health, safety or general welfare of the public.
   (b)   Within three working days of the revocation of a license, the
responsible official shall send notice to the person whose license has been
revoked, setting forth specifically the grounds of the revocation. Such notice
shall be mailed to the person to whom the license was issued at the address
shown on the license application.
   (c)   Any person aggrieved by a decision of the responsible official in
regard to the denial of a permit or the revocation of a permit shall have the
right to appeal to the Board of Zoning Appeals. Such appeal shall be submitted
and heard according to the rules and procedures of the Board. Such appeal must
be filed within ten days of receipt of the written verification of such denial
or revocation. Such appeal shall be heard by the Board at the next regularly
scheduled meeting from the date of filing, however, no appeal shall be heard
sooner than 14 days from the date of filing.
(Ord. 02-O-51, passed 11-4-2002)
§ 824.10  DISPLAY OF LICENSE.
   (a)   Every solicitor, peddler or transient merchant licensed under this
section shall have with him or her while engaged in such business the license
received by him or her from the responsible official and shall produce the same
at the request of any city official or at the request of any individual within
the City of Kirtland to whom he or she is exhibiting his or her goods or
selling or attempting to sell same.
   (b)   A temporary business license issued under the provisions of this
chapter shall be posted in a conspicuous manner at every place of temporary
business.
(Ord. 02-O-51, passed 11-4-2002)
§ 824.11  HOURS OF BUSINESS.
   No person shall engage in soliciting or operate any roadside stand or other
temporary business at any place in the city during the period from sunset until
9:00 a.m., unless otherwise specified on the license.
(Ord. 02-O-51, passed 11-4-2002)
§ 824.12  SALES FROM A VEHICLE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person traveling about the city engaged in
soliciting from a vehicle to:
   (a)   Operate a vehicle when under the age of 18 years;
   (b)   Operate a vehicle at a speed in excess of 15 mph or more when cruising
neighborhoods or attempting to make a sale;
   (c)   Make a U-turn on any street;
   (d)   Operate the vehicle backwards in making or attempting to make a sale;
   (e)   Double park or park in any manner contrary to any ordinance relating
to parking when attempting to make or making a sale;
   (f)   Permit any person except an employee to hang on the vehicle or permit
any person except an employee to ride on or in the vehicle;
   (g)   Refuse to remove the vehicle from any street or public place in the
city upon the request of a police officer when, in the opinion of the police
officer, the vehicle is causing traffic congestion;
   (h)   Make or attempt to make a sale within a public park, or within 500
feet of any school, school yard or school playground during the hours when such
school is in regular or special session, or for a period of one-half hour after
the closing of such school;
   (i)   Make or attempt to make a sale within 100 feet of an intersection;
   (j)   Make or attempt to make a sale to any person standing in a street of
the city;
   (k)   Make or attempt to make a sale from a side of a vehicle not closest to
the nearest curb or berm;
   (l)   Cry his or her wares in a loud voice or use any noise-producing device
other than a soft chime and the limit of audibility of his voice or chime shall
not be more than 200 feet from the source of such sound; and/or
   (m)   Sell or offer for sale, food, candy confections, frozen desserts or
beverages unless the operator of the vehicle, is at all times, accompanied by a
responsible adult whose sole duty it shall be to keep a look out for and
protect the safety of, children and other persons attracted to or proceeding to
or from the location of the vehicle.
(Ord. 02-O-51, passed 11-4-2002)
§ 824.13  SPECIAL REGULATIONS FOR TEMPORARY BUSINESSES.
   (a)   No person shall operate a place of temporary business which:
      (1)   Violates the provisions of the Zoning Code of the city which
governs setbacks of merchandise displayed for sale and the district in which
such activities can be conducted;
      (2)   Exhibits signs of any kind which are in violation of the provisions
of the Sign Code of the city; and/or
      (3)   In any manner adversely affects the public health, safety or
welfare.
   (b)   In authorizing such outside displays, the responsible official may
attach such reasonable conditions as he or she deems necessary including, but
not limited to, the length of time such display may be permitted, the portions
of the property used for display, provisions for parking, provisions for
adequate ingress and egress and the posting of a deposit not to exceed two
hundred dollars ($200.00) to ensure compliance with city laws, including, but
not limited to, the municipal income tax laws.
(Ord. 02-O-51, passed 11-4-2002)
§ 824.14  ENFORCEMENT.
   The Chief of Police and the Zoning Inspector and their duly authorized
representatives shall have the authority to examine all places of business and
persons within the city subject to the provisions of this chapter, to determine
if this chapter has been complied with and to enforce the provisions of this
chapter against any person found to be violating the same.
(Ord. 02-O-51, passed 11-4-2002)
§ 824.15  PRACTICES PROHIBITED.
   (a)   No person licensed under the provisions of this section shall, within
the City of Kirtland call attention to his or her business nor to the goods,
wares or merchandise which he or she is selling or offering for sale by crying
them out, by blowing a horn, by ringing a bell or by any loud or unusual noise.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any solicitor or charitable solicitor to go
upon any premise and ring the doorbell or rap or knock on any door or create
any sound in any other manner calculated to attract the attention of any
occupant of such residence at which a sign bearing the words "No Solicitors" is
painted, affixed or otherwise exposed to public view.
(Ord. 02-O-51, passed 11-4-2002)
§ 824.16  EXCLUSION BY RESIDENTS.
   Any resident of the city who wishes to exclude peddlers or solicitors from
premises occupied by him or her may place upon or near the usual entrance to
such premises a printed placard or sign bearing the following notice: "Peddlers
and Solicitors prohibited". Such placard shall be at least three and three-
fourths inches long and three and three-fourths inches wide and the printing
thereon shall not be smaller than 48 point type. No peddler shall enter in or
upon any premises, or attempt to enter in or upon any premises, where placard
or sign is placed and maintained. No person other than the person occupying
such premises shall remove, injure or deface such placard or sign.
(Ord. 02-O-51, passed 11-4-2002)
§ 824.99  PENALTY.
   Any person, firm or corporation who pleads guilty or is found guilty of
violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be fined not more than
five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisoned not more than 30 days, or both.
Each day of violation shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 02-O-51, passed 11-4-2002)
CHAPTER 826:  CASUAL SALES
Section
826.01   Purpose of chapter.
826.02   Permit required; fee.
826.03   Issuance, expiration and display of permit.
826.04   Sales through classified advertising.
826.05   Requirements for sales.
826.99   Penalty.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Auctions - see Ohio R.C. 1302.41, Ch. 4707
   Christmas tree sales - see Ohio R.C. Ch. 4551
   Determining property value in theft offense - see GEN. OFF.
642.24
   Peddlers, Solicitors and Transient Merchants - see B.R. & T.
Ch. 824
   Receiving stolen property - see GEN. OFF.
642.22
   Theft - see GEN. OFF.
642.015,
642.02,
642.03
§ 826.01  PURPOSE OF CHAPTER.
   The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the orderly regulation of
traffic and parking in the city, the control of commercial activity within
residential neighborhoods, the regulation of signs advertising the sales
referred to in §
826.02 and the regulation of nuisances.
(Ord. 74-O-38, passed 3-18-1974)
§ 826.02  PERMIT REQUIRED; FEE.
   No person shall conduct a sale of household goods and belongings, commonly
described as a house, garage, porch, yard, basement, lawn, barn, attic,
rummage, liquidation or  flea market sale, without first obtaining a permit
therefor from the City Clerk. The fee for such permit is as stated in the Fee
Schedule in §
236.07 of the City of Kirtland Codified Ordinances.
(Ord. 74-O-38, passed 3-18-1974; Am. Ord. 17-O-20, passed 7-3-2017)
§ 826.03  ISSUANCE, EXPIRATION AND DISPLAY OF PERMIT.
   Not more than two permits per residence shall be issued in any one year from
January 1 to December 31. Each permit shall be valid for four consecutive days,
whereupon it shall expire. Hours of the sale shall be only between sunrise and
sunset of any given day. A permit must be conspicuously displayed on the sale
premises during the time of the sale.
(Ord. 74-O-38, passed 3-18-1974)
§ 826.04  SALES THROUGH CLASSIFIED ADVERTISING.
   This chapter does not prohibit the sale of an item through classified
advertising or similar methods.
(Ord. 74-O-38, passed 3-18-1974)
§ 826.05  REQUIREMENTS FOR SALES.
   (a)   All items advertised or displayed for sale at a sale regulated by this
chapter shall be the personal property of the person conducting the sale. Such
personal property must have been used or possessed by the seller incidental to
his or her use and occupancy of the single-family residential dwelling from
which such sale is conducted. As used in this section, a single-family
residential dwelling includes any private living unit, whether in a one-family,
two-family, multifamily, apartment or dormitory structure.
   (b)   No such sale shall be held on any property, other than that mentioned
in subsection (a) hereof, not designated as commercial or industrial, but this
shall not prevent the operation of a rummage sale by a church, school or other
recognized nonprofit organization on its premises.
   (c)   No person shall sell personal property for or on behalf of any other
person either by consignment or otherwise.
   (d)   No person shall sell any personal property purchased from others for
the sole purpose of selling it from such person's single-family residential
dwelling. However, owners of contiguous property may join together to conduct a
joint sale of property, meeting all other conditions of this section, provided
that the names of the sellers are set forth on the required permit.
(Ord. 74-O-38, passed 3-18-1974)
§ 826.99  PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than one hundred fifty dollars
($150.00) for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each
day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
CHAPTER 834:  GAME ROOMS AND AMUSEMENT DEVICES
Section
834.01   Definitions.
834.02   License required.
834.03   License application.
834.04   License fee.
834.05   Interior requirements.
834.06   Supervision.
834.07   Alcoholic beverages.
834.08   Minors.
834.09   License revocation or suspension.
834.99   Penalty.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Amusement corporations - see Ohio R.C. 1743.10 et seq.
   Gambling - see GEN. OFF.
Ch. 630
   Licensing of places of amusement - see Ohio R.C. 715.48
   Making or using slugs - see GEN. OFF.
642.16
   Safety examination of buildings - see Ohio R.C. 737.37 et seq.
   Tampering with coin machines - see GEN. OFF.
642.13
§ 834.01  DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this chapter:
   (a)   Game room. "Game room" means a building, room enclosure, premises,
place or establishment in the city which contains more than four mechanical or
electrical amusement devices, other than telephones, juke boxes or coin-
operated rides, which mechanical or electrical amusement devices require coins
or tokens for their operation.
   (b)   Mechanical or electrical amusement device. "Mechanical or electrical
amusement device" means a machine or device, other than a telephone, juke box
or coin-operated ride, which, upon the insertion of a coin or token, operates
or may be operated for use as a game, contest or amusement of any description,
or which may be used for any such game, contest or amusement. "Mechanical or
electrical amusement device" does not include and shall not be construed as
pertaining to machines which have as their primary purpose the dispensing of a
product or merchandise upon deposit of one or more coins or tokens.
(Ord. 82-O-48, passed 6-21-1982)
§ 834.02  LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person shall engage in the business of operating a game room in the city
without first obtaining a license therefor from the Director of Public Safety
as provided for in this chapter.
(Ord. 82-O-48, passed 6-21-1982)
§ 834.03  LICENSE APPLICATION.
   An application for the license shall be made to the Director of Public
Safety on forms to be prescribed by him or her and shall state the name and
address of the applicant, if an individual, and, if a firm or partnership, the
names, residences and occupations of the manager and each member of the firm or
partnership, and, if a corporation, the names of its officers and managers, and
such other information as the Director may reasonably require.
   The applicant shall attach to the application a floor plan, drawn to scale,
showing the proposed placement of each amusement device on the applicant's
premises. All regular and emergency exits shall be clearly identified on the
floor plan.
   The application shall contain the name or names and addresses of all persons
who will be acting as supervisors of the game room, and the Director shall be
notified in writing, within 24 hours, of any change in supervisory personnel.
   The application shall be rejected if it is found that any person named in
the application has been convicted of a felony or a misdemeanor involving moral
turpitude or that the game room sought to be licensed does not comply with any
zoning, building, health or fire regulation applicable thereto.
(Ord. 82-O-48, passed 6-21-1982)
§ 834.04  LICENSE FEE.
   Any person to which a license is granted shall pay an annual fee as stated
in the Fee Schedule in §
236.07 of the City of Kirtland Codified Ordinances. In addition, the applicant
shall be charged an annual fee as stated in the Fee Schedule in §
236.07 of the City of Kirtland Codified Ordinances for each mechanical or
electrical amusement device on the premises. The maximum number of mechanical
or electrical amusement devices allowed on the premises shall be indicated on
the face of the license.
(Ord. 82-O-48, passed 6-21-1982; Am. Ord. 17-O-20, passed 7-3-2017)
§ 834.05  INTERIOR REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   The interior of the game room shall contain sufficient toilet
facilities as required and defined by the current provisions of the Ohio Basic
Building Code.
   (b)   There shall be a minimum of four feet separating each mechanical or
electrical amusement device and the front portion of each device must be in
view of the supervisor on the premises.
(Ord. 82-O-48, passed 6-21-1982)
§ 834.06  SUPERVISION.
   Each operator of a game room shall provide at least one or more responsible
adults, 21 years old or older, as a supervisor who shall be readily
identifiable and who shall be on duty at all times the game room is open for
business. Such supervisor shall maintain the decorum of the game room and keep
the aisles free for passage throughout the game room and shall further control
the amount of noise within the game room so that it does not constitute a
nuisance.
(Ord. 82-O-48, passed 6-21-1982)
§ 834.07  ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES.
   No person shall possess, use, sell or consume any alcoholic beverage while
such person is within or upon the premises of a game room. This section shall
not apply to any game room for which a permit, which is in force at the time,
is issued by the Ohio Department of Liquor Control.
(Ord. 82-O-48, passed 6-21-1982)
§ 834.08  MINORS.
   (a)   No operator of a game room shall allow an amusement device within his
or her establishment to be played by a minor between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and
4:00 p.m. On any day, from September 1 through May 31, on which any school of
the public school system of the city is in session and conducting classes,
unless such minor is accompanied by his or her parent or legal guardian.
   (b)   Each operator of a game room shall have displayed in a prominent place
the following notice:
"No person under 18 years of age shall be allowed in this establishment between
the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. on any day, from September 1 through May
31, on which any school of the public school system of the city is in session
and conducting classes, unless such minor is accompanied by his or her parent
or legal guardian."
(Ord. 82-O-48, passed 6-21-1982)
§ 834.09  LICENSE REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION.
   The Director of Public Safety may at any time revoke or suspend licenses
granted under the authority of this chapter for failure to comply with the
provisions of this chapter or any law, ordinance or rule of the state or the
city. In addition, the Director is hereby authorized to revoke the license of
any person who is convicted of a violation of any criminal law of the state or
the city.
(Ord. 82-O-48, passed 6-21-1982)
§ 834.99  PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than one hundred fifty dollars
($150.00) for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each
day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
(Ord. 82-O-48, passed 6-21-1982)
CHAPTER 836:  GAS AND OIL WELLS
Section
836.01   Permit required; fee.
836.02   Plot plan required.
836.03   Investigation of premises.
836.04   Rejection of application; appeals.
836.05   Permit issuance; bond.
836.06   Restoration of land.
836.07   Duration of bond; insurance.
836.08   Permit limitations.
836.09   Drilling near buildings and rights-of-way; fire extinguishers and
equipment required.
836.10   Control gates.
836.11   Abandonment of wells.
836.12   Discovery of abandoned wells.
836.13   Maintenance of wells.
836.14   Drilling hours.
836.15   Prescribing methods where chapter ineffective; conflict of laws.
836.16   Expiration of permit.
836.17   Testing of water wells.
836.18   Setbacks.
836.99   Penalty; equitable remedies.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Excavations, landfills and grading - see B. & H.
Ch. 1442
   Gas generally - see S.U. & P.S.
Ch. 1044
   Noxious odors; filthy accumulations; polluting and diverting watercourses -
see GEN. OFF.
660.04
   Oil and gas - see Ohio R.C. Ch. 1509
§ 836.01  PERMIT REQUIRED; FEE.
   No person shall drill a gas or oil well in the city without first obtaining
a permit therefor. For each well to be drilled, application for a permit shall
be made to the City Engineer upon such forms as he or she may prescribe. Such
application shall be accompanied by a fee as stated in the Fee Schedule in §
236.07 of the City of Kirtland Codified Ordinances. There shall be filed a
separate application and fee for each well contemplated.
(Ord. 80-O-104, passed 2-17-1981; Am. Ord. 17-O-20, passed 7-3-2017)
§ 836.02  PLOT PLAN REQUIRED.
   Every person who makes application for the permit provided for in §
836.01 shall submit a plot plan by a licensed surveyor, showing thereon the
exact location of the well to be drilled, all proposed access roads, buildings
and structures, adjacent property owners and all buildings located on adjacent
property which are within 300 feet of the property line. Such plot plan shall
remain on file with the city.
(Ord. 80-O-104, passed 2-17-1981)
§ 836.03  INVESTIGATION OF PREMISES.
   The City Engineer shall refer each application for the permit provided for
in §
836.01 and the plot plan provided for in §
836.02 to the Planning and Zoning Commission, which shall cause an
investigation to be made of the premises on which the applicant proposes to
drill or operate a well for oil or gas.
(Ord. 80-O-104, passed 2-17-1981)
§ 836.04  REJECTION OF APPLICATION; APPEALS.
   Any other provision of this chapter to the contrary notwithstanding, the
Planning and Zoning Commission may recommend rejection of an application for
the permit provided for in §
836.01 where, by reason of the location of the proposed well, the character and
value of the permanent improvements already erected and the use to which the
land and surroundings are adapted for civic purposes or for sanitary reasons,
the drilling of an oil or gas well will constitute a health or safety problem
to the city and its inhabitants. When such permit is refused, the fee deposited
with the application shall be returned to the applicant. An appeal from the
decision of the Commission to deny a permit to the applicant may be made to the
Board of Zoning Appeals, as provided by the City Charter and city ordinance.
(Ord. 80-O-104, passed 2-17-1981)
§ 836.05  PERMIT ISSUANCE; BOND.
   The City Engineer shall issue the permit provided for in §
836.01, upon receipt of the application duly approved by the Planning and
Zoning Commission, and upon the furnishing of a one-year drilling bond by the
applicant in the sum of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) in a form and with
a surety approved by the Director of Law. Such bond shall be conditioned upon
the faithful observance of all provisions of law or ordinance relating to the
drilling of an oil or gas well and further conditioned upon the permittee and
his or her assigns doing the following:
   (a)   Restoring to their former condition the streets, sidewalks and other
public places of the city which may be disturbed in the drilling operation; and
   (b)   Clearing the area of all litter, machinery, derricks, buildings and
all other substances used or permitted in the drilling operation.
(Ord. 89-O-46, passed 12-18-1989)
§ 836.06  RESTORATION OF LAND.
   No oil or gas well owner or his agent shall fail to restore the land surface
within the area disturbed in siting, drilling, completing and producing the
well as required in this section.
   (a)   Within five months after the date upon which the surface drilling of a
well is commenced, the owner or his or her agent shall fill all the pits for
containing brine, other waste substances resulting, obtained or produced in
connection with exploration, drilling or production of oil or gas, or oil that
is not required by other state or federal law or regulation, and remove all
concrete bases, drilling supplies and drilling equipment. Within nine months
after the date upon which the surface drilling of a well is commenced, the
owner or his or her agent shall grade or terrace and plant, seed or sod the
area disturbed that is not required in production of the well, where necessary
to bind the soil and prevent substantial erosion and sedimentation.
   (b)   Within three months after a well that has produced oil or gas is
plugged, or after the plugging of a dry hole, the owner or his or her agent
shall remove all production and storage structures, supplies and equipment, and
any oil, salt water and debris, and fill any remaining excavations. Within such
period, the owner or his or her agent shall grade or terrace and plant, seed or
sod the area disturbed in such manner as to approximate, at a minimum, the
original shape and condition of the drilling site as it existed prior to the
initiation of drilling procedures and where necessary to bind the soil and
prevent erosion and sedimentation.
   (c)   The City Engineer may, by written order, shorten the time periods
provided under subsections (a) and (b) hereof if failure to shorten the periods
would be likely to result in damage to public health or the waters or natural
resources of the city. The City Engineer may, upon written application by an
owner or his or her agent showing reasonable cause, extend the period within
which restoration shall be completed under subsections (a) and (b) hereof, but
not to exceed a further six-month period, except under extraordinarily adverse
weather conditions or when essential equipment, fuel or labor is unavailable to
the owner or his or her agent.
(Ord. 89-O-46, passed 12-18-1989)
§ 836.07  DURATION OF BOND; INSURANCE.
   (a)   The bond provided for in §
836.05 shall be in force and effect during the entire drilling operation and
for at least 30 days thereafter, until the permit holder has complied with all
of the conditions thereof, including the restoration of the land as required by
§
836.06.
   (b)   The drilling bond must then be replaced with a maintenance bond in the
amount of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000), which will guarantee proper
maintenance and eventual plugging and site restoration and which shall remain
in full force and effect until such time as the well is plugged and permanently
abandoned and the land is restored as required by §
836.06.
   (c)   If the surety provider cancels the maintenance bond, the city shall
receive a 30-day certified notice. The permit holder must replace the bond with
another bond or security acceptable to the city within that 30-day period or
the city shall have the right to immediately revoke the permit and order the
well production to cease and the well to be plugged.
   (d)   In addition to the above bonds, the applicant shall deposit with the
city multi-peril insurance policies or certificates of insurance covering
liability for property damage and personal injury. Such policies shall be
subject to the approval of the Law Director and shall, at a minimum, be written
by companies licensed to do business in the state. Such insurance shall be in
an amount of not less than ten million dollars ($10,000,000.00) bodily injury
coverage and ten million dollars ($10,000,000.00) property damage coverage to
pay damages for injury to persons and/or damage to property caused by the
drilling, operation or plugging of such a well. The city shall be named as an
additional insured, holding the city free and harmless from any and all
liability incurred by the granting of such permit. The above insurance policies
shall be kept in full force and effect until such time as the well is plugged
and permanently abandoned and the land is restored as required by §
836.06.
(Ord. 89-O-46, passed 12-18-1989)
§ 836.08  PERMIT LIMITATIONS.
   No permit shall be issued for the drilling of a well, except upon the ground
owned by the applicant or held by the applicant under an oil and gas lease or
drilling contract from the owner giving permission to drill the well. Nothing
in this chapter and no permit issued hereunder shall be deemed to grant any
right or license to the permittee to enter upon or occupy, in any respect, for
drilling or production operations, any land, except by written permission of
the owner.
(Ord. 80-O-104, passed 2-17-1981)
§ 836.09  DRILLING NEAR BUILDINGS AND RIGHTS-OF-WAY; FIRE EXTINGUISHERS AND
EQUIPMENT REQUIRED.
   No person shall erect or use a drilling rig within 300 feet of a building in
the city without first obtaining, in writing, the consent of the owner of such
building. The measurement shall be made from the center of the proposed well.
Every drilling rig shall be equipped with a "hospital" or extra quiet-type
muffler and a fire extinguisher maintained in good condition. No person shall
drill any gas or oil well within 300 feet of any railroad right-of-way, street
or highway as measured from the center of the proposed well to the nearest
point of the right-of-way or dedicated portion of the street or highway.
(Ord. 87-O-33, passed 8-24-1987)
§ 836.10  CONTROL GATES.
   In the drilling of a well or the cleaning of an abandoned well, preparatory
to the plugging of such abandoned well, a person shall provide for a drilling-
in control gate which shall be so constructed as to effectually cut off the
flow of gas to the top of the well and which can be operated at a remote point
from the well.
(Ord. 80-O-104, passed 2-17-1981)
§ 836.11  ABANDONMENT OF WELLS.
   If a well is abandoned, the owner or lessee thereof shall notify the City
Engineer and the Chief of the Ohio Division of Oil and Gas. The location of the
well shall be indicated on the map provided at the time of the original
application. The plugging and/or abandonment shall be performed pursuant to the
laws of the state and the ordinances of the city and shall be done under the
supervision of a representative of the Division.
(Ord. 80-O-104, passed 2-17-1981)
§ 836.12  DISCOVERY OF ABANDONED WELLS.
   (a)   Any owner or lessee of land who discovers an abandoned gas or oil well
shall immediately notify the Fire Division and/or the City Engineer.
   (b)   Any person who discovers an abandoned gas or oil well during the
development of land or the construction of a building shall immediately cease
all operations until notice of the discovery is given to the Engineer and the
Fire Chief and until such well is treated in accordance with this chapter.
   (c)   No person engaged in any phase of construction shall remove any casing
or piping of an abandoned well until such well has been reported to the Chief
of the Ohio Division of Oil and Gas and the Fire Chief. No construction shall
take place either over or near an abandoned gas or oil well until such well has
been inspected and the recommended type of treatment has been made by the Chief
of the Division in conformity with the laws of the state and this chapter.
(Ord. 80-O-104, passed 2-17-1981)
§ 836.13  MAINTENANCE OF WELLS.
   No owner of land or lessee of gas or oil well rights upon the land of
another shall permit a gas or oil well to become deteriorated, damaged or in
such disrepair as to cause leakage of gas or oil. Such leakage shall constitute
a nuisance and repair to the well shall be made forthwith.
(Ord. 80-O-104, passed 2-17-1981)
§ 836.14  DRILLING HOURS.
   Drilling is permitted twenty-four hours a day, but no driller may dress
tolls, sharpen bits or operate his or her forge between the hours of 9:00 p.m.
and 6:00 a.m. of the next day in any area where there are inhabited dwellings
within 1,000 feet of the drilling operation.
(Ord. 80-O-104, passed 2-17-1981)
§ 836.15  PRESCRIBING METHODS WHERE CHAPTER INEFFECTIVE; CONFLICT OF LAWS.
   If any provision of this chapter cannot be applied or, if applied, would be
ineffective in carrying out the protection which this chapter is meant to give,
then the City Engineer, the Fire Chief and the Ohio Division of Oil and Gas may
designate the method to be used. If the standards established by this chapter
are less restrictive than Ohio R.C. Chapter 1509 or the rules adopted
thereunder by the Division, then the more restrictive standards of the state
statute or Division rules shall apply.
(Ord. 80-O-104, passed 2-17-1981)
§ 836.16  EXPIRATION OF PERMIT.
   All drilling operations authorized pursuant to a permit granted under this
chapter shall commence within one year of the date of such permit. If drilling
operations are not commenced within one year of the date of the permit, the
permit shall be void.
(Ord. 87-O-33, passed 8-24-1987)
§ 836.17  TESTING OF WATER WELLS.
   (a)   In addition to all other requirements of this chapter, no permit shall
be issued for the drilling of a well until the applicant, at the applicant's
sole cost and expense, has caused each and every water well located within
2,500 feet from the center of the proposed well to be tested for rate of flow,
if the well owner desires such test, and tested by the Lake County General
Health District, or other agency or laboratory approved by the Environmental
Protection Agency (EPA) and the City Engineer, for the following parameters:
chloride, calcium, magnesium, sodium, iron, barium, total dissolved solids,
potassium, strontium, manganese, nitrate and sulfate. Such test should also
provide for the recording of any odor of sulfur. The laboratory results of such
tests shall be maintained as a permanent record of the city.
   (b)   Within 30 days after the commencement of the actual drilling
operation, and not less than every 30 days thereafter for a period of one year,
the permit holder shall, at the permit holder's sole cost and expense, cause
three water wells located down-gradient from the center of the gas and oil
well, as determined by the City Engineer, to be tested by the Lake County
General Health District, or other agency or laboratory approved by the EPA and
the City Engineer, for the following parameters: chloride, calcium, magnesium,
sodium, iron, barium, total dissolved solids, potassium, strontium, manganese,
nitrate and sulfate. The results of such tests shall be provided to the City
Engineer and maintained as a permanent record of the city.
(Ord. 90-O-45, passed 8-20-1990)
§ 836.18  SETBACKS.
   No part of a gas or oil well operation conducted pursuant to a permit issued
under this chapter, including, but not limited to, the erection or use of a
drill rig, the storage of supplies and materials, the placement of tanks or any
other use directly or indirectly associated with the drilling or well
operation, shall be conducted within the minimum front yard, side yard or rear
yard set-back requirements as established by
Chapter 1280 of the Planning and Zoning Code for each zoning district. No
access road for the ingress and egress of trucks and equipment to the well site
or for the operation of the well shall be placed within the minimum side yard
or rear yard set-back requirements or within 50 feet of any occupied dwelling,
whichever distance is greater. The set-back requirements of this section shall
not apply to a lot line of a parcel of land which directly adjoins another
parcel of land where both parcels are a part of one pool agreement for the
purpose of forming a drilling unit approved by the Chief of the Division of Oil
and Gas pursuant to Ohio R.C. Chapter 1509.
(Ord. 87-O-53, passed 10-19-1987)
§ 836.99  PENALTY; EQUITABLE REMEDIES.
   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than one hundred fifty dollars
($150.00) for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each
day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. The Director of Law may
seek injunctive relief against violations of any of the provisions of this
chapter.
CHAPTER 870:  SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
Section
870.01   Purpose and intent.
870.02   Definitions.
870.03   Classification.
870.04   License required; application.
870.05   License issuance.
870.06   Fees.
870.07   Inspections.
870.08   License expiration.
870.09   License suspension.
870.10   License revocation.
870.11   Appeals.
870.12   License transfer.
870.13   Location.
870.14   Escort agencies.
870.15   Nude model studios.
870.16   Adult theaters and adult motion picture theaters.
870.17   Adult motels.
870.18   Exhibition of sexually explicit films or videos.
870.19   Display of sexually explicit material to minors.
870.99   Penalty.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Displaying matter harmful to juveniles - see GEN. OFF.
666.115
   Disseminating matter harmful to juveniles - see GEN. OFF.
666.11
   Obscenity - see Ohio R.C. 2907.31 et seq.
   Sex related offenses - see GEN. OFF.
Ch. 666
   Deception to obtain matter harmful to juveniles - see GEN. OFF.
666.13
§ 870.01  PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate sexually oriented businesses
to promote the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the citizens of
the city and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the
concentration of sexually oriented businesses within the city. The provisions
of this chapter have neither the purpose nor the effect of imposing a
limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials,
including sexually oriented materials. Similarly, it is not the intent nor the
effect of this chapter to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually
oriented materials protected by the First Amendment, or to deny access by the
distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their
intended market.
(Ord. 98-O-24, passed 4-6-1998)
§ 870.02  DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this chapter:
   (a)   Adult arcade. "Adult arcade" means any place to which the public is
permitted or invited wherein coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically,
electrically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines,
projectors or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to
five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so
displayed are distinguished or characterized by the depicting or describing of
specific sexual activities or specific anatomical areas.
   (b)   Adult bookstore, adult video store. "Adult bookstore" or "adult video
store" means a commercial establishment which utilizes twenty-five percent or
more of its retail selling area for the purpose of sale or rental, for any form
of consideration, any one or more of the following:
      (1)   Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or
photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, video reproductions,
slides or other visual representations, which depict or describe specific
sexual activities or specific anatomical areas; or
      (2)   Instruments, devices or paraphernalia which are designed for use in
connection with specific sexual activities.
   (c)   Adult cabaret. "Adult cabaret" means a nightclub, bar, restaurant or
similar commercial establishment which regularly features:
      (1)   Persons who appear in a state of nudity;
      (2)   Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of
specific anatomical areas or by specific sexual activities; or
      (3)   Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other
photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or
description of specific sexual activities or specific anatomical areas.
   (d)   Adult motel. "Adult motel" means a hotel, motel or similar commercial
establishment which:
      (1)   Offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration;
provides patrons with closed circuit television transmissions, films, motion
pictures, video cassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions which are
characterized by the depiction or description of specific sexual activities or
specific anatomical areas; and has a sign visible from the public right-of-way
which advertises the availability of this adult type of photographic
reproductions;
      (2)   Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less
than ten hours; or
      (3)   Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to sub-rent the room
for a period of time that is less than ten hours.
   (e)   Adult motion picture theater. "Adult motion picture theater" means a
commercial establishment where, for any form of consideration, films, motion
pictures, video cassettes, slides or similar photographic reproductions are
regularly shown which are characterized by the exposure of specific sexual
activities or specific anatomical areas.
   (f)   Adult theater. "Adult theater" means a theater, concert hall,
auditorium or similar commercial establishment which regularly features persons
who appear in a state of nudity or live performances which are characterized by
the exposure of specific sexual activities or specific anatomical areas.
   (g)   Chief of Police. "Chief of Police" means the Chief of Police of the
city or his or her designated agent.
   (h)   Escort. "Escort" means a person who, for consideration, agrees or
offers to act as a companion, guide or date for another person, or who agrees
or offers to privately model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for
another person.
   (i)   Escort agency. "Escort agency" means a person or business association
who furnishes, offers to furnish or advertises to furnish, escorts as one of
its primary business purposes, for a fee, tip or other consideration.
   (j)   Establishment. "Establishment" means and includes any of the
following:
      (1)   The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as a
new business;
      (2)   The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually
oriented business, to any sexually oriented business;
      (3)   The addition of any sexually oriented business to any other
existing sexually oriented business; or
      (4)   The relocation of any sexually oriented business.
   (k)   Licensee. "Licensee" means a person in whose name a license to operate
a sexually oriented business has been issued, as well as the individual listed
as an applicant on the application for a license.
   (l)   Nude model studio. "Nude model studio" means any place where a person
who appears in a state of nudity or displays specific anatomical areas is
provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculpted, photographed or
similarly depicted by other persons who pay money or any form of consideration.
   (m)   Nudity, state of nudity. "Nudity" or "state of nudity" means:
      (1)   The appearance of a human bare buttocks, anus, male genitals,
female genitals or female breasts; or
      (2)   A state of dress which fails to opaquely cover a human buttocks,
anus, male genitals, female genitals or the entire female breasts.
   (n)   Operates, causes to operate. "Operates" or "causes to operate" means
to cause to function or to put or keep in operation. A person may be found to
be operating or causing to be operated a sexually oriented business whether or
not that person is an owner, part owner or licensee of the business.
   (o)   Person. "Person" means an individual, proprietorship, partnership,
corporation, association or other legal entity.
   (p)   Public park. "Public park" means public land which has been designated
for park or recreational activities, including, but not limited to, a park,
playground, nature trails, swimming pool, reservoir, athletic field, basketball
or tennis courts, pedestrian bicycle paths, open space, wilderness areas or
similar public land within the city which is under the control, operation or
management of the city, county or state.
   (q)   Residential district. "Residential district" means a single-family,
duplex, townhouse, multiple-family or mobile home zoning district.
   (r)   Residential use. "Residential use" means a single-family, duplex,
multiple-family or mobile home park, mobile home subdivision and campground
use.
   (s)   School. "School" means any public or private educational facility,
including, but not limited to, child day care facilities, nursery schools,
preschools, kindergartens, elementary schools, primary schools, intermediate
schools, junior high schools, middle schools, high schools, vocational schools,
secondary schools, continuation schools, special education schools, junior
colleges and universities. "School" includes the school ground, but does not
include the facilities used primarily for another purpose and only incidentally
as a school.
   (t)   Semi-nude. "Semi-nude" means a state of dress in which clothing covers
no more than the genitals, the pubic region and an entire female breast, as
well as portions of the body covered by supporting straps or devices.
   (u)   Sexual encounter center. "Sexual encounter center" means a business or
commercial enterprise that, as one of its primary business purposes, offers for
any form of consideration:
      (1)   Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between
persons of the opposite sex; or
      (2)   Activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the
same sex when one or more of the persons is in a state of nudity or semi-nude.
   (v)   Sexually oriented business. "Sexually oriented business" means an
adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel,
adult motion picture theater, adult theater, escort agency, nude model studio
or sexual encounter center.
   (w)   Specific anatomical areas. "Specific anatomical areas" mean human
genitals in a state of sexual arousal.
   (x)   Specific sexual activities. "Specific sexual activities" means and
includes any of the following:
      (1)   The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic
region, buttocks, anus or female breasts;
      (2)   Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including
intercourse, oral copulation or sodomy;
      (3)   Masturbation, actual or simulated; and
      (4)   Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the
activities set forth in paragraph (x)(1) to (3) hereof.
   (y)   Substantial enlargement. "Substantial enlargement" of a sexually
oriented business means the increase in floor area occupied by the business by
more than 25 percent, as the floor area exists on March 1, 1998.
   (z)   Transfer of ownership or control. "Transfer of ownership or control"
of a sexually oriented business means and includes any of the following:
      (1)   The sale, lease or sublease of the business;
      (2)   The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest
in the business, whether by sale, exchange or similar means; or
      (3)   The establishment of a trust, gift or other similar legal device
which transfers the ownership or control of the business, except for transfer
by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the person possessing
the ownership or control.
(Ord. 98-O-24, passed 4-6-1998)
§ 870.03  CLASSIFICATION.
   Sexually oriented businesses are classified as follows:
   (a)   Adult arcades;
   (b)   Adult bookstores or adult video stores;
   (c)   Adult cabarets;
   (d)   Adult motels;
   (e)   Adult motion picture theaters;
   (f)   Adult theaters;
   (g)   Escort agencies;
   (h)   Nude model studios; and
   (i)   Sexual encounter centers.
(Ord. 98-O-24, passed 4-6-1998)
§ 870.04  LICENSE REQUIRED; APPLICATION.
   (a)   No person shall operate a sexually oriented business without a valid
license issued therefor by the city for the particular type of business.
   (b)   (1)   An application for a license must be made on a form provided by
the Chief of Police. The application must be accompanied by a sketch or diagram
showing the configuration of the premises, including a statement of total floor
space occupied by the business. The sketch or diagram need not be
professionally prepared, but must be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with
marked dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or
minus six inches.
      (2)   Applicants who must comply with §
870.19 shall submit a diagram meeting the requirements of §
870.18.
   (c)   The applicant must be qualified according to the provisions of this
chapter.
   (d)   If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is an
individual, he or she must sign the application for a license as the applicant.
If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is other than an
individual, each individual who has a 20 percent or greater interest in the
business must sign the application for a license as the applicant. Each
applicant must be qualified under §
870.05 and each applicant shall be considered a licensee if a license is
granted.
(Ord. 98-O-24, passed 4-6-1998)
§ 870.05  LICENSE ISSUANCE.
   (a)   The Chief of Police shall approve the issuance of a license to an
applicant within 60 days after receipt of an application unless the Chief of
Police finds one or more of the following to be true:
      (1)   An applicant is under 18 years of age;
      (2)   An applicant or an applicant's spouse is overdue in payment to the
city of taxes, fees, fines or penalties assessed or imposed upon the applicant
or the applicant's spouse in relation to a sexually oriented business;
      (3)   An applicant has failed to provide information reasonably necessary
for issuance of the license or has falsely answered a question or request for
information on the application form;
      (4)   An applicant or an applicant's spouse has been convicted of a
violation of a provision of this chapter, other than the offense of operating a
sexually oriented business without a license, within two years immediately
preceding the application. The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall
have no effect;
      (5)   The license fee required by this chapter has not been paid;
      (6)   An applicant has been employed in a sexually oriented business in a
managerial capacity within the preceding 12 months and has demonstrated an
inability to operate or manage a sexually oriented business premises in a
peaceful and law abiding manner, thus necessitating action by law enforcement
officers;
      (7)   An applicant or the proposed establishment is in violation of, or
is not in compliance with, this chapter;
      (8)   An applicant or an applicant's spouse has been convicted of a
crime:
         A.   Involving any of the following offenses:
            1.   Prostitution;
            2.   Promotion of prostitution;
            3.   Aggravated promotion of prostitution;
            4.   Compelling prostitution;
            5.   Obscenity;
            6.   Sale, distribution or display of harmful material to a minor;
            7.   Sexual performance by a child;
            8.   Possession of child pornography;
            9.   Public lewdness;
            10.   Indecent exposure;
            11.   Indecency with a child;
            12.   Sexual assault or aggravated sexual assault;
            13.   Incest, solicitation of a child or harboring a runaway child;
or
            14.   Criminal attempt, conspiracy or solicitation to commit any of
the foregoing offenses;
         B.   For which:
            1.   Less than two years have elapsed since the date of conviction
or the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever
is the later date, if the conviction is of a misdemeanor offense;
            2.   Less than five years have elapsed since the date of conviction
or the date of release from confinement for the conviction, whichever is the
later date, if the conviction is of a felony offense; or
            3.   Less than five years have elapsed since the date of the last
conviction or the date of release from confinement for the last conviction,
whichever is the later date, if the convictions are of two or more misdemeanor
offenses or combination of misdemeanor offenses occurring within any 24- month
period.
      (9)   An applicant proposes a site which is 1,000 feet near a residence,
school or park; and
      (10)   An applicant fails to comply with laws of the city or state
statutes or additional codes or federal laws.
   (b)   The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on
the disqualification of the applicant or the applicant's spouse.
   (c)   An applicant who has been convicted or whose spouse has been convicted
of an offense listed in subsection (a)(8) hereof may qualify for a sexually
oriented business license only when the time period required by subsection (a)
(8)B hereof has elapsed.
   (d)   The license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the
person or persons to whom it is granted, the expiration date and the address of
the sexually oriented business. The license shall be posted in a conspicuous
place at or near the entrance of the sexually oriented business so that it may
be easily read at any time.
(Ord. 98-O-24, passed 4-6-1998)
§ 870.06  FEES.
   The annual fee for a sexually oriented business license is as stated in the
Fee Schedule in §
236.07 of the City of Kirtland Codified Ordinances.
(Ord. 98-O-24, passed 4-6-1998; Am. Ord. 17-O-20, passed 7-3-2017)
§ 870.07  INSPECTIONS.
   (a)   An applicant or licensee shall permit representatives of the Police
Division, the Fire Department, the Building Department, the City Engineer, the
Health Department or any other department of the city or of the county or state
government, to inspect the premises of a sexually oriented business for the
purpose of insuring compliance with the law, at any time it is occupied or open
for business.
   (b)   No person who operates a sexually oriented business, or his or her
agent or employee, shall refuse to permit a lawful inspection of the premises
by a representative of the Police Division at any time it is occupied or open
for business.
(Ord. 98-O-24, passed 4-6-1998)
§ 870.08  LICENSE EXPIRATION.
   Each license shall expire one year from the date of issuance and may be
renewed only by making application as provided in §
870.04. Applications for renewal should be made at least 30 days before the
expiration date and when made less than 30 days before the expiration date, the
expiration of the license will not be affected. It is the responsibility of the
permit holder to apply for renewal.
(Ord. 98-O-24, passed 4-6-1998)
§ 870.09  LICENSE SUSPENSION.
   The Chief of Police shall suspend a license for a period not to exceed 30
days if he or she determines that a licensee or an employee of a licensee has:
   (a)   Violated or is not in compliance with this chapter;
   (b)   Engaged in excessive use of alcoholic beverages while on the sexually
oriented business premises;
   (c)   Refused to allow an inspection of the sexually oriented business
premises as authorized by this chapter;
   (d)   Knowingly permitted gambling by any person on the sexually oriented
business premises;
   (e)   Demonstrated an inability to operate or manage a sexually oriented
business in a peaceful and law abiding manner, thus necessitating action by law
enforcement officers; and/or
   (f)   Violated any of the city's laws, state law or federal law.
(Ord. 98-O-24, passed 4-6-1998)
§ 870.10  LICENSE REVOCATION.
   (a)   The Chief of Police shall revoke a license if a cause of suspension
set forth in §
870.09 occurs and the license has been suspended within the preceding 12
months.
   (b)   The Chief of Police shall revoke a license if he or she determines
that:
      (1)   A licensee gave false or misleading information in the material
submitted to the Chief of Police during the application process;
      (2)   A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed possession, use or
sale of controlled substances on the premises;
      (3)   A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed prostitution on the
premises;
      (4)   A licensee or an employee knowingly operated the sexually oriented
business during a period of time when the licensee's license was suspended;
      (5)   A licensee has been convicted of an offense listed in §
870.05(a)(8)A. for which the time period required in §
870.05(a)(8)B. has not elapsed;
      (6)   On two or more occasions within a 12-month period, a person or
persons commit an offense occurring in or on the licensed premises as set forth
in §
870.05(a)(8)A. for which a conviction has been obtained, and the person or
persons were employees of the sexually oriented business at the time the
offenses were committed;
      (7)   A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed any act of sexual
intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation or sexual contact to occur
in or on the licensed premises; or
      (8)   A licensee is delinquent in payment to the city for hotel occupancy
taxes, income taxes or any other taxes or assessments which the city imposes or
sales taxes related to the sexually oriented business.
   (c)   The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on
the revocation of the license.
   (d)   Subsection (b)(7) hereof above does not apply to adult motels as a
ground for revoking the license unless the licensee or employee knowingly
allowed the act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation or
sexual contact to occur in a public place or within public view.
   (e)   When the Chief of Police revokes a license, the revocation shall
continue for one year and the licensee shall not be issued a sexually oriented
business license for one year from the date the revocation became effective.
If, subsequent to revocation, the Chief of Police finds that the basis for the
revocation has been corrected or abated, the applicant may be granted a license
if at least 90 days have elapsed since the date the revocation became
effective. If the license was revoked under subsection (b)(5) hereof, an
applicant may not be granted another license until the appropriate number of
years required under §
870.05(a)(8)B. has elapsed.
(Ord. 98-O-24, passed 4-6-1998)
§ 870.11  APPEALS.
   If the Chief of Police denies the issuance of a license or suspends or
revokes a license, the Chief of Police shall send to the applicant, or
licensee, by certified mail, return receipt requested, written notification of
the denial, suspension or revocation. The licensee whose application for a
license has been denied, or whose license has been suspended or revoked, shall
have the right to appeal to the Safety Director of the city. An appeal must be
filed within 30 days after the receipt of notice of the decision of the Chief
of Police. The licensee shall bear the burden of proof.
(Ord. 98-O-24, passed 4-6-1998)
§ 870.12  LICENSE TRANSFER.
   A licensee shall not transfer his or her license to another, nor shall a
licensee operate a sexually oriented business under the authority of a license
at any place other than the address designated in the application.
(Ord. 98-O-24, passed 4-6-1998)
§ 870.13  LOCATION.
   (a)   No person shall operate or cause to be operated a sexually oriented
business within 1,000 feet of:
      (1)   A church;
      (2)   A public or private elementary or secondary school;
      (3)   A boundary of a Residential, Multifamily or Historical District as
defined in these Codified Ordinances;
      (4)   A public park; or
      (5)   The property line of a lot devoted to a residential or multifamily
use as defined in these Codified Ordinances.
   (b)   No person shall cause or permit the operation, establishment,
substantial enlargement or transfer of ownership or control of a sexually
oriented business within 1,000 feet of another sexually oriented business. No
person shall cause or permit the operation, establishment or maintenance of
more than one sexually oriented business in the same building, structure or
portion thereof, or the increase of floor area of any sexually oriented
business in any building, structure or portion thereof containing another
sexually oriented business.
   (c)   For the purpose of subsection (a) hereof, measurements shall be made
in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from
the nearest portion of the building or structure used as a part of the premises
where a sexually oriented business is conducted, to the nearest property line
of the premises of a church or public or private elementary or secondary
school, or to the nearest boundary of an affected public park, Residential
District or residential lot.
   (d)   For purposes of subsection (b) hereof, the distance between any two
sexually oriented businesses shall be measured in a straight line, without
regard to intervening structures or objects, from the closest exterior wall of
the structure in which each business is located.
   (e)   Any sexually oriented business lawfully operating on March 1, 1998,
that is in violation of subsection (a), (b) or (c) hereof shall be deemed a
nonconforming use. The nonconforming use will be permitted to continue for a
period not to exceed five years, unless sooner terminated for any reason or
voluntarily discontinued for a period of 30 days or more. Such nonconforming
uses shall not be increased, enlarged, extended or altered, except that the use
may be changed to a conforming use. If two or more sexually oriented businesses
are within 1,000 feet of one another and otherwise in a permissible location,
the sexually oriented business which was first established and continually
operating at a particular location is the conforming use and the later
established business or businesses are nonconforming.
   (f)   A sexually oriented business lawfully operating as a conforming use is
not rendered a nonconforming use by the location of a church, public or private
elementary or secondary school, public park, Residential District or
residential lot within 1,000 feet of the sexually oriented business, subsequent
to the grant or renewal of the sexually oriented business license. This
provision applies only to the renewal of a valid license and does not apply
when an application for a license is submitted after a license has expired or
has been revoked.
(Ord. 98-O-24, passed 4-6-1998)
§ 870.14  ESCORT AGENCIES.
   (a)   An escort agency shall not employ any person under the age of 18
years.
   (b)   A person commits an offense if he or she acts as an escort or agrees
to act as an escort for any person under the age of 18 years.
(Ord. 98-O-24, passed 4-6-1998)
§ 870.15  NUDE MODEL STUDIOS.
   (a)   No nude model studio shall employ any person under the age of 18
years.
   (b)   No person under the age of 18 years shall appear in a state of nudity
in or on the premises of a nude model studio. It is a defense to a prosecution
under this subsection if the person under 18 years was in a restroom not open
to public view or persons of the opposite sex.
   (c)   No person shall appear in a state of nudity or knowingly allow another
to appear in a state of nudity in an area of a nude model studio premises which
can be viewed from the public right-of-way.
   (d)   No nude model studio shall place or permit a bed, sofa or mattress in
any room on the premises, except that a sofa may be placed in a reception room
open to the public.
(Ord. 98-O-24, passed 4-6-1998)
§ 870.16  ADULT THEATERS AND ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATERS.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly allow a person under the age of 18 years to
appear in a state of nudity in or on the premises of an adult theater or adult
motion picture theater.
   (b)   No person under the age of 18 years shall knowingly appear in a state
of nudity in or on the premises of an adult theater or adult motion picture
theater.
   (c)   It is a defense to a prosecution under subsection (a) and (b) hereof
if the person under 18 years was in a restroom not open to public view or
persons of the opposite sex.
(Ord. 98-O-24, passed 4-6-1998)
§ 870.17  ADULT MOTELS.
   (a)   Evidence that a sleeping room in a hotel, motel or similar commercial
establishment has been rented and vacated two or more times in a period of time
that is less than ten hours creates a rebuttable presumption that the
establishment is an adult motel as that term is defined in this chapter.
   (b)   No person in control of a sleeping room in a hotel, motel or similar
commercial establishment that does not have a sexually oriented business
license shall rent or subrent a sleeping room to a person and, within ten hours
from the time the room is rented, rent or subrent the same sleeping room again.
   (c)   For the purpose of subsection (b) hereof, the terms "rent" and
"subrent" mean the act of permitting a room to be occupied for any form of
consideration.
(Ord. 98-O-24, passed 4-6-1998)
§ 870.18  EXHIBITION OF SEXUALLY EXPLICIT FILMS OR VIDEOS.
   (a)   A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented
business, other than an adult motel, which exhibits on the premises in a
viewing room of less than 150 square feet of floor space, a film, video
cassette or other video reproduction which depicts specific sexual activities
or specific anatomical areas, shall comply with the following requirements:
      (1)   Upon application for a sexually oriented business license, the
application shall be accompanied by a diagram of the premises showing a plan
thereof specifying the location of one or more managers' stations and the
location of all overhead lighting fixtures and designating any portion of the
premises in which patrons will not be permitted. A manager's station may not
exceed 32 square feet of floor area. The diagram shall also designate the place
at which the permit will be conspicuously posted, if granted. A professionally
prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer's or architect's blueprint shall
not be required. However, each diagram should be oriented to the north or to
some designated street or object and should be drawn to a designated scale or
with marked dimensions sufficient to show the various internal dimensions of
all areas of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six
inches. The Chief of Police may waive the foregoing diagram for renewal
applications if the applicant adopts a diagram for renewal applications that
was previously submitted and certifies that the configuration of the premises
has not been altered since it was prepared;
      (2)   The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by the
applicant;
      (3)   No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager's
station may be made without prior approval of the Chief of Police or his or her
designee;
      (4)   It is the duty of the owners and operator of the premises to ensure
that at least one employee is on duty and situated in each manager's station at
all times that any patron is present inside the premises;
      (5)   The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner
that there is an unobstructed view from a manager's station of every area of
the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose excluding
restrooms. Restrooms may not contain video reproduction equipment. If the
premises have two or more managers' stations designated, then the interior of
the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed
view of each area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for
any purpose from at least one of the manager's stations. The view required in
this subsection must be by direct line of sight from the manager's station;
      (6)   In addition, a closed circuit television system shall be maintained
and operated with a television monitor or monitors located in the area of the
manager's station, in the clear view of the public and available for continuous
viewing by the manager on duty. A camera or cameras shall be installed in the
booth areas and shall scan each hallway and aisleway of the entranceway to each
booth. The closed circuit television system shall operate on a switcher system
so that the television monitor or monitors will switch sequentially and
continuously from one camera to another. The continuous switching process will
be timed to allow an adequate view of each area surveyed by each camera while
accomplishing a complete circuit within less than one minute. To the extent
necessary, more than one television monitor shall be installed so that there
will be adequate circuits to provide a complete view of the entire interior
premises, including booth areas, in less than one minute.
         A.   In the event of a malfunction of any of the closed circuit
television equipment described above, the operator or his or her designee shall
act promptly to repair or cause to be repaired any such malfunction within 24
hours. The operator shall maintain documentation of the date and time of any
such malfunction and all measures taken to effect a repair. If an equipment
malfunction cannot be repaired within 24 hours, those areas of the adult arcade
which are not capable of being monitored as a result of the malfunction shall
be closed until repairs are completed.
         B.   Signs, of adequate size for clear visibility, shall be posted in
the adult arcade to give notice to all patrons of the areas therein which are
continuously monitored by closed circuit television cameras with monitors.
      (7)   It shall be the duty of the owners and operators and it shall also
be the duty of any agents and employees present in the premises, to ensure that
the view area specified in subsection (a)(5) hereof remains unobstructed by any
doors, wall, merchandise, display racks or other materials at all times that
any patron is present in the premises and to ensure that no patron is permitted
access to any area of the premises which has been designated, in the
application filed pursuant to subsection (a)(1) hereof, as an area in which
patrons will not be permitted;
      (8)   The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of
sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted
access at an illumination of not less than five foot-candles as measured at the
floor level; and
      (9)   It shall be the duty of the owners and operators and it shall also
be the duty of any agents and employees present in the premises, to ensure that
the illumination described above is maintained at all times that any patron is
present in the premises.
   (b)   No person having a duty under subsection (a) hereof shall knowingly
fail to fulfill that duty.
(Ord. 98-O-24, passed 4-6-1998)
§ 870.19  DISPLAY OF SEXUALLY EXPLICIT MATERIAL TO MINORS.
   (a)   No person shall display a book, pamphlet, newspaper, magazine, film or
video cassette, the cover of which depicts, in a manner calculated to arouse
sexual lust or passion for commercial gain or to exploit sexual lust or
perversion for commercial gain in a business establishment open to persons
under the age of 18 years, any of the following:
      (1)   Human sexual intercourse, masturbation or sodomy;
      (2)   Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals the pubic
region, buttocks or female breasts;
      (3)   Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, buttocks
or that portion of the female breast below the top of the areola; or
      (4)   Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, whether covered
or uncovered.
   (b)   In this section "display" means to locate an item in such a manner
that, without obtaining assistance from an employee of the business
establishment:
      (1)   It is available to the general public for handling and inspection;
or
      (2)   The cover or outside packaging on the item is visible to members of
the general public.
(Ord. 98-O-24, passed 4-6-1998)
§ 870.99  PENALTY.
   (a)   Except as provided in subsection (b) or (c) hereof, whoever violates
any of the provisions of this chapter shall be fined not more than one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00) for each offense.
   (b)   It is a defense to a prosecution under §§
870.04(a),
870.13 or
870.15(d) that a person appearing in a state of nudity did so in a modeling
class operated:
      (1)   By a college, junior college or university supported entirely or
partly by taxation;
      (2)   By a private college or university which maintains and operates
educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior
college or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or
      (3)   In a structure:
         A.   Which has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and
no other advertising that indicates a nude person is available for viewing;
         B.   Where in order to participate in a class a student must enroll at
least three days in advance of the class; and
         C.   Where no more than one nude model is on the premises at any one
time.
   (c)   It is a defense to a prosecution under §§
870.04(a) or
870.13 that each item of descriptive, printed, film or video material offered
for sale or rental, taken as a whole, contains serious literary, artistic,
political or scientific value.
(Ord. 98-O-24, passed 4-6-1998)
CHAPTER 872:  VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER
Section
872.01   Fee.
§ 872.01  FEE.
   (a)   Subject to Ohio Senate Bill 117 going into legal effect, in accordance
with the requirements of R.C. 1332.32 enacted thereby, all video service
providers providing video service in the city pursuant to a video service
authorization obtained from the Director of the Ohio Department of Commerce
shall pay video service provider fees ("VSP Fees") in the amount of five
percent of gross revenues received from providing video service in the city,
which gross revenue base shall include advertising revenues. The VSP Fee shall
be paid quarterly, not sooner than 45 days nor later than 60 days after the end
of each calendar quarter.
   (b)   No later than ten days from receipt of notice from a video service
provider that it will begin providing video service in the city pursuant to a
state-issued video service authorization, the Mayor, or the Mayor's designee,
is authorized and directed to provide such video service provider with notice
of the VSP Fee as determined by this Council above, which notice shall be
delivered in a manner that provides for proof of timely delivery.
(Ord. 07-O-54, passed 12-3-2007)
TITLE FOUR - TAXATION
CHAPTER 880:  TRANSIENT GUEST REGISTRATION
Section
880.01   Register required; exceptions.
880.02   Transient guests to register.
880.03   False registration.
880.04   Register may be inspected.
880.99   Penalty.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Hotels - see Ohio R.C. Ch. 3731
   Innkeepers - see Ohio R.C. Ch. 4721
   Transient Guest Tax - see B.R. & T.
Ch. 885
§ 880.01  REGISTER REQUIRED; EXCEPTIONS.
   (a)   Every person conducting, operating or keeping a hotel, motel, tourist
home, tourist cabins or any other place kept, used, maintained or held out to
the public to be a place where sleeping accommodations are offered for pay to
transient guests, shall keep a register upon which there shall be provided
space for the name and address, including the street, house number, town or
city and state, the automobile registration license number, the name of the
state appearing on such automobile registration license, the date of entry and
the expected departure date for each and every person who rents, uses or
occupies any of the rooms therein maintained.
   (b)   This chapter shall have no application to persons who rent or permit
persons to occupy one or more rooms of their homes as the permanent residence
of such guests or renters.
(Ord. 05-O-56, passed 12-5-2005)
§ 880.02  TRANSIENT GUESTS TO REGISTER.
   Every person who intends to rent, use or occupy any place mentioned in §
880.01 shall legibly write his or her name, address, automobile registration
license number, the name of the state appearing on such registration license
number, the date of entry and the expected date of departure upon the register
in the places provided. In the event such person fails or refuses to register,
the person then in charge of such business shall cause the information herein
required to be written on the register.
(Ord. 05-O-56, passed 12-5-2005)
§ 880.03  FALSE REGISTRATION.
   No person shall register for sleeping accommodations at any hotel, motel,
tourist home, tourist cabins or any other place used, maintained or held out to
the public to be a place where sleeping accommodations are offered for pay to
transient guests under a false, fictitious or assumed name.
(Ord. 05-O-56, passed 12-5-2005)
§ 880.04  REGISTER MAY BE INSPECTED.
   The register required by §
880.01 shall be open at all reasonable times for inspection by any police
officer.
(Ord. 05-O-56, passed 12-5-2005)
§ 880.99  PENALTY.
   A violation of any provision of this chapter of the codified ordinances of
the City of Kirtland shall be a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(Ord. 05-O-56, passed 12-5-2005)
CHAPTER 882:  EARNED INCOME TAX EFFECTIVE THROUGH DECEMBER 31, 2015
Section
882.01   Purpose; levy of tax.
882.02   Definitions.
882.03   Rate and income taxable
882.04   Effective period.
882.05   Determination of tax.
882.06   Sales in city defined.
882.07   Business allocation percentage.
882.08   Rental income.
882.09   Operating loss carry-forward.
882.10   Exceptions.
882.11   Date of filing return; employee covered by employer's return.
882.12   Form and content of return.
882.13   Extension of time for filing returns.
882.14   Consolidated returns.
882.15   Amended returns.
882.16   Payment of tax on filing of return; overpayment.
882.17   Collection at source; payment by employer.
882.18   Declarations of income not collected at source.
882.19   Filing of declaration.
882.20   Form of declaration.
882.21   Payment upon declaration.
882.22   Annual returns.
882.23   Extensions.
882.24   Recovery of unpaid taxes.
882.25   Taxes erroneously paid.
882.26   Amounts less than one dollar ($1.00).
882.27   Tax credits.
882.28   Disbursement of funds.
882.29   Powers and duties of Administrator.
882.30   Refusal to produce records.
882.31   Retention of records by taxpayer.
882.32   Assignment of duties to other municipality; central collection.
882.33   Confidentiality of information.
882.34   Board of Review.
882.35   Approval of rules and regulations by Board.
882.36   Right of appeal.
882.37   Separability.
882.38   Continuation of tax; collection after termination.
882.39   Interest on unpaid taxes.
882.40   Penalties on unpaid taxes.
882.41   Abatement of interest and penalties.
882.42   Violations.
882.43   Limitation on prosecution.
882.44   Failure to procure forms.
882.99   Penalty.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Authority to tax - see Ohio Const., Art. XVIII, § 3
   Department of Finance - see ADM.
Ch. 236
   Municipal income taxes - see Ohio R.C. Ch. 718
   Payroll deductions - see Ohio R.C. 9.42
§ 882.01  PURPOSE; LEVY OF TAX.
   To provide funds for street construction and improvement, police protection,
improvement of fire protection and the improvement of general municipal
functions, there is hereby levied a tax on all salaries, wages, commissions and
other compensation and on net profits as hereinafter provided.
(Ord. 71-O-11, passed 12-20-1971)
§ 882.02  DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this chapter:
   (a)   Administrator. "Administrator" means the individual designated to
administer and enforce this chapter. The Administrator shall be the Clerk of
Council or an appointee of Council.
   (b)   Assignment. "Assignment" means the assignment made by a resident of
the city of a claim for refund due from another taxing municipality granting
credit to nonresidents thereof.
   (c)   Association. "Association" means a partnership, limited partnership or
any other form of unincorporated enterprise, owned by two or more persons.
   (d)   Board of Review. "Board of Review" means the Board established by and
constituted as provided in §
882.34.
   (e)   Business. "Business" means an enterprise, activity, profession or
undertaking of any kind conducted for profit or ordinarily conducted for
profit, whether by an individual, partnership. association, corporation or any
other entity, excluding, however, all nonprofit corporations which are exempt
from the payment of federal income tax.
   (f)   Corporation. "Corporation" means a corporation or joint stock
association organized under the laws of the United States, the State or any
other state, territory, foreign country or dependency.
   (g)   Employee. "Employee" means one who works for wages, salary, commission
or another type of compensation in the service of an employer.
   (h)   Employer. "Employer" means an individual, partnership, association,
corporation, governmental body, unit or agency or any other entity, whether or
not organized for profit, who or that employs one or more persons on a salary,
wage, commission or other basis of compensation.
   (i)   Fiscal year. "Fiscal year" means an accounting period of twelve months
or less ending on any day other than December 31.
   (j)   Gross receipts. "Gross receipts" means the total income from any
source.
   (k)   Net profits. "Net profits" means a net gain from the operation of a
business, profession, enterprise or other activity after provision for all
ordinary and necessary expenses either paid or accrued in accordance with the
accounting system used by the taxpayer for federal income tax purposes without
deduction of taxes imposed by this chapter or federal, state and other taxes
based on income and, in the case of an association, without deduction of
salaries paid to partners and other owners.
   (l)   Nonresident. "Nonresident" means an individual domiciled outside the
city.
   (m)   Nonresident unincorporated business entity. "Nonresident
unincorporated business entity" means an unincorporated business entity not
having an office or place of business in the city.
   (n)   Person. "Person" means a natural person, partnership, fiduciary,
association or corporation. When used in a clause prescribing and imposing a
penalty, "person", as applied to an unincorporated entity, means the partners
or members thereof and, as applied to a corporation, the officers thereof.
   (o)   Place of business. "Place of business" means any bona fide office
(other than a mere statutory office), factory, warehouse or other space which
is occupied and used by the taxpayer in carrying on any business activity
individually or through one or more of his or her regular employees regularly
in attendance.
   (p)   Resident. "Resident" means an individual domiciled in the city.
   (q)   Resident unincorporated business entity. "Resident unincorporated
business entity" means an unincorporated business entity having an office or
place of business in the city.
(Ord. 71-O-11, passed 12-20-1971)
   (r)   Taxable income. "Taxable income" means wages, salaries and other
compensation paid by an employer or employers before any deduction of any kind
and/or the net profits from the operation of a business, profession or other
enterprise or activity adjusted in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter. As used in this subsection, "other compensation" includes, but is not
limited to, bonuses; commissions; incentive payments; directors' and other
fees; property in lieu of cash; tips; dismissal or severance pay; supplemental
income benefits for early retirement, regardless of their label; contest prizes
and awards; tax shelter plans (including contributions to retirement plans,
annuities or individual retirement accounts (IRAs) and all other deferred
compensation plans); vacation and sick pay, regardless of label (such as sick
leave, including third-party sick pay, disability pay, vacation pay and the
like); wage continuation plans; supplemental employment benefits (subpay);
depreciation recapture; gifts and gratuities in connection with employment;
fellowships, grants and stipends (including those representing payment for
teaching, research or other services); group term life insurance protection
over fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) (taxed on the cost of such insurance
in excess of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00)); benefits resulting from an
employer's assumption of a tax; stock options given as compensation; income
from gaming, wagering and lotteries (including the Ohio State Lottery); and all
other compensation earned, received or accrued and not excluded by §
882.10.
(Ord. 96-O-63, passed 11-4-1996)
   (s)   Taxable year. "Taxable year" means the calendar year or the fiscal
year upon the basis of which the net profits are to be computed under this
chapter, and, in the case of a return for a fractional part of a year, the
period for which such return is required to be made.
   (t)   Taxing municipality. "Taxing municipality" means a municipal
corporation levying a municipal income tax on salaries, wages, commissions and
other compensation earned by individuals and on the net profits earned from the
operation of a business, profession or other activity.
   (u)   Taxpayer. "Taxpayer" means a person, whether an individual,
partnership, association, corporation or other entity, required by this chapter
to file a return or pay a tax.
(Ord. 71-O-11, passed 12-20-1971)
§ 882.03  RATE AND INCOME TAXABLE.
   Effective January 1, 2002, an annual tax for the purposes specified in §
882.01 shall be imposed at the rate of two percent per year upon the following:
   (a)   On all salaries, wages, commissions and other compensation earned by
residents of the city;
   (b)   On all salaries, wages, commissions and other compensation earned by
nonresidents of the city for work done or services performed or rendered in the
city;
   (c)   On the portion attributable to the city of the net profits earned by
all resident unincorporated business entities, professions or other activities,
such net profits derived from sales made, work done, services performed or
rendered and business or other activities conducted in the city;
   (d)   On the portion of the distributive share of the net profits earned by
a resident partner or owner of a resident unincorporated business entity not
attributable to the city and not levied against such unincorporated business
entity;
   (e)   On the portion attributable to the city of the net profits earned by
all nonresident unincorporated business entities, professions or other
activities, such net profits derived from sales made, work done, services
performed or rendered and business and other activities conducted in the city,
whether or not such unincorporated business entity has an office or place of
business in the city;
   (f)   On the portion of the distributive share of the net profits earned by
a resident partner or owner of a nonresident unincorporated business entity not
attributable to the city and not levied against such unincorporated business
entity; and
   (g)   On the portion attributable to the city of the net profits earned by
all corporations, such net profits derived from sales made, work done, services
performed or rendered and business or other activities conducted in the city,
whether or not such corporations have an office or place of business in the
city.
(Ord. 71-O-11, passed 12-20-1971; Am. Ord. 01-O-50, passed 11-19-2001)
§ 882.04  EFFECTIVE PERIOD.
   The tax levied by this chapter shall be levied, collected and paid with
respect to all salaries, wages, commissions and other compensation, and with
respect to all net profits of businesses, professions or other activities,
earned on and after the effective date of this chapter (Ord. 71-O-11, passed
December 20, 1971). Such tax shall be in full force and effect until repealed
by amendment of the City Charter by a vote of the electors of the municipality.
(Ord. 71-O-11, passed 12-20-1971)
§ 882.05  DETERMINATION OF TAX.
   If the books and records of a taxpayer conducting a business or profession
both within and outside of the boundaries of the city disclose with reasonable
accuracy what portion of the net profit of such business or profession is
attributable to that part of the business or profession conducted in the city,
then only such portion shall be considered as having a taxable situs in the
city for the purposes of the tax levied by this chapter. The portion of the
entire net profits of a taxpayer to be allocated as having been derived from
within the city, in the absence of actual records thereof, shall be determined
by multiplying the entire net profits by a business allocation percentage to be
determined by a three-factor formula of property, payroll and sales, each of
which shall be given equal weight, as follows:
   (a)   The average net book value of the real and tangible personal property
owned or used by the taxpayer in the business or profession in the city during
the taxable period to the average net book value of all the real and tangible
personal property owned or used by the taxpayer in the business or profession
during the same period, wherever situated. As used in this section, "real
property" includes property rented or leased by the taxpayer, the value of such
property to be determined by multiplying the annual rental thereon by eight;
   (b)   Wages, salaries and other compensation paid during the taxable period
to persons employed in the business or profession for services performed in the
city to wages, salaries and other compensation paid during the same period to
persons employed in the business or profession, wherever their services are
performed;
   (c)   Gross receipts of the business or profession from sales made and
services performed during the taxable period in the city to gross receipts of
the business or profession during the same period from sales and services,
wherever made or performed; and
   (d)   If the formula does not produce an equitable result, another basis
may, under uniform regulations, be substituted so as to produce such result.
(Ord. 71-O-11. Passed 12-20-71.)
§ 882.06  SALES IN CITY DEFINED.
   As used in §
882.05(c), "sales made in the city" means:
   (a)   All sales of tangible personal property which is delivered in the
city, regardless of where title passes, if shipped or delivered from a stock of
goods in the city;
   (b)   All sales of tangible personal property which is delivered in the
city, regardless of where title passes, even though transported from a point
outside the city, if the taxpayer is regularly engaged through his or her own
employees in the solicitation or promotion of sales in the city and the sales
result from such solicitation or promotion; and
   (c)   All sales of tangible personal property which is shipped from a place
in the city to purchasers outside of the city, regardless of where title
passes, if the taxpayer is not, through his or her own employees, regularly
engaged in the solicitation or promotion of sales at the place where delivery
is made.
(Ord. 71-O-11, passed 12-20-1971)
§ 882.07  BUSINESS ALLOCATION PERCENTAGE.
   The business allocation percentage referred to in §
882.05 shall be determined by adding together the percentages determined in
accordance with subsections (a) through (c) of §
882.05 or such of these percentages as are applicable to the particular
taxpayer and dividing the total so obtained by the number of percentages used
in deriving such total. A factor is applicable even though it may be allocable
entirely in or outside of the city.
(Ord. 71-O-11, passed 12-20-1971)
§ 882.08  RENTAL INCOME.
   Rental income received by a taxpayer shall be included in the computation of
net profits from business activities as set forth in subsections (c) through
(g) of §
882.03 only if, and to the extent that, the rental ownership, management or
operation of the real estate from which such rentals are derived (whether so
rented, managed or operated by a taxpayer individually or through agents or
other representatives) constitutes a business activity of the taxpayer in whole
or in part. Where the gross monthly rental of any and all real properties,
regardless of number and value, aggregates in excess of one hundred twenty-five
dollars ($125.00) per month, it shall be prima-facie evidence that the rental,
ownership, management or operation of such properties is a business activity of
such taxpayer and the net income of such rental property shall be subject to
tax; provided that:
   (a)   In the case of commercial property, the owner shall be considered
engaged in a business activity when the rental is based on a fixed or
fluctuating percentage of gross net sales, receipts or profits of the lessee,
whether or not such rental exceeds one hundred twenty-five dollars ($125.00)
per month;
   (b)   In the case of farm property, the owner shall be considered engaged in
a business activity when he or she shares in crops or when the rental is based
on a percentage of the gross or net receipts derived from the farm, whether or
not the gross income exceeds one hundred twenty-five dollars ($125.00) per
month; and
   (c)   The person who operates a licensed rooming house shall be considered
to be in business whether or not the gross income exceeds one hundred twenty-
five dollars ($125.00) per month.
(Ord. 71-O-11, passed 12-20-1971)
§ 882.09  OPERATING LOSS CARRY-FORWARD.
   (a)   The portion of a net operating loss, sustained in any taxable year
subsequent to July 1, 1969, allocable to the city may be applied against the
portion of the profit of succeeding tax years allocable to the city until
exhausted, but in no event for more than five taxable years immediately
following the year in which the loss occurred. No portion of a net operating
loss shall be carried back against net profits of any prior year.
   (b)   The portion of net operating loss sustained shall be allocated to the
city in the same manner as provided in this chapter for allocating net profits
to the city.
   (c)   The Administrator shall provide, by rules and regulations, the manner
in which such net operating loss carry-forward shall be determined.
(Ord. 71-O-11, passed 12-20-1971)
§ 882.10  EXCEPTIONS.
   The tax levied by this chapter shall not be levied on the following:
   (a)   Pay or allowance of active members of the Armed Forces of the United
States or the income of religious, fraternal, charitable, scientific, literary
or educational institutions to the extent that such income is derived from tax-
exempt real estate, tax-exempt tangible or intangible property or tax-exempt
activities and by enumeration in Ohio R.C. 718.01 or § 501(a) of the Internal
Revenue Code, being U.S.C. Title 26;
   (b)   Poor relief, unemployment insurance benefits, Social Security,
Medicare, old age pensions or similar payments, including disability benefits
received from local, state or federal governments or charitable, religious or
educational organizations;
   (c)   Proceeds of insurance paid by reason of the death of the insured,
pensions, disability benefits, annuities or gratuities not in the nature of
compensation for services rendered, from whatever source derived;
   (d)   Receipts from seasonal or casual entertainment, amusements, sport
events and health and welfare activities when conducted by bona fide
charitable, religious or educational organizations and associations;
   (e)   Alimony received;
   (f)   Personal earnings of a natural person under 18 years of age;
   (g)   Compensation for personal injuries or for damage to property by way of
insurance or otherwise;
   (h)   Interest, dividends and other revenue and royalties from intangible
property;
   (i)   Gains from involuntary conversion, cancellation of indebtedness,
interest on federal obligations, items of income already taxed by the state
which the city is specifically prohibited from taxing and income of a
decedent's estate during the period of administration (except such income from
the operation of a business);
   (j)   Salaries, wages, commissions and other compensation and net profits,
the taxation of which is prohibited by the United States Constitution or any
act of Congress limiting the power of the states or their political
subdivisions to impose net income taxes on income derived from interstate
commerce; and
   (k)   Salaries, wages, commissions and other compensation and net profits,
the taxation of which is prohibited by the Constitution of the state or any act
of the General Assembly limiting the power of the city to impose net income
taxes.
(Ord. 96-O-63, passed 11-4-1996)
§ 882.11  DATE OF FILING RETURN; EMPLOYEE COVERED BY EMPLOYER'S RETURN.
   (a)   Each taxpayer, except as otherwise provided in this chapter, shall,
whether or not a tax is due thereon, make and file a return on or before April
30 of the year following the effective date of this chapter (Ord. 71-O-11,
passed December 20, 1971) and on or before April 30 of each year thereafter.
When the return is made for a fiscal year or other period different from the
calendar year, the return shall be filed within four months from the end of
such fiscal year or period.
   (b)   The Administrator may provide by regulation that the return of an
employer, showing the amount of tax deducted by the employer from the salaries,
wages, commissions or other compensation of an employee and paid by such
employer to the Administrator, shall be accepted as the return required of an
employee whose sole income, subject to tax under this chapter, is such salary,
wages, commissions or other compensation.
(Ord. 71-O-11, passed 12-20-1971)
§ 882.12  FORM AND CONTENT OF RETURN.
   The return for the tax levied by this chapter shall be filed with the
Administrator on a form furnished by, or obtainable upon request from, the
Administrator, setting forth:
   (a)   The aggregate amounts of salaries, wages, commissions and other
compensation earned and gross income from a business, profession or other
activity, less allowable expenses incurred in the acquisition of such gross
income earned during the preceding year and subject to such tax;
   (b)   The amount of the tax levied by this chapter on such earnings and
profits; and
   (c)   Such other pertinent statements, information returns or other
information as the Administrator may require.
(Ord. 71-O-11, passed 12-20-1971)
§ 882.13  EXTENSION OF TIME FOR FILING RETURNS.
   The Administrator may extend the time for filing the annual return, upon the
request of the taxpayer, for a period not to exceed six months, or one month
beyond any extension requested of or granted by the Internal Revenue Service
for the filing of the Federal Income Tax Return. The Administrator may require
a tentative return, accompanied by payment of the amount of tax shown to be due
thereon, by the date the return is normally due. No penalty or interest shall
be assessed in those cases in which the return is filed and the final tax paid
within the period as extended.
(Ord. 71-O-11, passed 12-20-1971)
§ 882.14  CONSOLIDATED RETURNS.
   (a)   Filing of consolidated returns may be permitted or required in
accordance with rules and regulations prescribed by the Administrator.
   (b)   In the case of a corporation that carries on transactions with its
stockholders or with other corporations related by stock ownership,
interlocking directorates or some other method, or in the case of a person who
operates a division, branch, factory, office, laboratory or activity in the
city constituting only a portion of its total business, the Administrator shall
require such additional information as he or she may deem necessary to
ascertain whether or not net profits are properly allocated to the city. If the
Administrator finds that such net profits are not properly allocated to the
city by reason of transactions with stockholders or with other corporations
related by stock ownership, interlocking directorates or transactions with such
division, branch, factory, office, laboratory or activity or by some other
method, he or she shall make such allocation as he or she deems appropriate to
produce a fair and proper allocation of net profits to the city.
(Ord. 71-O-11, passed 12-20-1971)
§ 882.15  AMENDED RETURNS.
   (a)   Where necessary, an amended return shall be filed in order to report
additional income and pay any additional tax due, or claim a refund of tax
overpaid, subject to the requirements, limitations or both, contained in §§
882.24 through
882.27. Such amended return shall be on a form obtainable on request from the
Administrator. A taxpayer may not change the method of accounting or
apportionment of net profits after the due date for filing the original return.
   (b)   Within three months from the final determination of any federal tax
liability affecting the taxpayer's city tax liability, such taxpayer shall make
and file an amended city return showing income subject to the city tax based
upon such final determination of federal tax liability and pay any additional
tax shown due thereon or make claim for refund of any overpayment.
(Ord. 71-O-11, passed 12-20-1971)
§ 882.16  PAYMENT OF TAX ON FILING OF RETURN; OVERPAYMENT.
   (a)   A taxpayer making a return shall, at the time of the filing thereof,
pay to the Administrator the amount of tax shown to be due thereon, provided,
however, that where any portion of the tax so due has been deducted at the
source pursuant to §
882.17, or where any portion of such tax has been paid by the taxpayer pursuant
to §
882.13, or where an income tax has been paid to another municipality, credit
for the amount so paid in accordance with §
882.27 shall be deducted from the amount shown to be due and only the balance,
if any, shall be due and payable at the time of filing such return.
   (b)   A taxpayer who has overpaid the amount of tax to which the city is
entitled under this chapter may have such overpayment applied against any
subsequent liability hereunder or, at his or her election, indicated on the
return, such overpayment (or part thereof) shall be refunded, provided that no
additional tax or refund of less than one dollar ($1.00) shall be collected or
refunded.
(Ord. 71-O-11, passed 12-20-1971)
§ 882.17  COLLECTION AT SOURCE; PAYMENT BY EMPLOYER.
   (a)   (1)   In accordance with rules and regulations prescribed by the
Administrator, each employer within or doing business in the city shall deduct,
at the time of payment of salaries, wages, commissions or other compensation,
the amount of tax levied by §
882.03 on the gross salaries, wages, commissions or other compensation due by
the employer to an employee and shall, on or before the twentieth day of the
month following the close of each calendar quarter, make a return and pay to
the Administrator the amount of taxes so deducted, subject to the provisions of
subsections (c), (d) and (e) hereof. Such return shall be on a form prescribed
by or acceptable to the Administrator and shall be subject to the rules and
regulations prescribed therefor by the Administrator. Such employer shall be
liable for the payment of the tax required to be deducted and withheld, whether
or not such tax has in fact been withheld.
      (2)   The officer or employee having control or supervision of or charged
with the responsibility of filing any return or declaration required by this
chapter and making payment, or any officer of a corporation who is responsible
for execution of the corporation's fiscal responsibilities, shall be personally
liable for failure to file any return or declaration or pay the tax or employer
withholding due by the provisions of this chapter. The dissolution, termination
or bankruptcy of a corporation does not discharge a responsible officer's or
employee's liability for a failure of the corporation to file returns or
declarations or pay tax or employer withholding due.
   (b)   Such employer, in collecting such tax, shall be deemed to hold the
same, until payment is made by such employer to the city, as a trustee for the
benefit of the city and any such tax collected by such employer from his or her
employees, shall, until the same is paid to the city, be deemed a trust fund in
the hands of such employer.
   (c)   An employer who deducts tax in the amount of one hundred dollars
($100.00) or more per month shall pay to the Administrator, before the
twentieth day of the following month, the amount of tax so deducted on a
monthly basis beginning with the first month the employer exceeds one hundred
dollars ($100.00) in taxes withheld.
   (d)   The payments shall be on a form or forms furnished by, or obtainable
upon request from, the Administrator.
   (e)   No person shall be required to withhold the tax on wages or other
compensation paid domestic servants employed by him or her exclusively in or
about such person's residence, even though such residence is in the city, but
such employee shall be subject to all of the requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. 82-O-63, passed 8-23-1982; Am. Ord. 01-O-6, passed 3-5-2001)
§ 882.18  DECLARATIONS OF INCOME NOT COLLECTED AT SOURCE.
   Every person who anticipates any taxable income which is not subject to §
882.17 or who engages in any business, profession, enterprise or activity
subject to the tax imposed by this chapter, shall file a declaration setting
forth such estimated income or the estimated profit or loss from such business
activity, together with the estimated tax due thereon, if any. However, if a
person's income is wholly from wages from which the tax shall be withheld and
remitted to the city in accordance with §
882.17, such person need not file a declaration.
(Ord. 71-O-11, passed 12-20-1971)
§ 882.19  FILING OF DECLARATION.
   (a)   The declaration required by §
882.18 shall be filed on or before April 30 of each year, during the effective
period set forth in §
882.04, or within four months of the date the taxpayer becomes subject to tax
for the first time.
   (b)   Those taxpayers reporting on a fiscal year basis shall file a
declaration within four months after the beginning of each fiscal year.
(Ord. 71-O-11, passed 12-20-1971)
§ 882.20  FORM OF DECLARATION.
   (a)   The declaration of income not collected at the source, as required by
§
882.18, shall be filed on a form furnished by or obtainable from the
Administrator, provided, however, that credit shall be taken for the city tax
to be withheld from any portion of such income. In accordance with §
882.27, credit may be taken for tax to be paid or to be withheld and remitted
to another taxing municipality.
   (b)   The original declaration, or any subsequent amendment thereof, may be
increased or decreased on or before any subsequent quarterly payment date as
provided for in this chapter.
(Ord. 71-O-11, passed 12-20-1971)
§ 882.21  PAYMENT UPON DECLARATION.
   The declaration of estimated tax to be paid to the city shall be accompanied
by a payment of at least one-fourth of the estimated annual tax and at least a
similar amount shall be paid on or before the last day of the sixth, ninth and
twelfth months after the beginning of the taxable year. However, in case an
amended declaration has been filed, the unpaid balance shown due thereon shall
be paid in equal installments on or before the remaining payment dates.
Notwithstanding the above if the estimated tax for the current year, less the
tax to be withheld and less all allowable tax credits, amounts to not more than
ten dollars ($10.00), no quarterly payment of estimated tax is required.
(Ord. 93-O-36, passed 7-6-1993)
§ 882.22  ANNUAL RETURNS.
   (a)   On or before April 30 of the year following that for which such
declaration or amended declaration was filed, an annual return shall be filed
and any balance which may be due the city shall be paid therewith in accordance
with §
882.16.
   (b)   Every resident of the city shall file an annual return or exemption
certificate on or before the last day of the fourth month following the end of
the year for which he or she is subject for any tax due. A joint return may be
filed by a husband and wife.
(Ord. 80-O-68, passed 6-2-1980)
§ 882.23  EXTENSIONS.
   The Administrator may extend the time of the filing of any return, the
making of any payment or the performing of any other act required by this
chapter for a period not to exceed six months beyond the originally required
date.
(Ord. 71-O-11, passed 12-20-1971)
§ 882.24  RECOVERY OF UNPAID TAXES.
   The tax imposed by this chapter shall be collectible, together with any
interest and penalties thereon, by suit, as other debts of like amount are
recoverable. Except in cases of fraud, omission of a substantial portion of
income subject to the tax or failure to file a return, an additional assessment
shall not be made after three years from the time the return was due or filed,
whichever is later. However, in those cases in which a commissioner of Internal
Revenue and the taxpayer have executed a waiver of the federal statute of
limitations, the period within which an additional assessment may be made by
the Administrator shall be one year from the time of the final determination of
the federal tax liability.
(Ord. 71-O-11, passed 12-20-1971)
§ 882.25  TAXES ERRONEOUSLY PAID.
   Tax erroneously paid under this chapter shall not be refunded unless a claim
for refund is made within three years from the date on which such payment was
made or the return was due or within three months after the final determination
of the federal tax liability, whichever is later.
(Ord. 71-O-11, passed 12-20-1971)
§ 882.26  AMOUNTS LESS THAN ONE DOLLAR ($1.00).
   Amounts of less than one dollar ($1.00) shall not be collected or refunded.
(Ord. 71-O-11, passed 12-20-1971)
§ 882.27  TAX CREDITS.
   (a)   A taxpayer, who is a nonresident of the city and who is subject to the
tax levied by this chapter and to a tax on the same income in the municipality
of his or her residence, shall not receive any credit for any tax paid in the
municipality of his or her residence.
   (b)   When the taxable income of a resident of this municipality is subject
to a municipal income tax in another municipality on the same income taxable
under this section, such resident shall be allowed a credit of the amount of
income tax paid on such taxable income to such other municipality, equal to
1.75 percent of the amount obtained by multiplying the lower of the tax rate of
such other municipality or of this municipality by the taxable income earned in
or attributable to the municipality of employment or business activity. For the
purposes of this section, taxable income shall include the distributive share
of net profits of a resident partner or owner of an unincorporated business
entity. The effective date of this section is January 1, 2002.
(Ord. 86-O-36, passed 9-2-1986; Am. Ord. 01-O-29, passed 7-2-2001)
§ 882.28  DISBURSEMENT OF FUNDS.
   The funds collected under this chapter shall be disbursed as follows:
   (a)   Such part thereof as is necessary to defray all expenses of collecting
the tax and of administering and enforcing this chapter shall be paid; and
   (b)   The balance remaining after such payment shall be deposited in the
General Fund for the municipal purposes described in §
882.01.
(Ord. 71-O-11, passed 12-20-1971)
§ 882.29  POWERS AND DUTIES OF ADMINISTRATOR.
   The powers and duties of the Administrator are as follows:
   (a)   Receipt of tax. The Administrator shall receive the tax levied by this
chapter from the taxpayers in the manner prescribed herein, keep an accurate
record thereof and report all monies so received.
   (b)   Payment; records. The Administrator shall enforce payment of all taxes
owing to the city and keep accurate records for a minimum of five years showing
the amount due from each taxpayer required to file a declaration and make any
return, or both, including taxes withheld, and showing the dates and amounts of
payments thereof.
   (c)   Enforcement: rules and regulations. The Administrator shall enforce
this chapter and, subject to the approval of the Board of Review, may adopt,
promulgate and enforce rules and regulations relating to any matter pertaining
to the collection of taxes levied under this chapter and the administration and
enforcement of this chapter, including the re-examination and correction of
returns.
   (d)   Installment payments. The Administrator may arrange for the payment of
unpaid taxes, interest and penalties on a schedule of installment payments when
the taxpayer has proved to the Administrator that, due to certain hardship
conditions, he or she is unable to pay the full amount of the tax due. Such
authorization shall not be granted until proper returns are filed by the
taxpayer for all amounts owed by him or her under this chapter. Failure to make
any deferred payment when due shall cause the total unpaid amount, including
penalty and interest, to become payable on demand, and §§
882.24 and
882.42 shall apply.
   (e)   Determination of tax due. If a taxpayer has failed to file a return or
has filed a return which does not show the proper amount of tax due, the
Administrator may determine the amount of tax appearing to be due the city from
the taxpayer and shall send to such taxpayer a written statement showing the
amount of tax so determined, together with interest and penalties thereon, if
any.
   (f)   Investigations. The Administrator or any authorized employee may
examine the books, papers, records and federal income tax returns of any
employer, taxpayer or person subject to, or whom the Administrator believes is
subject to, this chapter, for the purpose of verifying the accuracy of any
return made, or, if no return was made, to ascertain the tax due under this
chapter. Every such employer, supposed employer, taxpayer or supposed taxpayer
is hereby directed and required to furnish, upon written request by the
Administrator or his or her duly authorized agent or employee, the means,
facilities and opportunity for making the examinations and investigations
authorized in this subsection.
   (g)   Examination: production of records. The Administrator may order any
person presumed to have knowledge of, or information applicable to, income
which was or should have been returned for taxation or any transaction tending
to affect such income. The Administrator may examine such person under oath,
concerning such income and for this purpose may compel the production of books,
papers, records and federal income tax returns and the attendance of all
persons before him or her, whether as parties or witnesses, whenever he or she
believes such persons have knowledge of such income or information pertinent to
such inquiry.
(Ord. 71-O-11, passed 12-20-1971)
§ 882.30  REFUSAL TO PRODUCE RECORDS.
   The refusal to produce books, papers, records and federal income tax
returns, or the refusal to submit to an examination, by any employer or person
subject or presumed to be subject to the tax or by any officer, agent or
employee of a person subject to the tax or required to withhold tax, or the
failure of any person to comply with this chapter or with an order or subpoena
of the Administrator authorized hereby, shall be deemed a violation of this
chapter, punishable as provided in §
882.99.
(Ord. 71-O-11, passed 12-20-1971)
§ 882.31  RETENTION OF RECORDS BY TAXPAYERS.
   Every taxpayer shall retain all records necessary to compute his or her tax
liability for a period of five years from the date his or her return is filed
or the date withholding taxes are paid.
(Ord. 71-O-11, passed 12-20-1971)
§ 882.32  ASSIGNMENT OF DUTIES TO OTHER MUNICIPALITY; CENTRAL COLLECTION.
   (a)   The Mayor may enter into an agreement, subject to the consent of
Council, on behalf of the city, with any other municipal corporation to act as
an agent for the city for the purpose of administering the income tax laws of
the city and providing a central collection facility for the collection of the
income tax on behalf of the city.
   (b)   If the Mayor enters into such an agreement, then all or part of the
duties and authority of the Administrator may be assigned by such agreement to
such other municipal corporation.
(Ord. 71-O-11, passed 12-20-1971)
§ 882.33  CONFIDENTIALITY OF INFORMATION.
   Any information gained as the result of returns, investigations, hearings or
verifications required or authorized by this chapter shall be confidential
except for official purposes or except in accordance with proper judicial
order. No person shall divulge such information.
(Ord. 71-O-11, passed 12-20-1971)
§ 882.34  BOARD OF REVIEW.
   There is hereby established a Board of Review, consisting of the Mayor (or a
person designated by him or her), the President of Council and a member of
Council to be elected by that body. The Board shall select, each year for a
one-year term, one of its members to serve as Chairperson and one to serve as
Secretary. A majority of the members of the Board shall constitute a quorum.
The Board shall adopt its own procedural rules and shall keep a record of its
transactions. Any hearing by the Board may be conducted privately, and §
882.33, with reference to the confidential character of information required to
be disclosed by this chapter, shall apply to such matters as may be heard
before the Board.
(Ord. 71-O-11, passed 12-20-1971)
§ 882.35  APPROVAL OF RULES AND REGULATIONS BY BOARD.
   All rules and regulations and amendments or changes thereto, which are
adopted by the Administrator under the authority conferred by this chapter,
shall be approved by the Board of Review before the same become effective.
(Ord. 71-O-11, passed 12-20-1971)
§ 882.36  RIGHT OF APPEAL.
   Any person dissatisfied with a ruling or decision of the Administrator which
is made under the authority conferred by this chapter may appeal therefrom to a
court of competent jurisdiction in the manner prescribed by law.
(Ord. 71-O-11, passed 12-20-1971)
§ 882.37  SEPARABILITY.
   If a sentence, clause, section or part of this chapter, or any tax against a
person specified in this chapter, is found to be unconstitutional, illegal or
invalid, such unconstitutionality, illegality or invalidity shall affect only
such clause, sentence, section or part of this chapter and shall not affect or
impair any of the remaining provisions, sentences, clauses, sections or other
parts of this chapter. It is hereby declared to be the intention of Council
that this chapter would have been adopted had such unconstitutional, illegal or
invalid sentence, clause, section or part thereof not been included herein.
(Ord. 71-O-11, passed 12-20-1971)
§ 882.38  CONTINUATION OF TAX; COLLECTION AFTER TERMINATION.
   (a)   This chapter shall continue effective, insofar as the levy of taxes is
concerned, until terminated as provided in §
882.04. Insofar as the collection of taxes levied under this chapter and the
actions and proceedings for collecting any tax so levied or enforcing this
chapter are concerned, this chapter shall continue effective until all taxes
levied under this chapter are fully paid and any and all suits and prosecutions
for the collection of such taxes or for the punishment of violations of this
chapter have been fully terminated, subject to the limitations contained in §§
882.24 through
882.26 and
882.42 through
882.44.
   (b)   Annual returns due for all or any part of the last effective year of
this chapter shall be due on the date provided in §§
882.11 and
882.17 as though the same were continuing.
(Ord. 71-O-11, passed 12-20-1971)
§ 882.39  INTEREST ON UNPAID TAXES.
   All taxes imposed and all monies withheld or required to be withheld by
employers under this chapter and remaining unpaid after they become due shall
bear interest at the rate of one and one-half percent per month or fraction
thereof.
(Ord. 80-O-68, passed 6-2-1980)
§ 882.40  PENALTIES ON UNPAID TAXES.
   In addition to interest as provided in §
882.39, penalties based on unpaid taxes and estimated taxes are hereby imposed
as follows:
   (a)   For failure to pay taxes due other than taxes withheld, there shall be
a penalty of one and one-half percent per month or fraction thereof. The
minimum penalty for failure to file any return or quarterly estimated payment
when due is twenty-five dollars ($25.00); and
   (b)   For failure to remit taxes withheld from employees, there shall be a
penalty of ten percent per month or fraction thereof.
(Ord 93-O-36, passed 7-6-1993)
§ 882.41  ABATEMENT OF INTEREST AND PENALTIES.
   Upon the recommendation of the Administrator or for good cause shown, the
Board of Review may abate penalties or interest or both.
(Ord. 71-O-11, passed 12-20-1971)
§ 882.42  VIOLATIONS.
   No person shall:
   (a)   Fail, neglect or refuse to make any return or declaration required by
this chapter;
   (b)   Make any incomplete, false or fraudulent return;
   (c)   Fail, neglect or refuse to pay the tax, penalties or interest imposed
by this chapter;
   (d)   Fail, neglect or refuse to withhold the tax from his or her employees
or remit such withholding to the Administrator;
   (e)   Refuse to permit the Administrator or any duly authorized agent or
employee to examine his or her books, records, papers and Federal Income Tax
Returns relating to the income or net profits of a taxpayer;
   (f)   Fail to appear before the Administrator and to produce his or her
books, records, papers or Federal Income Tax Returns relating to the income or
net profits of a taxpayer upon order or subpoena of the Administrator;
   (g)   Refuse to disclose to the Administrator any information with respect
to the income or net profits of a taxpayer;
   (h)   Fail to comply with this chapter or any order or subpoena of the
Administrator authorized hereby;
   (i)   Give to an employer false information as to his or her true name,
correct Social Security number and residence address, or fail to properly
notify an employer of any change in his or her residence address and the date
thereof;
   (j)   Fail to use ordinary diligence in maintaining proper records of
employees' residence addresses, total wages paid and city tax withheld, or
knowingly give the Administrator false information; or
   (k)   Attempt to do anything whatever to avoid the payment of the whole or
any part of the tax, penalties or interest imposed by this chapter.
(Ord. 71-O-11, passed 12-20-1971)
§ 882.43  LIMITATION ON PROSECUTION.
   All prosecutions under this chapter must be commenced within the periods set
forth in Ohio R.C. 718.06.
§ 882.44  FAILURE TO PROCURE FORMS.
   The failure of a person to receive or procure a return, declaration or other
required form shall not excuse him or her from making any information return,
return or declaration, from filing such form or from paying the tax.
(Ord. 71-O-11, passed 12-20-1971)
§ 882.99  PENALTY.
   (a)   Whoever violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of this
chapter, for which no penalty is otherwise provided, is guilty of a misdemeanor
of the third degree and shall be fined not more than five hundred dollars
($500.00) or imprisoned not more than 60 days, or both, for each offense. A
separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a
violation or noncompliance occurs or continues.
   (b)   (1)   Whoever violates §
882.33 is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree and shall be fined not
more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisoned not more than six
months, or both, for each offense. Each disclosure shall constitute a separate
offense.
      (2)   In addition, an employee of the city who violates §
882.33 is guilty of an offense punishable by immediate dismissal.
CHAPTER 883:  EARNED INCOME TAX REGULATIONS EFFECTIVE BEGINNING JANUARY 1, 2016
Section
883.01   Authority to levy tax; purpose of tax.
883.02   Definitions.
883.03   Imposition of tax.
883.04   Collection at source.
883.05   Annual return; filing.
883.06   Credit for tax paid to other municipalities.
883.07   Estimated taxes.
883.08   Rounding of amounts.
883.09   Requests for refunds.
883.10   Second municipality imposing tax after time period allowed for refund.
883.11   Amended returns.
883.12   Limitations.
883.13   Audits.
883.14   Service of assessment.
883.15   Administration of claims.
883.16   Tax information confidential.
883.17   Fraud.
883.18   Interest and penalties.
883.19   Authority of Tax Administrator; verification of information.
883.20   Request for opinion of the Tax Administrator.
883.21   Board of Tax Review.
883.22   Authority to create rules and regulations.
883.23   Rental and leased property.
883.24   Savings clause.
883.25   Collection of tax after termination of chapter.
883.26   Adoption of RITA Rules and Regulations.
883.99   Violations; penalties.
§ 883.01  AUTHORITY TO LEVY TAX; PURPOSE OF TAX.
   (a)   To provide funds for the purposes of general municipal operations,
maintenance, new equipment, extension and enlargement of municipal services and
facilities and capital improvements, including but not limited to street
construction and improvement, police protection, improvement of fire
protection, recreation and general municipal functions, the City of Kirtland
(hereinafter referred to as "city") hereby levies an annual municipal income
tax on income, qualifying wages, commissions and other compensation, and on net
profits as hereinafter provided.
   (b)   The annual tax is levied at a rate of two percent. The tax is levied
at a uniform rate on all persons residing in or earning or receiving income in
the city. The tax is levied on income, qualifying wages, commissions and other
compensation, and on net profits as hereinafter provided in §
883.03 and other sections as they may apply.
   (c)   The tax on income and the withholding tax established by this chapter
are authorized by Article XVIII, Section 3 of the Ohio Constitution. The tax is
levied in accordance with, and is intended to be consistent with, the
provisions and limitations of Ohio R.C. Chapter 718.
(Ord. 15-O-60, passed 11-16-2015)
§ 883.02  DEFINITIONS.
   (a)   Any term used in this chapter that is not otherwise defined in this
chapter has the same meaning as when used in a comparable context in laws of
the United States relating to federal income taxation or in Ohio R.C. Title
LVII, unless a different meaning is clearly required. If a term used in this
chapter that is not otherwise defined in this chapter is used in a comparable
context in both the laws of the United States relating to federal income tax
and in Ohio R.C. Title LVII and the use is not consistent, then the use of the
term in the laws of the United States relating to federal income tax shall
control over the use of the term in Ohio R.C. Title LVII.
   (b)   The singular shall include the plural, and the masculine shall include
the feminine and the gender-neutral.
   (c)   As used in this chapter:
      (1)   "Adjusted federal taxable income," for a person required to file as
a C corporation, or for a person that has elected to be taxed as a C
corporation under subsection (c)(24)D. of this section, means a C corporation's
federal taxable income before net operating losses and special deductions as
determined under the Internal Revenue Code, adjusted as follows:
         A.   Deduct intangible income to the extent included in federal
taxable income. The deduction shall be allowed regardless of whether the
intangible income relates to assets used in a trade or business or assets held
for the production of income.
         B.   Add an amount equal to five percent of intangible income deducted
under subsection (c)(1)A. of this section, but excluding that portion of
intangible income directly related to the sale, exchange, or other disposition
of property described in section 1221 of the Internal Revenue Code;
         C.   Add any losses allowed as a deduction in the computation of
federal taxable income if the losses directly relate to the sale, exchange, or
other disposition of an asset described in section 1221 or 1231 of the Internal
Revenue Code;
         D.   1.   Except as provided in subsection (c)(1)D.2. of this section,
deduct income and gain included in federal taxable income to the extent the
income and gain directly relate to the sale, exchange, or other disposition of
an asset described in section 1221 or 1231 of the Internal Revenue Code;
            2.   Subsection (c)(l)D.1. of this section does not apply to the
extent the income or gain is income or gain described in section 1245 or 1250
of the Internal Revenue Code.
         E.   Add taxes on or measured by net income allowed as a deduction in
the computation of federal taxable income;
         F.   In the case of a real estate investment trust or regulated
investment company, add all amounts with respect to dividends to, distributions
to, or amounts set aside for or credited to the benefit of investors and
allowed as a deduction in the computation of federal taxable income;
         G.   Deduct, to the extent not otherwise deducted or excluded in
computing federal taxable income, any income derived from a transfer agreement
or from the enterprise transferred under that agreement under Ohio R.C.
4313.02;
         H.   1.   Except as limited by subsections (c)(l)H.2., 3., and 4. of
this section, deduct any net operating loss incurred by the person in a taxable
year beginning on or after January 1, 2017.  The amount of such net operating
loss shall be deducted from net profit that is reduced by exempt income to the
extent necessary to reduce municipal taxable income to zero, with any remaining
unused portion of the net operating loss carried forward to not more than five
consecutive taxable years following the taxable year in which the loss was
incurred, but in no case for more years than necessary for the deduction to be
fully utilized.
            2.   No person shall use the deduction allowed by subsection (c)
(1)H. of this section to offset qualifying wages.
            3.   a.   For taxable years beginning in 2018, 2019, 2020, 2021, or
2022, a person may not deduct more than fifty percent of the amount of the
deduction otherwise allowed by subsection (c)(l)H.1. of this section.
               b.   For taxable years beginning in 2023 or thereafter, a person
may deduct the full amount, allowed by subsection (c)(l)H.1. of this section.
            4.   Any pre-2017 net operating loss carryforward deduction that is
available must be utilized before a taxpayer may deduct any amount pursuant to
subsection (c)(1)H. of this section.
            5.   Nothing in subsection (c)(l)H.3.a. of this section precludes a
person from carrying forward, use with respect to any return filed for a
taxable year beginning after 2018, any amount of net operating loss that was
not fully utilized by operation of subsection (c)(l)H.3.a. of this section.  To
the extent that an amount of net operating loss that was not fully utilized in
one or more taxable years by operation of subsection (c)(l)H.3.a. of this
section is carried forward for use with respect to a return filed for a taxable
year beginning in 2019, 2020, 2021, or 2022, the limitation described in
subsection (c)(l)H.3.a. of this section shall apply to the amount carried
forward.
         I.   Deduct any net profit of a pass-through entity owned directly or
indirectly by the taxpayer and included in the taxpayer's federal taxable
income unless an affiliated group of corporations includes that net profit in
the group's federal taxable income in accordance with §
883.05(v)(3)B.
         J.   Add any loss incurred by a pass-through entity owned directly or
indirectly by the taxpayer and included in the taxpayer's federal taxable
income unless an affiliated group of corporations includes that loss in the
group's federal taxable income in accordance with §
883.05(v)(3)B.
      If the taxpayer is not a C corporation, is not a disregarded entity that
has made an election described in subsection (c)(48)B. of this section, is not
a publicly traded partnership that has made the election described in
subsection (c)(24)D. of this section, and is not an individual, the taxpayer
shall compute adjusted federal taxable income under this section as if the
taxpayer were a C corporation, except guaranteed payments and other similar
amounts paid or accrued to a partner, former partner, shareholder, former
shareholder, member, or former member shall not be allowed as a deductible
expense unless such payments are in consideration for the use of capital and
treated as payment of interest under section 469 of the Internal Revenue Code
or United States Treasury regulations. Amounts paid or accrued to a qualified
self-employed retirement plan with respect to a partner, former partner,
shareholder, former shareholder, member, or former member of the taxpayer,
amounts paid or accrued to or for health insurance for a partner, former
partner, shareholder, former shareholder, member, or former member, and amounts
paid or accrued to or for life insurance for a partner, former partner,
shareholder, former shareholder, member, or former member shall not be allowed
as a deduction.
      Nothing in subsection (c)(1) of this section shall be construed as
allowing the taxpayer to add or deduct any amount more than once or shall be
construed as allowing any taxpayer to deduct any amount paid to or accrued for
purposes of federal self-employment tax.
      (2)   A.   "Assessment" means a written finding by the Tax Administrator
that a person has underpaid municipal income tax, or owes penalty and interest,
or any combination of tax, penalty, or interest, to the municipal corporation
that commences the person's time limitation for making an appeal to the Board
of Tax Review pursuant to §
883.21, and has "ASSESSMENT" written in all capital letters at the top of such
finding.
         B.   "Assessment" does not include a notice denying a request for
refund issued under §
883.09(c)(3), a billing statement notifying a taxpayer of current or past-due
balances owed to the municipal corporation, a Tax Administrator's request for
additional information, a notification to the taxpayer of mathematical errors,
or a Tax Administrator's other written correspondence to a person or taxpayer
that does not meet the criteria prescribed by subsection (c)(2)A. of this
section.
      (3)   "Audit" means the examination of a person or the inspection of the
books, records, memoranda, or accounts of a person, ordered to appear before
the Tax Administrator, for the purpose of determining liability for a municipal
income tax.
      (4)   "Board of Tax Review" or "Board of Review" or "Board of Tax
Appeals", or other named local board constituted to hear appeals of municipal
income tax matters, means the entity created under §
883.21.
      (5)   "Calendar quarter" means the three-month period ending on the last
day of March, June, September, or December.
      (6)   "Casino operator" and "casino facility" have the same meanings as
in Ohio R.C. 3772.01.
      (7)   "Certified mail," "express mail," "United States mail," "postal
service," and similar terms include any delivery service authorized pursuant to
Ohio R.C. 5703.056.
      (8)   "Disregarded entity" means a single member limited liability
company, a qualifying subchapter S subsidiary, or another entity if the
company, subsidiary, or entity is a disregarded entity for federal income tax
purposes.
      (9)   "Domicile" means the true, fixed, and permanent home of a taxpayer
and to which, whenever absent, the taxpayer intends to return. A taxpayer may
have more than one residence but not more than one domicile.
      (10)   "Employee" means an individual who is an employee for federal
income tax purposes.
      (11)   "Employer" means a person that is an employer for federal income
tax purposes.
      (12)   "Exempt income" means all of the following:
         A.   The military pay or allowances of members of the Armed Forces of
the United States or members of their reserve components, including the
national guard of any state.
         B.   Intangible income.
         C.   Social Security benefits, railroad retirement benefits,
unemployment compensation, pensions, retirement benefit payments, payments from
annuities, and similar payments made to an employee or to the beneficiary of an
employee under a retirement program or plan, disability payments received from
private industry or local, state, or federal governments or from charitable,
religious or educational organizations, and the proceeds of sickness, accident,
or liability insurance policies. As used in subsection (c)(12)C. of this
section, "unemployment compensation" does not include supplemental unemployment
compensation described in section 3402(o)(2) of the Internal Revenue Code.
         D.   The income of religious, fraternal, charitable, scientific,
literary, or educational institutions to the extent such income is derived from
tax-exempt real estate, tax-exempt tangible or intangible property, or tax-
exempt activities.
         E.   Compensation paid under Ohio R.C. 3501.28 or 3501.36 to a person
serving as a precinct election official to the extent that such compensation
does not exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000) for the taxable year. Such
compensation in excess of one thousand dollars ($1,000) for the taxable year
may be subject to taxation by a municipal corporation. A municipal corporation
shall not require the payer of such compensation to withhold any tax from that
compensation.
         F.   Dues, contributions, and similar payments received by charitable,
religious, educational, or literary organizations or labor unions, lodges, and
similar organizations.
         G.   Alimony and child support received.
         H.   Compensation for personal injuries or for damages to property
from insurance proceeds or otherwise, excluding compensation paid for lost
salaries or wages or compensation from punitive damages.
         I.   Income of a public utility when that public utility is subject to
the tax levied under Ohio R.C. 5727.24 or 5727.30.  Subsection (c)(12)I. of
this section does not apply for purposes of Ohio R.C. Chapter 5745.
         J.   Gains from involuntary conversions, interest on federal
obligations, items of income subject to a tax levied by the state and that a
municipal corporation is specifically prohibited by law from taxing, and income
of a decedent's estate during the period of administration except such income
from the operation of a trade or business.
         K.   Compensation or allowances excluded from federal gross income
under section 107 of the Internal Revenue Code.
         L.   Employee compensation that is not qualifying wages as defined in
subsection (c)(35) of this section.
         M.   Compensation paid to a person employed within the boundaries of a
United States Air Force base under the jurisdiction of the United States Air
Force that is used for the housing of members of the United States Air Force
and is a center for Air Force operations, unless the person is subject to
taxation because of residence or domicile. If the compensation is subject to
taxation because of residence or domicile, tax on such income shall be payable
only to the municipal corporation of residence or domicile.
         N.   An S corporation shareholder's share of net profits of the S
corporation, other than any part of the share of net profits that represents
wages as defined in section 3121(a) of the Internal Revenue Code or net
earnings from self-employment as defined in section 1402(a) of the Internal
Revenue Code.
         O.   All of the income of individuals under 18 years of age.
         P.   1.   Except as provided in subsections (c)(12)P.2., 3., and 4. of
this section, qualifying wages described in §
883.04(c)(2) or (c)(5) to the extent the qualifying wages are not subject to
withholding for the city under either of those divisions.
            2.   The exemption provided in subsection (c)(12)P.1. of this
section does not apply with respect to the municipal corporation in which the
employee resided at the time the employee earned the qualifying wages.
            3.   The exemption provided in subsection (c)(12)P.1. of this
section does not apply to qualifying wages that an employer elects to withhold
under §
883.04(c)(4)B.
            4.   The exemption provided in subsection (c)(12)P.1. of this
section does not apply to qualifying wages if both of the following conditions
apply:
               a.   For qualifying wages described in §
883.04(c)(2), the employee's employer withholds and remits tax on the
qualifying wages to the municipal corporation in which the employee's principal
place of work is situated, or, for qualifying wages described in §
883.04(c)(5), the employee's employer withholds and remits tax on the
qualifying wages to the municipal corporation in which the employer's fixed
location is located;
               b.   The employee receives a refund of the tax described in
subsection (c)(12)P.4.a. of this section on the basis of the employee not
performing services in that municipal corporation.
         Q.   1.   Except as provided in subsection (c)(12)Q.2. or 3. of this
section, compensation that is not qualifying wages paid to a nonresident
individual for personal services performed in the city on not more than 20 days
in a taxable year.
            2.   The exemption provided in subsection (c)(12)Q.1. of this
section does not apply under either of the following circumstances:
               a.   The individual's base of operation is located in the
municipal corporation.
               b.   The individual is a professional athlete, professional
entertainer, or public figure, and the compensation is paid for the performance
of services in the individual's capacity as a professional athlete,
professional entertainer, or public figure. For purposes of subsection (c)
(12)Q.2.b. of this section, "professional athlete," "professional entertainer,"
and "public figure" have the same meanings as in §
883.04(c).
            3.   Compensation to which subsection (c)(12)Q. of this section
applies shall be treated as earned or received at the individual's base of
operation. If the individual does not have a base of operation, the
compensation shall be treated as earned or received where the individual is
domiciled.
            4.   For purposes of subsection (c)(12)Q. of this section, "base of
operation" means the location where an individual owns or rents an office,
storefront, or similar facility to which the individual regularly reports and
at which the individual regularly performs personal services for compensation.
2016 Replacement
         R.   Compensation paid to a person for personal services performed for
a political subdivision on property owned by the political subdivision,
regardless of whether the compensation is received by an employee of the
subdivision or another person performing services for the subdivision under a
contract with the subdivision, if the property on which services are performed
is annexed to a municipal corporation pursuant to Ohio R.C. 709.023 on or after
March 27, 2013, unless the person is subject to such taxation because of
residence. If the compensation is subject to taxation because of residence,
municipal income tax shall be payable only to the municipal corporation of
residence.
         S.   Income the taxation of which is prohibited by the constitution or
laws of the United States. 
         Any item of income that is exempt income of a pass-through entity
under subsection (c) of this section is exempt income of each owner of the
pass-through entity to the extent of that owner's distributive or proportionate
share of that item of the entity's income.
      (13)   "Form 2106" means Internal Revenue Service form 2106 filed by a
taxpayer pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code.
      (14)   "Generic form" means an electronic or paper form that is not
prescribed by a particular municipal corporation and that is designed for
reporting taxes withheld by an employer, agent of an employer, or other payer,
estimated municipal income taxes, or annual municipal income tax liability or
for filing a refund claim.
      (15)   "Gross receipts" means the total revenue derived from sales, work
done, or service rendered.
      (16)   "Income" means the following:
         A.   1.   For residents, all income, salaries, qualifying wages,
commissions, and other compensation from whatever source earned or received by
the resident, including the resident's distributive share of the net profit of
pass-through entities owned directly or indirectly by the resident and any net
profit of the resident, except as provided in subsection (c)(24)D. of this
section.
            2.   For the purposes of subsection (c)(16)A.1. of this section:
               A.   Any net operating loss of the resident incurred in the
taxable year and the resident's distributive share of any net operating loss
generated in the same taxable year and attributable to the resident's ownership
interest in a pass-through entity shall be allowed as a deduction, for that
taxable year and the following five taxable years, against any other net profit
of the resident or the resident's distributive share of any net profit
attributable to the resident's ownership interest in a pass-through entity
until fully utilized, subject to subsection (c)(16)A.4. of this section;
               B.   The resident's distributive share of the net profit of each
pass-through entity owned directly or indirectly by the resident shall be
calculated without regard to any net operating loss that is carried forward by
that entity from a prior taxable year and applied to reduce the entity's net
profit for the current taxable year.
            3.   Subsection (c)(16)A.2. of this section does not apply with
respect to any net profit or net operating loss attributable to an ownership
interest in an S corporation unless shareholders' shares of net profits from S
corporations are subject to tax in the municipal corporation as provided in
subsection (c)(12)N. or (c)(16)E. of this section.
            4.   Any amount of a net operating loss used to reduce a taxpayer's
net profit for a taxable year shall reduce the amount of net operating loss
that may be carried forward to any subsequent year for use by that taxpayer. In
no event shall the cumulative deductions for all taxable years with respect to
a taxpayer's net operating loss exceed the original amount of that net
operating loss available to that taxpayer.
         B.   In the case of nonresidents, all income, salaries, qualifying
wages, commissions, and other compensation from whatever source earned or
received by the nonresident for work done, services performed or rendered, or
activities conducted in the municipal corporation, including any net profit of
the nonresident, but excluding the nonresident's distributive share of the net
profit or loss of only pass-through entities owned directly or indirectly by
the nonresident.
         C.   For taxpayers that are not individuals, net profit of the
taxpayer.
         D.   Lottery, sweepstakes, gambling and sports winnings, winnings from
games of chance, and prizes and awards. If the taxpayer is a professional
gambler for federal income tax purposes, the taxpayer may deduct related
wagering losses and expenses to the extent authorized under the Internal
Revenue Code and claimed against such winnings.
      (17)   "Intangible income" means income of any of the following types:
income yield, interest, capital gains, dividends, or other income arising from
the ownership, sale, exchange, or other disposition of intangible property
including, but not limited to, investments, deposits, money, or credits as
those terms are defined in Ohio R.C. Chapter 5701, and patents, copyrights,
trademarks, tradenames, investments in real estate investment trusts,
investments in regulated investment companies, and appreciation on deferred
compensation. "Intangible income" does not include prizes, awards, or other
income associated with any lottery winnings, gambling winnings, or other
similar games of chance.
      (18)   "Internal Revenue Code" has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C.
5747.01.
      (19)   "Limited liability company" means a limited liability company
formed under Ohio R.C. Chapter 1705 or under the laws of another state.
      (20)   "Municipal corporation" means, in general terms, a status
conferred upon a local government unit, by state law giving the unit certain
autonomous operating authority such as the power of taxation, power of eminent
domain, police power and regulatory power, and includes a joint economic
development district or joint economic development zone that levies an income
tax under Ohio R.C. 715.691, 715.70, 715.71, or 715.74.
      (21)   A.   "Municipal taxable income" means the following:
            1.   For a person other than an individual, income reduced by
exempt income to the extent otherwise included in income and then, as
applicable, apportioned or sitused to the city under §
883.03, and further reduced by any pre-2017 net operating loss carryforward
available to the person for the city.
            2.   a.   For an individual who is a resident of the city, income
reduced by exempt income to the extent otherwise included in income; then
reduced as provided in subsection (c)(21)B. of this section, and further
reduced by any pre-2017 net operating loss carryforward available to the
individual for the municipal corporation.
               b.   For an individual who is a nonresident of the city, income
reduced by exempt income to the extent otherwise included in income and then,
as applicable, apportioned or sitused to the municipal corporation under §
883.03, then reduced as provided in subsection (c)(21)B. of this section, and
further reduced by any pre-2017 net operating loss carryforward available to
the individual for the city.
         B.   In computing the municipal taxable income of a taxpayer who is an
individual, the taxpayer may subtract, as provided in subsection (c)(21)A.2.a.
or (c)(21)B. of this section, the amount of the individual's employee business
expenses reported on the individual's form 2106 that the individual deducted
for federal income tax purposes for the taxable year, subject to the limitation
imposed by section 67 of the Internal Revenue Code. For the municipal
corporation in which the taxpayer is a resident, the taxpayer may deduct all
such expenses allowed for federal income tax purposes, but only to the extent
the expenses do not relate to exempt income. For a municipal corporation in
which the taxpayer is not a resident, the taxpayer may deduct such expenses
only to the extent the expenses are related to the taxpayer's performance of
personal services in that nonresident municipal corporation and are not related
to exempt income.
      (22)   "Municipality" means the same as the City of Kirtland.
      (23)   "Net operating loss" means a loss incurred by a person in the
operation of a trade or business. "Net operating loss" does not include
unutilized losses resulting from basis limitations, at-risk limitations, or
passive activity loss limitations.
      (24)   A.   "Net profit" for a person other than an individual means
adjusted federal taxable income.
         B.   "Net profit" for a person who is an individual means the
individual's net profit required to be reported on schedule C, schedule E, or
schedule F reduced by any net operating loss carried forward. For the purposes
of this subsection, the net operating loss carried forward shall be calculated
and deducted in the same manner as provided in subsection (c)(l)H. of this
section.
         C.   For the purposes of this chapter, and notwithstanding subsection
(c)(24)A. of this section, net profit of a disregarded entity shall not be
taxable as against that disregarded entity, but shall instead be included in
the net profit of the owner of the disregarded entity.
         D.   A publicly traded partnership that is treated as a partnership
for federal income tax purposes, and that is subject to tax on its net profits
by the city, may elect to be treated as a C corporation for the city. The
election shall be made on the annual return for the city. The city will treat
the publicly traded partnership as a C corporation if the election is so made.
      (25)   "Nonresident" means an individual that is not a resident.
      (26)   "Ohio Business Gateway" means the online computer network system,
created under Ohio R.C. 125.30, that allows persons to electronically file
business reply forms with state agencies and includes any successor electronic
filing and payment system.
      (27)   "Other payer" means any person, other than an individual's
employer or the employer's agent, that pays an individual any amount included
in the federal gross income of the individual. "Other payer" includes casino
operators and video lottery terminal sales agents.
      (28)   "Pass-through entity" means a partnership not treated as an
association taxable as a C corporation for federal income tax purposes, a
limited liability company not treated as an association taxable as a C
corporation for federal income tax purposes, an S corporation, or any other
class of entity from which the income or profits of the entity are given pass-
through treatment for federal income tax purposes. "Pass-through entity" does
not include a trust, estate, grantor of a grantor trust, or disregarded entity.
      (29)   "Pension" means any amount paid to an employee or former employee
that is reported to the recipient on an IRS form 1099-R, or successor form.
Pension does not include deferred compensation, or amounts attributable to
nonqualified deferred compensation plans, reported as FICA/Medicare wages on an
IRS form W-2, Wage and Tax Statement, or successor form.
      (30)   "Person" includes individuals, firms, companies, joint stock
companies, business trusts, estates, trusts, partnerships, limited liability
partnerships, limited liability companies, associations, C corporations, S
corporations, governmental entities, and any other entity.
      (31)   "Postal service" means the United States postal service.
      (32)   "Postmark date," "date of postmark," and similar terms include the
date recorded and marked in the manner described in division (B)(3) of Ohio
R.C. 5703.056.
      (33)   A.   "Pre-2017 net operating loss carryforward" means any net
operating loss incurred in a taxable year beginning before January 1, 2017, to
the extent such loss was permitted, by a resolution or ordinance of the city
that was adopted by the city before January 1, 2016, to be carried forward and
utilized to offset income or net profit generated in the city in future taxable
years.
         B.   For the purpose of calculating municipal taxable income, any pre-
2017 net operating loss carryforward may be carried forward to any taxable
year, including taxable years beginning in 2017 or thereafter, for the number
of taxable years provided in the resolution or ordinance or until fully
utilized, whichever is earlier.
      (34)   "Publicly traded partnership" means any partnership, an interest
in which is regularly traded on an established securities market. A "publicly
traded partnership" may have any number of partners.
      (35)   "Qualifying wages" means wages, as defined in section 3121(a) of
the Internal Revenue Code, without regard to any wage limitations, adjusted as
follows:
         A.   Deduct the following amounts:
            1.   Any amount included in wages if the amount constitutes
compensation attributable to a plan or program described in section 125 of the
Internal Revenue Code.
            2.   Any amount included in wages if the amount constitutes payment
on account of a disability related to sickness or an accident paid by a party
unrelated to the employer, agent of an employer, or other payer.
            3.   Any amount included in wages that is exempt income.
         B.   Add the following amounts:
            1.   Any amount not included in wages solely because the employee
was employed by the employer before April 1, 1986.
            2.   Any amount not included in wages because the amount arises
from the sale, exchange, or other disposition of a stock option, the exercise
of a stock option, or the sale, exchange, or other disposition of stock
purchased under a stock option. Subsection (c)(35)B.2. of this section applies
only to those amounts constituting ordinary income.
            3.   Any amount not included in wages if the amount is an amount
described in section 401(k), 403(b), or 457 of the Internal Revenue Code.
Subsection (c)(35)B.3. of this section applies only to employee contributions
and employee deferrals.
            4.   Any amount that is supplemental unemployment compensation
benefits described in section 3402(o)(2) of the Internal Revenue Code and not
included in wages.
            5.   Any amount received that is treated as self-employment income
for federal tax purposes in accordance with section 1402(a)(8) of the Internal
Revenue Code.
            6.   Any amount not included in wages if all of the following
apply:
               a.   For the taxable year the amount is employee compensation
that is earned outside the United States and that either is included in the
taxpayer's gross income for federal income tax purposes or would have been
included in the taxpayer's gross income for such purposes if the taxpayer did
not elect to exclude the income under section 911 of the Internal Revenue Code;
               b.   For no preceding taxable year did the amount constitute
wages as defined in section 3121(a) of the Internal Revenue Code;
               c.   For no succeeding taxable year will the amount constitute
wages; and
               d.   For any taxable year the amount has not otherwise been
added to wages pursuant to either subsection (c)(35)B. of this section or Ohio
R.C. 718.03, as that section existed before the effective date of H.B. 5 of the
130th General Assembly, March 23, 2015.
      (36)   "Related entity" means any of the following:
         A.   An individual stockholder, or a member of the stockholder's
family enumerated in section 318 of the Internal Revenue Code, if the
stockholder and the members of the stockholder's family own directly,
indirectly, beneficially, or constructively, in the aggregate, at least fifty
percent of the value of the taxpayer's outstanding stock;
         B.   A stockholder, or a stockholder's partnership, estate, trust, or
corporation, if the stockholder and the stockholder's partnerships, estates,
trusts, or corporations own directly, indirectly, beneficially, or
constructively, in the aggregate, at least fifty percent of the value of the
taxpayer's outstanding stock;
         C.   A corporation, or a party related to the corporation in a manner
that would require an attribution of stock from the corporation to the party or
from the party to the corporation under subsection (c)(36)D. of this section,
provided the taxpayer owns directly, indirectly, beneficially, or
constructively, at least fifty percent of the value of the corporation's
outstanding stock;
         D.   The attribution rules described in section 318 of the Internal
Revenue Code apply for the purpose of determining whether the ownership
requirements in subsections (c)(36)A. to C. of this section have been met.
      (37)   "Related member" means a person that, with respect to the taxpayer
during all or any portion of the taxable year, is either a related entity, a
component member as defined in section 1563(b) of the Internal Revenue Code, or
a person to or from whom there is attribution of stock ownership in accordance
with section 1563(e) of the Internal Revenue Code except, for purposes of
determining whether a person is a related member under this division, "twenty
percent (20%)" shall be substituted for "five percent (5%)" wherever "five
percent (5%)" appears in section 1563(e) of the Internal Revenue Code.
      (38)   "Resident" means an individual who is domiciled in the municipal
corporation as determined under §
883.03(e).
      (39)   "S corporation" means a person that has made an election under
subchapter S of Chapter 1 of Subtitle A of the Internal Revenue Code for its
taxable year.
      (40)   "Schedule C" means Internal Revenue Service schedule C (form 1040)
filed by a taxpayer pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code.
      (41)   "Schedule E" means Internal Revenue Service schedule E (form 1040)
filed by a taxpayer pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code.
      (42)   "Schedule F" means Internal Revenue Service schedule F (form 1040)
filed by a taxpayer pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code.
      (43)   "Single member limited liability company" means a limited
liability company that has one direct member.
      (44)   "Small employer" means any employer that had total revenue of less
than five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000) during the preceding taxable
year. For purposes of this subsection, "total revenue" means receipts of any
type or kind, including, but not limited to, sales receipts; payments; rents;
profits; gains, dividends, and other investment income; compensation;
commissions; premiums; money; property; grants; contributions; donations;
gifts; program service revenue; patient service revenue; premiums; fees,
including premium fees and service fees; tuition payments; unrelated business
revenue; reimbursements; any type of payment from a governmental unit,
including grants and other allocations; and any other similar receipts reported
for federal income tax purposes or under generally accepted accounting
principles. "Small employer" does not include the federal government; any state
government, including any state agency or instrumentality; any political
subdivision; or any entity treated as a government for financial accounting and
reporting purposes.
      (45)   "Tax Administrator" means the individual charged with direct
responsibility for administration of an income tax levied by the city in
accordance with this chapter.
      (46)   "Tax return preparer" means any individual described in section
7701(a)(36) of the Internal Revenue Code and 26 C.F.R. 301.7701-15 .
      (47)   "Taxable year" means the corresponding tax reporting period as
prescribed for the taxpayer under the Internal Revenue Code.
      (48)   A.   "Taxpayer" means a person subject to a tax levied on income
by a municipal corporation in accordance with this chapter. "Taxpayer" does not
include a grantor trust or, except as provided in subsection (c)(48)B.1. of
this section, a disregarded entity.
         B.   1.   A single member limited liability company that is a
disregarded entity for federal tax purposes may be a separate taxpayer from its
single member in all Ohio municipal corporations in which it either filed as a
separate taxpayer or did not file for its taxable year ending in 2003, if all
of the following conditions are met:
               a.   The limited liability company's single member is also a
limited liability company.
               b.   The limited liability company and its single member were
formed and doing business in one or more Ohio municipal corporations for at
least five years before January 1, 2004.
               c.   Not later than December 31, 2004, the limited liability
company and its single member each made an election to be treated as a separate
taxpayer under division (L) of Ohio R.C. 718.01 as that section existed on
December 31, 2004.
               d.   The limited liability company was not formed for the
purpose of evading or reducing Ohio municipal corporation income tax liability
of the limited liability company or its single member.
               e.   The Ohio municipal corporation that was the primary place
of business of the sole member of the limited liability company consented to
the election.
            2.   For purposes of subsection (c)(48)B.1.e. of this section, a
municipal corporation was the primary place of business of a limited liability
company if, for the limited liability company's taxable year ending in 2003,
its income tax liability was greater in that municipal corporation than in any
other municipal corporation in Ohio, and that tax liability to that municipal
corporation for its taxable year ending in 2003 was at least four hundred
thousand dollars ($400,000).
      (49)   "Taxpayers' rights and responsibilities" means the rights provided
to taxpayers in Sections 9, 12, 13, 19(B), 20, 21, and Ohio R.C. 5717.011 and
5717.03, and the responsibilities of taxpayers to file, report, withhold,
remit, and pay municipal income tax and otherwise comply with Ohio R.C. Chapter
718 and resolutions, ordinances, and rules and regulations adopted by the city
for the imposition and administration of a municipal income tax.
      (50)   "Video lottery terminal" has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C.
3770.21.
      (51)   "Video lottery terminal sales agent" means a lottery sales agent
licensed under Ohio R.C. Chapter 3770 to conduct video lottery terminals on
behalf of the state pursuant to Ohio R.C. 3770.21.
(Ord. 15-O-60, passed 11-16-2015)
§ 883.03  IMPOSITION OF TAX.
   The income tax levied by the city at a rate of two percent is levied on the
municipal taxable income of every person residing in and/or earning and/or
receiving income in the city.
Individuals.
   (a)   For residents of the city, the income tax levied herein shall be on
all income, salaries, qualifying wages, commissions, and other compensation
from whatever source earned or received by the resident, including the
resident's distributive share of the net profit of pass-through entities owned
directly or indirectly by the resident and any net profit of the resident. This
is further detailed in the definition of income (§
883.02(c)(16)).
   (b)   For nonresidents, all income, salaries, qualifying wages, commissions,
and other compensation from whatever source earned or received by the
nonresident for work done, services performed or rendered, or activities
conducted in the municipal corporation, including any net profit of the
nonresident, but excluding the nonresident's distributive share of the net
profit or loss of only pass-through entities owned directly or indirectly by
the nonresident.
   (c)   For residents and nonresidents, income can be reduced to municipal
taxable income as defined in §
883.02(c)(21). Exemptions which may apply are specified in §
883.02(c)(12).
Refundable Credit for Nonqualified Deferred Compensation Plan.
   (d)   (1)   As used in this subsection:
         A.   "Nonqualified deferred compensation plan" means a compensation
plan described in section 3121(v)(2)(C) of the Internal Revenue Code.
         B.   "Qualifying loss" means the amount of compensation attributable
to a taxpayer's nonqualified deferred compensation plan, less the receipt of
money and property attributable to distributions from the nonqualified deferred
compensation plan. Full loss is sustained if no distribution of money and
property is made by the nonqualified deferred compensation plan. The taxpayer
sustains a qualifying loss only in the taxable year in which the taxpayer
receives the final distribution of money and property pursuant to that
nonqualified deferred compensation plan.
         C.   1.   "Qualifying tax rate" means the applicable tax rate for the
taxable year for which the taxpayer paid income tax to the city with respect to
any portion of the total amount of compensation the payment of which is
deferred pursuant to a nonqualified deferred compensation plan.
            2.   If different tax rates applied for different taxable years,
then the "qualifying tax rate" is a weighted average of those different tax
rates. The weighted average shall be based upon the tax paid to the city each
year with respect to the nonqualified deferred compensation plan.
         D.   "Refundable credit" means the amount of the city income tax that
was paid on the non-distributed portion, if any, of a nonqualified deferred
compensation plan.
      (2)   If, in addition to the city, a taxpayer has paid tax to other
municipal corporations with respect to the nonqualified deferred compensation
plan, the amount of the credit that a taxpayer may claim from each municipal
corporation shall be calculated on the basis of each municipal corporation's
proportionate share of the total municipal corporation income tax paid by the
taxpayer to all municipal corporations with respect to the nonqualified
deferred compensation plan.
      (3)   In no case shall the amount of the credit allowed under this
section exceed the cumulative income fax that a taxpayer has paid to the city
for all taxable years with respect to the nonqualified deferred compensation
plan.
      (4)   The credit allowed under this subsection is allowed only to the
extent the taxpayer's qualifying loss is attributable to:
         A.   The insolvency or bankruptcy of the employer who had established
the nonqualified deferred compensation plan; or
         B.   The employee's failure or inability to satisfy all of the
employer's terms and conditions necessary to receive the nonqualified deferred
compensation.
Domicile.
   (e)   (1)   A.   An individual is presumed to be domiciled in the city for
all or part of a taxable year if the individual was domiciled in the city on
the last day of the immediately preceding taxable year or if the Tax
Administrator reasonably concludes that the individual is domiciled in the city
for all or part of the taxable year.
         B.   An individual may rebut the presumption of domicile described in
subsection (e)(1)A. of this section if the individual establishes by a
preponderance of the evidence that the individual was not domiciled in the city
for all or part of the taxable year.
      (2)   For the purpose of determining whether an individual is domiciled
in the city for all or part of a taxable year, factors that may be considered
include, but are not limited to, the following:
         A.   The individual's domicile in other taxable years;
         B.   The location at which the individual is registered to vote;
         C.   The address on the individual's driver's license;
         D.   The location of real estate for which the individual claimed a
property tax exemption or reduction allowed on the basis of the individual's
residence or domicile;
         E.   The location and value of abodes owned or leased by the
individual;
         F.   Declarations, written or oral, made by the individual regarding
the individual's residency;
         G.   The primary location at which the individual is employed;
         H.   The location of educational institutions attended by the
individual's dependents as defined in section 152 of the Internal Revenue Code,
to the extent that tuition paid to such educational institution is based on the
residency of the individual or the individual's spouse in the municipal
corporation where the educational institution is located;
         I.   The number of contact periods the individual has with the city.
For the purposes of this subsection, an individual has one contact period with
the city if the individual is away overnight from the individual's abode
located outside of the city and while away overnight from that abode spends at
least some portion, however minimal, of each of two consecutive days in the
city.
      (3)   All additional applicable factors are provided in the Rules and
Regulations.
Businesses.
   (f)   This subsection applies to any taxpayer engaged in a business or
profession in the city, unless the taxpayer is an individual who resides in the
city or the taxpayer is an electric company, combined company, or telephone
company that is subject to and required to file reports under Ohio R.C. Chapter
5745.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in subsection (f)(2) of this section,
net profit from a business or profession conducted both within and without the
boundaries of the city shall be considered as having a taxable situs in the
city for purposes of municipal income taxation in the same proportion as the
average ratio of the following:
         A.   The average original cost of the real property and tangible
personal property owned or used by the taxpayer in the business or profession
in the city during the taxable period to the average original cost of all of
the real and tangible personal property owned or used by the taxpayer in the
business or profession during the same period, wherever situated;
            As used in the preceding subsection, tangible personal or real
property shall include property rented or leased by the taxpayer and the value
of such property shall be determined by multiplying the annual rental thereon
by eight;
         B.   Wages, salaries, and other compensation paid during the taxable
period to individuals employed in the business or profession for services
performed in the city to wages, salaries, and other compensation paid during
the same period to individuals employed in the business or profession, wherever
the individual's services are performed, excluding compensation from which
taxes are not required to be withheld under §
883.04(c);
         C.   Total gross receipts of the business or profession from sales and
rentals made and services performed during the taxable period in the city to
total gross receipts of the business or profession during the same period from
sales, rentals, and services, wherever made or performed.
      (2)   A.   If the apportionment factors described in subsection (f)(1) of
this section do not fairly represent the extent of a taxpayer's business
activity in the city, the taxpayer may request, or the Tax Administrator of the
city may require, that the taxpayer use, with respect to all or any portion of
the income of the taxpayer, an alternative apportionment method involving one
or more of the following:
            1.   Separate accounting;
            2.   The exclusion of one or more of the factors;
            3.   The inclusion of one or more additional factors that would
provide for a more fair apportionment of the income of the taxpayer to the
municipal corporation;
            4.   A modification of one or more of the factors.
         B.   A taxpayer request to use an alternative apportionment method
shall be in writing and shall accompany a tax return, timely filed appeal of an
assessment, or timely filed amended tax return. The taxpayer may use the
requested alternative method unless the Tax Administrator denies the request in
an assessment issued within the period prescribed by §
883.12(a).
         C.   The Tax Administrator may require a taxpayer to use an
alternative apportionment method as described in subsection (f)(2)A. of this
section, but only by issuing an assessment to the taxpayer within the period
prescribed by §
883.12(a).
         D.   Nothing in subsection (f)(2) of this section nullifies or
otherwise affects any alternative apportionment arrangement approved by the Tax
Administrator or otherwise agreed upon by both the Tax Administrator and
taxpayer before January 1, 2016.
      (3)   As used in subsection (f)(1)B. of this section, wages, salaries,
and other compensation includes only wages, salaries, or other compensation
paid to an employee for services performed at any of the following locations:
         A.   A location that is owned, controlled, or used by, rented to, or
under the possession of one of the following:
            1.   The employer;
            2.   A vendor, customer, client, or patient of the employer, or a
related member of such a vendor, customer, client, or patient;
            3.   A vendor, customer, client, or patient of a person described
in subsection (f)(3)A.2. of this section, or a related member of such a vendor,
customer, client, or patient.
         B.   Any location at which a trial, appeal, hearing, investigation,
inquiry, review, court-martial, or similar administrative, judicial, or
legislative matter or proceeding is being conducted, provided that the
compensation is paid for services performed for, or on behalf of, the employer
or that the employee's presence at the location directly or indirectly benefits
the employer;
         C.   Any other location, if the Tax Administrator determines that the
employer directed the employee to perform the services at the other location in
lieu of a location described in subsection (f)(3)A. or B. of this section
solely in order to avoid or reduce the employer's municipal income tax
liability. If the Tax Administrator makes such a determination, the employer
may dispute the determination by establishing, by a preponderance of the
evidence, that the Tax Administrator's determination was unreasonable.
      (4)   For the purposes of subsection (f)(1)C. of this section, receipts
from sales and rentals made and services performed shall be sitused to a
municipal corporation as follows:
         A.   Gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property shall
be sitused to the municipal corporation in which the sale originated. For the
purposes of this subsection, a sale of property originates in the city if,
regardless of where title passes, the property meets any of the following
criteria:
            1.   The property is shipped to or delivered within the city from a
stock of goods located within the city.
            2.   The property is delivered within the city from a location
outside the city, provided the taxpayer is regularly engaged through its own
employees in the solicitation or promotion of sales within the city and the
sales result from such solicitation or promotion.
            3.   The property is shipped from a place within the city to
purchasers outside the city, provided that the taxpayer is not, through its own
employees, regularly engaged in the solicitation or promotion of sales at the
place where delivery is made.
         B.   Gross receipts from the sale of services shall be sitused to the
city to the extent that such services are performed in the city.
         C.   To the extent included in income, gross receipts from the sale of
real property located in the city shall be sitused to the city.
         D.   To the extent included in income, gross receipts from rents and
royalties from real property located in the city shall be sitused to the city.
         E.   Gross receipts from rents and royalties from tangible personal
property shall be sitused to the city based upon the extent to which the
tangible personal property is used in the city.
      (5)   The net profit received by an individual taxpayer from the rental
of real estate owned directly by the individual, or by a disregarded entity
owned by the individual, shall be subject to the city's tax only if the
property generating the net profit is located in the city or if the individual
taxpayer that receives the net profit is a resident of the city. The city shall
allow such taxpayers to elect to use separate accounting for the purpose of
calculating net profit sitused under this subsection to the municipal
corporation in which the property is located.
      (6)   A.   Commissions received by a real estate agent or broker relating
to the sale, purchase, or lease of real estate shall be sitused to the
municipal corporation in which the real estate is located. Net profit reported
by the real estate agent or broker shall be allocated to the city, if
applicable, based upon the ratio of the commissions the agent or broker
received from the sale, purchase, or lease of real estate located in the city
to the commissions received from the sale, purchase, or lease of real estate
everywhere in the taxable year.
         B.   An individual who is a resident of the city shall report the
individual's net profit from all real estate activity on the individual's
annual tax return for the city. The individual may claim a credit for taxes the
individual paid on such net profit to another municipal corporation to the
extent that such a credit is allowed under the city's income tax ordinance.
      (7)   When calculating the ratios described in subsection (f)(1) of this
section for the purposes of that subsection or subsection (f)(2) of this
section, the owner of a disregarded entity shall include in the owner's ratios
the property, payroll, and gross receipts of such disregarded entity.
(Ord. 15-O-60, passed 11-16-2015)
§ 883.04  COLLECTION AT SOURCE.
Withholding Provisions.
   (a)   Each employer, agent of an employer, or other payer located or doing
business in the city shall withhold an income tax from the qualifying wages
earned and/or received by each employee in the city. Except for qualifying
wages for which withholding is not required under §
883.03 or subsection (b)(4) or (b)(6) of this section, the tax shall be
withheld at the rate, specified in §
883.03, of two percent. An employer, agent of an employer, or other payer shall
deduct and withhold the tax from qualifying wages on the date that the
employer, agent, or other payer directly, indirectly, or constructively pays
the qualifying wages to, or credits the qualifying wages to the benefit of, the
employee.
   (b)   (1)   Except as provided in subsection (b)(2) of this section, an
employer, agent of an employer, or other payer shall remit to the Tax
Administrator the greater of the income taxes deducted and withheld or the
income taxes required to be deducted and withheld by the employer, agent, or
other payer according to the following schedule:
         A.   Taxes required to be deducted and withheld shall be remitted
monthly to the Tax Administrator if the total taxes deducted and withheld or
required to be deducted and withheld by the employer, agent, or other payer on
behalf of the city in the preceding calendar year exceeded two thousand three
hundred ninety-nine dollars ($2,399), or if the total amount of taxes deducted
and withheld or required to be deducted and withheld on behalf of the city in
any month of the preceding calendar quarter exceeded two hundred dollars
($200.00).
            Payment under subsection (b)(1)A. of this section shall be made so
that the payment is received by the Tax Administrator not later than 15 days
after the last day of each month for which the tax was withheld.
         B.   Any employer, agent of an employer, or other payer not required
to make payments under subsection (b)(1)A. of this section of taxes required to
be deducted and withheld shall make quarterly payments to the Tax Administrator
not later than the 15th day of the month following the end of each calendar
quarter.
      (2)   If the employer, agent of an employer, or other payer is required
to make payments electronically for the purpose of paying federal taxes
withheld on payments to employees under section 6302 of the Internal Revenue
Code, 26 C.F.R. 31.6302-1, or any other federal statute or regulation, the
payment shall be made by electronic funds transfer to the Tax Administrator of
all taxes deducted and withheld on behalf of the city. The payment of tax by
electronic funds transfer under this subsection does not affect an employer's,
agent's, or other payer's obligation to file any return as required under this
section.
      (3)   An employer, agent of an employer, or other payer shall make and
file a return showing the amount of tax withheld by the employer, agent, or
other payer from the qualifying wages of each employee and remitted to the Tax
Administrator. A return filed by an employer, agent, or other payer under this
subsection shall be accepted by Tax Administrator and the city as the return
required of a non-resident employee whose sole income subject to the tax under
this chapter is the qualifying wages reported by the employee's employer, agent
of an employer, or other payer.
      (4)   An employer, agent of an employer, or other payer is not required
to withhold the city income tax with respect to an individual's disqualifying
disposition of an incentive stock option if, at the time of the disqualifying
disposition, the individual is not an employee of either the corporation with
respect to whose stock the option has been issued or of such corporation's
successor entity.
      (5)   A.   An employee is not relieved from liability for a tax by the
failure of the employer, agent of an employer, or other payer to withhold the
tax as required under this chapter or by the employer's, agent's, or other
payer's exemption from the requirement to withhold the tax.
         B.   The failure of an employer, agent of an employer, or other payer
to remit to the city the tax withheld relieves the employee from liability for
that tax unless the employee colluded with the employer, agent, or other payer
in connection with the failure to remit the tax withheld.
      (6)   Compensation deferred before June 26, 2003, is not subject to the
city income tax or income tax withholding requirement to the extent the
deferred compensation does not constitute qualifying wages at the time the
deferred compensation is paid or distributed.
      (7)   Each employer, agent of an employer, or other payer required to
withhold taxes is liable for the payment of that amount required to be
withheld, whether or not such taxes have been withheld, and such amount shall
be deemed to be held in trust for the city until such time as the withheld
amount is remitted to the Tax Administrator.
      (8)   On or before the last day of February of each year, an employer
shall file a withholding reconciliation return with the Tax Administrator
listing:
         A.   The names, addresses, and Social Security numbers of all
employees from whose qualifying wages tax was withheld or should have been
withheld for the city during the preceding calendar year;
         B.   The amount of tax withheld, if any, from each such employee, the
total amount of qualifying wages paid to such employee during the preceding
calendar year;
         C.   The name of every other municipal corporation for which tax was
withheld or should have been withheld from such employee during the preceding
calendar year;
         D.   Any other information required for federal income tax reporting
purposes on Internal Revenue Service form W-2 or its equivalent form with
respect to such employee;
         E.   Other information as may be required by the Tax Administrator.
      (9)   The officer or the employee of the employer, agent of an employer,
or other payer with control or direct supervision of or charged with the
responsibility for withholding the tax or filing the reports and making
payments as required by this section, shall be personally liable for a failure
to file a report or pay the tax due as required by this section. The
dissolution of an employer, agent of an employer, or other payer does not
discharge the officer's or employee's liability for a failure of the employer,
agent of an employer, or other payer to file returns or pay any tax due.
      (10)   An employer is required to deduct and withhold city income tax on
tips and gratuities received by the employer's employees and constituting
qualifying wages, but only to the extent that the tips and gratuities are under
the employer's control. For the purposes of this subsection, a tip or gratuity
is under the employer's control if the tip or gratuity is paid by the customer
to the employer for subsequent remittance to the employee, or if the customer
pays the tip or gratuity by credit card, debit card, or other electronic means.
      (11)   The Tax Administrator shall consider any tax withheld by an
employer at the request of an employee, when such tax is not otherwise required
to be withheld by this chapter, to be tax required to be withheld and remitted
for the purposes of this section.
Occasional Entrant - Withholding.
   (c)   (1)   As used in this subsection:
         A.   "Employer" includes a person that is a related member to or of an
employer.
         B.   "Fixed location" means a permanent place of doing business in
this state, such as an office, warehouse, storefront or similar location owned
or controlled by an employer.
         C.   "Principal place of work" means the fixed location to which an
employee is required to report for employment duties on a regular and ordinary
basis. If the employee is not required to report for employment duties on a
regular and ordinary basis to a fixed location, "principal place of work" means
the worksite location in this state to which the employee is required to report
for employment duties on a regular and ordinary basis. If the employee is not
required to report for employment duties on a regular and ordinary basis to a
fixed location or worksite location, "principal place of work" means the
location in this state at which the employee spends the greatest number of days
in a calendar year performing services for or on behalf of the employee's
employer.
            If there is not a single municipal corporation in which the
employee spent the greatest number of days in a calendar year performing
services for or on behalf of the employer, but instead there are two or more
municipal corporations in which the employee spent an identical number of days
that is greater than the number of days the employee spent in any other
municipal corporation, the employer shall allocate any of the employee's
qualifying wages subject to subsection (c)(2)A.1. of this section among those
two or more municipal corporations. The allocation shall be made using any fair
and reasonable method, including, but not limited to, an equal allocation among
such municipal corporations or an allocation based upon the time spent or sales
made by the employee in each such municipal corporation. A municipal
corporation to which qualifying wages are allocated under this subsection shall
be the employee's "principal place of work" with respect to those qualifying
wages for the purposes of this section.
            For the purposes of this subsection, the location at which an
employee spends a particular day shall be determined in accordance with
subsection (c)(2)B. of this section, except that "location" shall be
substituted for "municipal corporation" wherever "municipal corporation"
appears in that division.
         D.   "Professional athlete" means an athlete who performs services in
a professional athletic event for wages or other remuneration.
         E.   "Professional entertainer" means a person who performs services
in the professional performing arts for wages or other remuneration on a per-
event basis.
         F.   "Public figure" means a person of prominence who performs
services at discrete events, such as speeches, public appearances, or similar
events, for wages or other remuneration on a per-event basis.
         G.   "Worksite location" means a construction site or other temporary
worksite in this state at which the employer provides services for more than 20
days during the calendar year. "Worksite location" does not include the home of
an employee.
      (2)   A.   Subject to subsections (c)(3), (c)(5), (c)(6), and (c)(7) of
this section, an employer is not required to withhold city income tax on
qualifying wages paid to an employee for the performance of personal services
in the city if the employee performed such services in the city on 20 or fewer
days in a calendar year, unless one of the following conditions applies:
            1.   The employee's principal place of work is located in the city.
            2.   The employee performed services at one or more presumed
worksite locations in the city. For the purposes of this division, "presumed
worksite location" means a construction site or other temporary worksite in the
city at which the employer provides or provided services that can reasonably
be, or would have been, expected by the employer to last more than 20 days in a
calendar year. Services can reasonably be expected by the employer to last more
than 20 days if either of the following applies at the time the services
commence:
               a.   The nature of the services are such that it will require
more than 20 days of the services to complete the services;
               b.   The agreement between the employer and its customer to
perform services at a location requires the employer to perform the services at
the location for more than 20 days.
            3.   The employee is a resident of the city and has requested that
the employer withhold tax from the employee's qualifying wages as provided in §
883.04.
            4.   The employee is a professional athlete, professional
entertainer, or public figure, and the qualifying wages are paid for the
performance of services in the employee's capacity as a professional athlete,
professional entertainer, or public figure.
         B.   For the purposes of subsection (c)(2)A. of this section, an
employee shall be considered to have spent a day performing services in the
city only if the employee spent more time performing services for or on behalf
of the employer in the city than in any other municipal corporation on that
day. For the purposes of determining the amount of time an employee spent in a
particular location, the time spent performing one or more of the following
activities shall be considered to have been spent at the employee's principal
place of work:
            1.   Traveling to the location at which the employee will first
perform services for the employer for the day;
            2.   Traveling from a location at which the employee was performing
services for the employer to any other location;
            3.   Traveling from any location to another location in order to
pick up or load, for the purpose of transportation or delivery, property that
has been purchased, sold, assembled, fabricated, repaired, refurbished,
processed, remanufactured, or improved by the employee's employer;
            4.   Transporting or delivering property described in subsection
(c)(2)B.3. of this section, provided that, upon delivery of the property, the
employee does not temporarily or permanently affix the property to real estate
owned, used, or controlled by a person other than the employee's employer;
            5.   Traveling from the location at which the employee makes the
employee's final delivery or pick-up for the day to either the employee's
principal place of work or a location at which the employee will not perform
services for the employer.
      (3)   If the principal place of work of an employee is located in another
Ohio municipal corporation that imposes an income tax, the exception from
withholding requirements described in subsection (c)(2)A. of this section shall
apply only if, with respect to the employee's qualifying wages described in
that subsection, the employer withholds and remits tax on such qualifying wages
to that municipal corporation.
      (4)   A.   Except as provided in subsection (c)(4)B. of this section, if,
during a calendar year, the number of days an employee spends performing
personal services in the city exceeds the 20-day threshold, the employer shall
withhold and remit tax to the city for any subsequent days in that calendar
year on which the employer pays qualifying wages to the employee for personal
services performed in the city.
         B.   An employer required to begin withholding tax for the city under
subsection (c)(4)A. of this section may elect to withhold tax for the city for
the first 20 days on which the employer paid qualifying wages to the employee
for personal services performed in the city.
      (5)   If an employer's fixed location is the city and the employer
qualifies as a small employer as defined in §
883.02, the employer shall withhold municipal income tax on all of the
employee's qualifying wages for a taxable year and remit that tax only to the
city, regardless of the number of days which the employee worked outside the
corporate boundaries of the city.
         To determine whether an employer qualifies as a small employer for a
taxable year, the employer will be required to provide the Tax Administrator
with the employer's federal income tax return for the preceding taxable year.
      (6)   Subsections (c)(2)A. and (4) of this section shall not apply to the
extent that a Tax Administrator and an employer enter into an agreement
regarding the manner in which the employer shall comply with the requirements
of §
883.04.
(Ord. 15-O-60, passed 11-16-2015)
§ 883.05  ANNUAL RETURN; FILING.
   (a)   An annual city income tax return shall be completed and filed by every
individual taxpayer 18 years of age or older and any taxpayer that is not an
individual for each taxable year for which the taxpayer is subject to the tax,
whether or not a tax is due thereon.
      (1)   The Tax Administrator may accept on behalf of all nonresident
individual taxpayers a return filed by an employer, agent of an employer, or
other payer under §
883.04 when the nonresident individual taxpayer's sole income subject to the
tax is the qualifying wages reported by the employer, agent of an employer, or
other payer, and no additional tax is due the city.
      (2)   Retirees having no municipal taxable income for city income tax
purposes may file with the Tax Administrator a written exemption from these
filing requirements on a form prescribed by the Tax Administrator. The written
exemption shall indicate the date of retirement and the entity from which
retired. The exemption shall be in effect until such time as the retiree
receives municipal taxable income taxable to the city, at which time the
retiree shall be required to comply with all applicable provisions of this
chapter.
   (b)   If an individual is deceased, any return or notice required of that
individual shall be completed and filed by that decedent's executor,
administrator, or other person charged with the property of that decedent.
   (c)   If an individual is unable to complete and file a return or notice
required by the city, the return or notice required of that individual shall be
completed and filed by the individual's duly authorized agent, guardian,
conservator, fiduciary, or other person charged with the care of the person or
property of that individual.
   (d)   Returns or notices required of an estate or a trust shall be completed
and filed by the fiduciary of the estate or trust.
   (e)   The city shall permit spouses to file a joint return.
   (f)   (1)   Each return required to be filed under this subsection shall
contain the signature of the taxpayer or the taxpayer's duly authorized agent
and of the person who prepared the return for the taxpayer. The return shall
include the taxpayer's Social Security number or taxpayer identification
number. Each return shall be verified by a declaration under penalty of
perjury.
      (2)   The Tax Administrator shall require a taxpayer who is an individual
to include, with each annual return, and amended return, copies of the
following documents: all of the taxpayer's Internal Revenue Service form W-2,
"Wage and Tax Statements," including all information reported on the taxpayer's
federal W-2, as well as taxable wages reported or withheld for any municipal
corporation; the taxpayer's Internal Revenue Service form 1040; and, with
respect to an amended tax return, any other documentation necessary to support
the adjustments made in the amended return. An individual taxpayer who files
the annual return required by this section electronically is not required to
provide paper copies of any of the foregoing to the Tax Administrator unless
the Tax Administrator requests such copies after the return has been filed.
      (3)   The Tax Administrator may require a taxpayer that is not an
individual to include, with each annual net profit return, amended net profit
return, or request for refund required under this section, copies of only the
following documents: the taxpayer's Internal Revenue Service form 1041, form
1065, form 1120, form 1120-REIT, form 1120F, or form 1120S, and, with respect
to an amended tax return or refund request, any other documentation necessary
to support the refund request or the adjustments made in the amended return.
         A taxpayer that is not an individual and that files an annual net
profit return electronically through the Ohio Business Gateway or in some other
manner shall either mail the documents required under this division to the Tax
Administrator at the time of filing or, if electronic submission is available,
submit the documents electronically through the Ohio Business Gateway.
      (4)   After a taxpayer files a tax return, the Tax Administrator may
request, and the taxpayer shall provide, any information, statements, or
documents required by the city to determine and verify the taxpayer's municipal
income tax liability. The requirements imposed under subsection (f) of this
section apply regardless of whether the taxpayer files on a generic form or on
a form prescribed by the Tax Administrator.
   (g)   (1)   A.   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, each
individual income tax return required to be filed under this section shall be
completed and filed as required by the Tax Administrator on or before the date
prescribed for the filing of state individual income tax returns under division
(G) of Ohio R.C. 5747.08.  The taxpayer shall complete and file the return or
notice on forms prescribed by the Tax Administrator or on generic forms,
together with remittance made payable to the city. No remittance is required if
the net amount due is ten dollars ($10.00) or less.
         B.   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, each annual net
profit return required to be filed under this section by a taxpayer that is not
an individual shall be completed and filed as required by the Tax Administrator
on or before the fifteenth day of the fourth month following the end of the
taxpayer's taxable year. The taxpayer shall complete and file the return or
notice on forms prescribed by the Tax Administrator or on generic forms,
together with remittance made payable to the city. No remittance is required if
the net amount due is ten dollars ($10.00) or less.
      (2)   Any taxpayer that has duly requested an automatic six-month
extension for filing the taxpayer's federal income tax return shall
automatically receive an extension for the filing of the city's income tax
return. The extended due date of the city's income tax return shall be the 15th
day of the tenth month after the last day of the taxable year to which the
return relates. An extension of time to file under this subsection is not an
extension of the time to pay any tax due unless the Tax Administrator grants an
extension of that date.
         A.   A copy of the federal extension request shall be included with
the filing of the city's income tax return.
         B.   A taxpayer that has not requested or received a six-month
extension for filing the taxpayer's federal income tax return may submit a
written request that the Tax Administrator grant the taxpayer a six-month
extension of the date for filing the taxpayer's city income tax return. If the
request is received by the Tax Administrator on or before the date the city
income tax return is due, the Tax Administrator shall grant the taxpayer's
requested extension.
      (3)   If the Tax Commissioner extends for all taxpayers the date for
filing state income tax returns under division (G) of Ohio R.C. 5747.08, a
taxpayer shall automatically receive an extension for the filing of the city's
income tax return. The extended due date of the city's income tax return shall
be the same as the extended due date of the state income tax return.
      (4)   If the Tax Administrator considers it necessary in order to ensure
the payment of the tax imposed by the city, the Tax Administrator may require
taxpayers to file returns and make payments otherwise than as provided in this
subsection, including taxpayers not otherwise required to file annual returns.
      (5)   To the extent that any provision in this subsection (g) conflicts
with any provision in subsections (n), (o), (p), or (q) of this section, the
provisions in subsections (n), (o), (p), or (q) of this section prevail.
   (h)   (1)   For taxable years beginning after 2015, the city shall not
require a taxpayer to remit tax with respect to net profits if the net amount
due is ten dollars ($10.00) or less.
      (2)   Any taxpayer not required to remit tax to the city for a taxable
year pursuant to subsection (h)(1) of this section shall file with the city an
annual net profit return under subsection (f)(3) of this section.
   (i)   If a payment is required to be made by electronic funds transfer, the
payment is considered to be made when the payment is credited to an account
designated by the Tax Administrator for the receipt of tax payments, except
that, when a payment made by electronic funds transfer is delayed due to
circumstances not under the control of the taxpayer, the payment is considered
to be made when the taxpayer submitted the payment. This division shall not
apply to payments required to be made under §
883.04(b)(1)A. or provisions for semi-monthly withholding.
   (j)   Taxes withheld for the city by an employer, the agent of an employer,
or other payer as described in §
883.04 shall be allowed to the taxpayer as credits against payment of the tax
imposed on the taxpayer by the city, unless the amounts withheld were not
remitted to the city and the recipient colluded with the employer, agent, or
other payer in connection with the failure to remit the amounts withheld.
   (k)   Each return required by the city to be filed in accordance with this
subsection shall include a box that the taxpayer may check to authorize another
person, including a tax return preparer who prepared the return, to communicate
with the Tax Administrator about matters pertaining to the return.
   (l)   The Tax Administrator shall accept for filing a generic form of any
income tax return, report, or document required by the city, provided that the
generic form, once completed and filed, contains all of the information
required by ordinance, resolution, or rules and regulations adopted by the city
or the Tax Administrator, and provided that the taxpayer or tax return preparer
filing the generic form otherwise complies with the provisions of this chapter
and of the city's ordinance, resolution, or rules and regulations governing the
filing of returns, reports, or documents.
Filing via Ohio Business Gateway.
   (m)   (l)   Any taxpayer subject to municipal income taxation with respect
to the taxpayer's net profit from a business or profession may file the city's
income tax return, estimated municipal income tax return, or extension for
filing a municipal income tax return, and may make payment of amounts shown to
be due on such returns, by using the Ohio Business Gateway.
      (2)   Any employer, agent of an employer, or other payer may report the
amount of municipal income tax withheld from qualifying wages, and may make
remittance of such amounts, by using the Ohio Business Gateway.
      (3)   Nothing in this section affects the due dates for filing employer
withholding tax returns.
Extension for Service in or for the Armed Forces.
   (n)   Each member of the national guard of any state and each member of a
reserve component of the Armed Forces of the United States called to active
duty pursuant to an executive order issued by the President of the United
States or an act of the Congress of the United States, and each civilian
serving as support personnel in a combat zone or contingency operation in
support of the Armed Forces, may apply to the Tax Administrator of the city for
both an extension of time for filing of the return and an extension of time for
payment of taxes required by the city during the period of the member's or
civilian's duty service, and for 180 days thereafter. The application shall be
filed on or before the 180th day after the member's or civilian's duty
terminates. An applicant shall provide such evidence as the Tax Administrator
considers necessary to demonstrate eligibility for the extension.
   (o)   (1)   If the Tax Administrator ascertains that an applicant is
qualified for an extension under this section, the Tax Administrator shall
enter into a contract with the applicant for the payment of the tax in
installments that begin on the 181st day after the applicant's active duty or
service terminates. The Tax Administrator may prescribe such contract terms as
the Tax Administrator considers appropriate.  However, taxes pursuant to a
contract entered into under this subsection are not delinquent, and the Tax
Administrator shall not require any payments of penalties or interest in
connection with those taxes for the extension period.
      (2)   If the Tax Administrator determines that an applicant is qualified
for an extension under this section, the applicant shall neither be required to
file any return, report, or other tax document nor be required to pay any tax
otherwise due to the municipal corporation before the 181st day after the
applicant's active duty or service terminates.
      (3)   Taxes paid pursuant to a contract entered into under subsection (o)
(1) of this section are not delinquent. The Tax Administrator shall not require
any payments of penalties or interest in connection with those taxes for the
extension period.
   (p)   (l)   Nothing in this subsection denies to any person described in
this subsection the application of subsections (n) and (o) of this section.
      (2)   A.   A qualifying taxpayer who is eligible for an extension under
the Internal Revenue Code shall receive both an extension of time in which to
file any return, report, or other tax document and an extension of time in
which to make any payment of taxes required by a municipal corporation in
accordance with this chapter. The length of any extension granted under
subsection (p)(2)A. of this section shall be equal to the length of the
corresponding extension that the taxpayer receives under the Internal Revenue
Code. As used in this subsection, "qualifying taxpayer" means a member of the
national guard or a member of a reserve component of the Armed Forces of the
United States called to active duty pursuant to either an executive order
issued by the President of the United States or an act of the Congress of the
United States, or a civilian serving as support personnel in a combat zone or
contingency operation in support of the Armed Forces.
         B.   Taxes whose payment is extended in accordance with subsection (p)
(2)A. of this section are not delinquent during the extension period. Such
taxes become delinquent on the first day after the expiration of the extension
period if the taxes are not paid prior to that date. The Tax Administrator
shall not require any payment of penalties or interest in connection with those
taxes for the extension period. The Tax Administrator shall not include any
period of extension granted under subsection (c)(2)A. of this section in
calculating the penalty or interest due on any unpaid tax.
   (q)   For each taxable year to which subsection (n), (o), or (p) of this
section applies to a taxpayer, the provisions of subsections (o)(2) and (o)(3)
of this section, as applicable, apply to the spouse of that taxpayer if the
filing status of the spouse and the taxpayer is married filing jointly for that
year.
Consolidated Municipal Income Tax Return.
   (r)   As used in this section:
      (1)   "Affiliated group of corporations" means an affiliated group as
defined in section 1504 of the Internal Revenue Code, except that, if such a
group includes at least one incumbent local exchange carrier that is primarily
engaged in the business of providing local exchange telephone service in this
state, the affiliated group shall not include any incumbent local exchange
carrier that would otherwise be included in the group.
      (2)   "Consolidated federal income tax return" means a consolidated
return filed for federal income tax purposes pursuant to section 1501 of the
Internal Revenue Code.
      (3)   "Consolidated federal taxable income" means the consolidated
taxable income of an affiliated group of corporations, as computed for the
purposes of filing a consolidated federal income tax return, before
consideration of net operating losses or special deductions. "Consolidated
federal taxable income" does not include income or loss of an incumbent local
exchange carrier that is excluded from the affiliated group under subsection
(r)(1) of this section.
      (4)   "Incumbent local exchange carrier" has the same meaning as in Ohio
R.C.  4927.01.
      (5)   "Local exchange telephone service" has the same meaning as in Ohio
R.C. 5727.01.
   (s)   (l)   For taxable years beginning on or after January 1, 2016, a
taxpayer that is a member of an affiliated group of corporations may elect to
file a consolidated municipal income tax return for a taxable year if at least
one member of the affiliated group of corporations is subject to the city's
income tax in that taxable year, and if the affiliated group of corporations
filed a consolidated federal income tax return with respect to that taxable
year. The election is binding for a five-year period beginning with the first
taxable year of the initial election unless a change in the reporting method is
required under federal law. The election continues to be binding for each
subsequent five-year period unless the taxpayer elects to discontinue filing
consolidated municipal income tax returns under subsection (s)(2) of this
section or a taxpayer receives permission from the Tax Administrator. The Tax
Administrator shall approve such a request for good cause shown.
      (2)   An election to discontinue filing consolidated municipal income tax
returns under this section must be made in the first year following the last
year of a five-year consolidated municipal income tax return election period in
effect under subsection (s)(l) of this section. The election to discontinue
filing a consolidated municipal income tax return is binding for a five-year
period beginning with the first taxable year of the election.
      (3)   An election made under subsections (s)(l) or (s)(2) of this section
is binding on all members of the affiliated group of corporations subject to a
municipal income tax.
   (t)   A taxpayer that is a member of an affiliated group of corporations
that filed a consolidated federal income tax return for a taxable year shall
file a consolidated city income tax return for that taxable year if the Tax
Administrator determines, by a preponderance of the evidence, that intercompany
transactions have not been conducted at arm's length and that there has been a
distortive shifting of income or expenses with regard to allocation of net
profits to the city. A taxpayer that is required to file a consolidated city
income tax return for a taxable year shall file a consolidated city income tax
return for all subsequent taxable years, unless the taxpayer requests and
receives written permission from the Tax Administrator to file a separate
return or a taxpayer has experienced a change in circumstances.
   (u)   A taxpayer shall prepare a consolidated city income tax return in the
same manner as is required under the United States Department of Treasury
regulations that prescribe procedures for the preparation of the consolidated
federal income tax return required to be filed by the common parent of the
affiliated group of which the taxpayer is a member.
   (v)   (l)   Except as otherwise provided in subsections (v)(2), (v)(3), and
(v)(4) of this section, corporations that file a consolidated municipal income
tax return shall compute adjusted federal taxable income, as defined in §
883.02, by substituting "consolidated federal taxable income" for "federal
taxable income" wherever "federal taxable income" appears in that subsection
and by substituting "an affiliated group of corporation's" for "a C
corporation's" wherever "a C corporation's" appears in that subsection.
      (2)   No corporation filing a consolidated city income tax return shall
make any adjustment otherwise required under §
883.02(c)(1) to the extent that the item of income or deduction otherwise
subject to the adjustment has been eliminated or consolidated in the
computation of consolidated federal taxable income.
      (3)   If the net profit or loss of a pass-through entity having at least
80 percent of the value of its ownership interest owned or controlled, directly
or indirectly, by an affiliated group of corporations is included in that
affiliated group's consolidated federal taxable income for a taxable year, the
corporation filing a consolidated city income tax return shall do one of the
following with respect to that pass-through entity's net profit or loss for
that taxable year:
         A.   Exclude the pass-through entity's net profit or loss from the
consolidated federal taxable income of the affiliated group and, for the
purpose of making the computations required in §
883.05(r) through (y), exclude the property, payroll, and gross receipts of the
pass-through entity in the computation of the affiliated group's net profit
sitused to the city. If the entity's net profit or loss is so excluded, the
entity shall be subject to taxation as a separate taxpayer on the basis of the
entity's net profits that would otherwise be included in the consolidated
federal taxable income of the affiliated group.
         B.   Include the pass-through entity's net profit or loss in the
consolidated federal taxable income of the affiliated group and, for the
purpose of making the computations required in §
883.05(r) through (y), include the property, payroll, and gross receipts of the
pass-through entity in the computation of the affiliated group's net profit
sitused to the city. If the entity's net profit or loss is so included, the
entity shall not be subject to taxation as a separate taxpayer on the basis of
the entity's net profits that are included in the consolidated federal taxable
income of the affiliated group.
      (4)   If the net profit or loss of a pass-through entity having less than
80 percent of the value of its ownership interest owned or controlled, directly
or indirectly, by an affiliated group of corporations is included in that
affiliated group's consolidated federal taxable income for a taxable year, all
of the following shall apply:
         A.   The corporation filing the consolidated municipal income tax
return shall exclude the pass-through entity's net profit or loss from the
consolidated federal taxable income of the affiliated group and, for the
purposes of making the computations required in §
883.05(r) through (y), exclude the property, payroll, and gross receipts of the
pass-through entity in the computation of the affiliated group's net profit
sitused to the city;
         B.   The pass-through entity shall be subject to the city income
taxation as a separate taxpayer in accordance with this chapter on the basis of
the entity's net profits that would otherwise be included in the consolidated
federal taxable income of the affiliated group.
   (w)   Corporations filing a consolidated city income tax return shall make
the computations required under §
883.05(r) through (y) by substituting "consolidated federal taxable income
attributable to" for "net profit from" wherever "net profit from" appears in
that section and by substituting "affiliated group of corporations" for
"taxpayer" wherever "taxpayer" appears in that section.
   (x)   Each corporation filing a consolidated city income tax return is
jointly and severally liable for any tax, interest, penalties, fines, charges,
or other amounts imposed by the city in accordance with this chapter on the
corporation, an affiliated group of which the corporation is a member for any
portion of the taxable year, or any one or more members of such an affiliated
group.
   (y)   Corporations and their affiliates that made an election or entered
into an agreement with the city before January 1, 2016, to file a consolidated
or combined tax return with the city may continue to file consolidated or
combined tax returns in accordance with such election or agreement for taxable
years beginning on and after January 1, 2016.
(Ord. 15-O-60, passed 11-16-2015)
§ 883.06  CREDIT FOR TAX PAID TO OTHER MUNICIPALITIES.
   (a)   Every individual taxpayer, domiciled in the city who is required to
and does pay, or has acknowledged liability for, a municipal tax to another
municipality on or measured by the same income, qualifying wages, commissions,
net profits or other compensation taxable under this chapter may claim a
nonrefundable credit upon satisfactory evidence of the tax paid to the other
municipality.  Subject to subsection (c) of this section, the credit shall not
exceed 100 percent of the amount obtained by multiplying the income, qualifying
wages, commissions, net profits or other compensation subject to tax in the
other municipality by the LOWER of the tax rate in such other municipality OR
the rate of 1.75 percent.
   (b)   The city shall grant a credit against its tax on income to a resident
of the city who works in a joint economic development zone created under Ohio
R.C. 715.691 or a joint economic development district created under Ohio R.C.
715.70, 715.71, or 715.72 to the same extent that it grants a credit against
its tax on income to its residents who are employed in another municipal
corporation.
   (c)   If the amount of tax withheld or paid to the other municipality is
less than the amount of tax required to be withheld or paid to the other
municipality, then for purposes of subsection (a) of this section, "the income,
qualifying wages, commissions, net profits or other compensation" subject to
tax in the other municipality shall be limited to the amount computed by
dividing the tax withheld or paid to the other municipality by the tax rate for
that municipality.
(Ord. 15-O-60, passed 11-16-2015)
§ 883.07  ESTIMATED TAXES.
   (a)   As used in this section:
      (1)   "Estimated taxes" means the amount that the taxpayer reasonably
estimates to be the taxpayer's tax liability for the city's income tax for the
current taxable year.
      (2)   "Tax liability" means the total taxes due to the city for the
taxable year, after allowing any credit to which the taxpayer is entitled, and
after applying any estimated tax payment, withholding payment, or credit from
another taxable year.
   (b)   (1)   Every taxpayer shall make a declaration of estimated taxes for
the current taxable year, on the form prescribed by the Tax Administrator, if
the amount payable as estimated taxes is at least two hundred dollars
($200.00). For the purposes of this section:
         A.   Taxes withheld for the city from qualifying wages shall be
considered as paid to the city in equal amounts on each payment date unless the
taxpayer establishes the dates on which all amounts were actually withheld, in
which case they shall be considered as paid on the dates on which the amounts
were actually withheld.
         B.   An overpayment of tax applied as a credit to a subsequent taxable
year is deemed to be paid on the date of the postmark stamped on the cover in
which the payment is mailed or, if the payment is made by electronic funds
transfer, the date the payment is submitted. As used in this subsection, "date
of the postmark" means, in the event there is more than one date on the cover,
the earliest date imprinted on the cover by the postal service.
      (2)   Taxpayers filing joint returns shall file joint declarations of
estimated taxes. A taxpayer may amend a declaration under rules prescribed by
the Tax Administrator. A taxpayer having a taxable year of less than 12 months
shall make a declaration under rules prescribed by the Tax Administrator.
      (3)   The declaration of estimated taxes shall be filed on or before the
date prescribed for the filing of municipal income tax returns under §
883.05(g) or on or before the 15th day of the fourth month after the taxpayer
becomes subject to tax for the first time.
      (4)   Taxpayers reporting on a fiscal year basis shall file a declaration
on or before the 15th day of the fourth month after the beginning of each
fiscal year or period.
      (5)   The original declaration or any subsequent amendment may be
increased or decreased on or before any subsequent quarterly payment day as
provided in this section.
   (c)   (1)   The required portion of the tax liability for the taxable year
that shall be paid through estimated taxes made payable to the city, including
the application of tax refunds to estimated taxes and withholding on or before
the applicable payment date, shall be as follows:
         A.   On or before the 15th day of the fourth month after the beginning
of the taxable year, 22.5 percent of the tax liability for the taxable year;
         B.   On or before the 15th day of the sixth month after the beginning
of the taxable year, 45 percent of the tax liability for the taxable year;
         C.   On or before the 15th day of the ninth month after the beginning
of the taxable year, 67.5 percent of the tax liability for the taxable year;
         D.   On or before the 15th day of the 12th month of the taxable year,
90 percent of the tax liability for the taxable year.
      (2)   When an amended declaration has been filed, the unpaid balance
shown due on the amended declaration shall be paid in equal installments on or
before the remaining payment dates.
      (3)   On or before the 15th day of the fourth month of the year following
that for which the declaration or amended declaration was filed, an annual
return shall be filed and any balance which may be due shall be paid with the
return in accordance with §
883.05.
   (d)   (1)   In the case of any underpayment of any portion of a tax
liability, penalty and interest may be imposed pursuant to §
883.18 upon the amount of underpayment for the period of underpayment, unless
the underpayment is due to reasonable cause as described in subsection (e) of
this section. The amount of the underpayment shall be determined as follows:
         A.   For the first payment of estimated taxes each year, 22.5 percent
of the tax liability, less the amount of taxes paid by the date prescribed for
that payment;
         B.   For the second payment of estimated taxes each year, 45 percent
of the tax liability, less the amount of taxes paid by the date prescribed for
that payment;
         C.   For the third payment of estimated taxes each year, 67.5 percent
of the tax liability, less the amount of taxes paid by the date prescribed for
that payment;
         D.   For the fourth payment of estimated taxes each year, 90 percent
of the tax liability, less the amount of taxes paid by the date prescribed for
that payment.
      (2)   The period of the underpayment shall run from the day the estimated
payment was required to be made to the date on which the payment is made. For
purposes of this section, a payment of estimated taxes on or before any payment
date shall be considered a payment of any previous underpayment only to the
extent the payment of estimated taxes exceeds the amount of the payment
presently required to be paid to avoid any penalty.
   (e)   An underpayment of any portion of tax liability determined under
subsection (d) of this section shall be due to reasonable cause and the penalty
imposed by this section shall not be added to the taxes for the taxable year if
any of the following apply:
      (1)   The amount of estimated taxes that were paid equals at least 90
percent of the tax liability for the current taxable year, determined by
annualizing the income received during the year up to the end of the month
immediately preceding the month in which the payment is due.
      (2)   The amount of estimated taxes that were paid equals at least 100
percent of the tax liability shown on the return of the taxpayer for the
preceding taxable year, provided that the immediately preceding taxable year
reflected a period of 12 months and the taxpayer filed a return with the city
under §
883.05 for that year.
      (3)   The taxpayer is an individual who resides in the city but was not
domiciled there on the first day of January of the calendar year that includes
the first day of the taxable year.
(Ord. 15-O-60, passed 11-16-2015)
§ 883.08  ROUNDING OF AMOUNTS.
   A person may round to the nearest whole dollar all amounts the person is
required to enter on any return, report, voucher, or other document required
under this chapter. Any fractional part of a dollar that equals or exceeds
fifty cents ($.50) shall be rounded to the next whole dollar, and any
fractional part of a dollar that is less than fifty cents ($.50) shall be
dropped. If a person chooses to round amounts entered on a document, the person
shall round all amounts entered on the document.
(Ord. 15-O-60, passed 11-16-2015)
§ 883.09  REQUESTS FOR REFUNDS.
   (a)   As used in this section, "withholding tax" has the same meaning as in
§
883.18.
   (b)   Upon receipt of a request for a refund, the Tax Administrator, in
accordance with this section, shall refund to employers, agents of employers,
other payers, or taxpayers, with respect to any income or withholding tax
levied by the municipal corporation:
      (1)   Overpayments of ten dollars ($10.00) or more;
      (2)   Amounts paid erroneously if the refund requested is ten dollars
($10.00) or more.
   (c)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, requests for
refund shall be filed with the Tax Administrator, on the form prescribed by the
Tax Administrator within three years after the tax was due or paid, whichever
is later. The Tax Administrator may require the requestor to file with the
request any documentation that substantiates the requestor's claim for a
refund.
      (2)   On filing of the refund request, the Tax Administrator shall
determine the amount of refund due and certify such amount to the appropriate
municipal corporation official for payment. Except as provided in subsection
(c)(3) of this section, the administrator shall issue an assessment to any
taxpayer whose request for refund is fully or partially denied. The assessment
shall state the amount of the refund that was denied, the reasons for the
denial, and instructions for appealing the assessment.
      (3)   If a Tax Administrator denies in whole or in part a refund request
included within the taxpayer's originally filed annual income tax return, the
Tax Administrator shall notify the taxpayer, in writing, of the amount of the
refund that was denied, the reasons for the denial, and instructions for
requesting an assessment that may be appealed under §
883.21.
   (d)   A request for a refund that is received after the last day for filing
specified in subsection (c) of this section shall be considered to have been
filed in a timely manner if any of the following situations exist:
      (1)   The request is delivered by the postal service, and the earliest
postal service postmark on the cover in which the request is enclosed is not
later than the last day for filing the request.
      (2)   The request is delivered by the postal service, the only postmark
on the cover in which the request is enclosed was affixed by a private postal
meter, the date of that postmark is not later than the last day for filing the
request, and the request is received within seven days of such last day.
      (3)   The request is delivered by the postal service, no postmark date
was affixed to the cover in which the request is enclosed or the date of the
postmark so affixed is not legible, and the request is received within seven
days of the last day for making the request.
   (e)   Interest shall be allowed and paid on any overpayment by a taxpayer of
any municipal income tax obligation from the date of the overpayment until the
date of the refund of the overpayment, except that if any overpayment is
refunded within 90 days after the final filing date of the annual return or 90
days after the completed return is filed, whichever is later, no interest shall
be allowed on the refund. For the purpose of computing the payment of interest
on amounts overpaid, no amount of tax for any taxable year shall be considered
to have been paid before the date on which the return on which the tax is
reported is due, without regard to any extension of time for filing that
return. Interest shall be paid at the interest rate described in §
883.18(a)(4).
(Ord. 15-O-60, passed 11-16-2015)
§ 883.10  SECOND MUNICIPALITY IMPOSING TAX AFTER TIME PERIOD ALLOWED FOR
REFUND.
   (a)   Income tax that has been deposited with the city, but should have been
deposited with another municipality, is allowable by the city as a refund but
is subject to the three-year limitation on refunds.
   (b)   Income tax that was deposited with another municipality but should
have been deposited with the city is subject to recovery by the city. If the
city's tax on that income is imposed after the time period allowed for a refund
of the tax or withholding paid to the other municipality, the city shall allow
a nonrefundable credit against the tax or withholding the city claims is due
with respect to such income or wages, equal to the tax or withholding paid to
the first municipality with respect to such income or wages.
   (c)   If the city's tax rate is less than the tax rate in the other
municipality, then the nonrefundable credit shall be calculated using the
city's tax rate. However, if the city's tax rate is greater than the tax rate
in the other municipality, the tax due in excess of the nonrefundable credit is
to be paid to the city, along with any penalty and interest that accrued during
the period of nonpayment.
   (d)   Nothing in this section permits any credit carryforward.
(Ord. 15-O-60, passed 11-16-2015)
§ 883.11  AMENDED RETURNS.
   (a)   (1)   If a taxpayer's tax liability shown on the annual tax return for
the city changes as a result of an adjustment to the taxpayer's federal or
state income tax return, the taxpayer shall file an amended return with the
city. The amended return shall be filed on a form required by the Tax
Administrator.
      (2)   If a taxpayer intends to file an amended consolidated municipal
income tax return, or to amend its type of return from a separate return to a
consolidated return, based on the taxpayer's consolidated federal income tax
return, the taxpayer shall notify the Tax Administrator before filing the
amended return.
   (b)   (1)   In the case of an underpayment, the amended return shall be
accompanied by payment of any combined additional tax due, together with any
penalty and interest thereon. If the combined tax shown to be due is ten
dollars ($10.00) or less, no payment need be made. The amended return shall
reopen those facts, figures, computations, or attachments from a previously
filed return that are not affected, either directly or indirectly, by the
adjustment to the taxpayer's federal or state income tax return only:
         A.   To determine the amount of tax that would be due if all facts,
figures, computations, and attachments were reopened; or
         B.   If the applicable statute of limitations for civil actions or
prosecutions under §
883.12 has not expired for a previously filed return.
      (2)   The additional tax to be paid shall not exceed the amount of tax
that would be due if all facts, figures, computations, and attachments were
reopened; i.e., the payment shall be the lesser of the two amounts.
   (c)   (1)   In the case of an overpayment, a request for refund may be filed
under this subsection within the period prescribed by §
883.12(a)(2) for filing the amended return, even if it is filed beyond the
period prescribed in that division if it otherwise conforms to the requirements
of that subsection. If the amount of the refund is less than ten dollars
($10.00), no refund need be paid by the city. A request filed under this
subsection shall claim refund of overpayments resulting from alterations only
to those facts, figures, computations, or attachments required in the
taxpayer's annual return that are affected, either directly or indirectly, by
the adjustment to the taxpayer's federal or state income tax return, unless it
is also filed within the time prescribed in §
883.09.
      (2)   The amount to be refunded shall not exceed the amount of refund
that would be due if all facts, figures, computations, and attachments were
reopened. All facts, figures, computations, and attachments may be reopened to
determine the refund amount due by inclusion of all facts, figures,
computations, and attachments.
   (d)   Within 60 days after the final determination of any federal or state
tax liability affecting the taxpayer's city's tax liability, that taxpayer
shall make and file an amended city return showing income subject to the city
income tax based upon such final determination of federal or state tax
liability. The taxpayer shall pay any additional city income tax shown due
thereon or make a claim for refund of any overpayment, unless the tax or
overpayment is less than ten dollars ($10.00).
(Ord. 15-O-60, passed 11-16-2015)
§ 883.12  LIMITATIONS.
   (a)   (1)   A.   Civil actions to recover municipal income taxes and
penalties and interest on municipal income taxes shall be brought within the
later of:
            1.   Three years after the tax was due or the return was filed,
whichever is later; or
            2.   One year after the conclusion of the qualifying deferral
period, if any.
         B.   The time limit described in subsection (a)(1)A. of this section
may be extended at any time if both the Tax Administrator and the employer,
agent of the employer, other payer, or taxpayer consent in writing to the
extension. Any extension shall also extend for the same period of time the time
limit described in subsection (c) of this section.
      (2)   As used in this section, "qualifying deferral period" means a
period of time beginning and ending as follows:
         A.   Beginning on the date a person who is aggrieved by an assessment
files with the Board of Tax Review the request described in §
883.21. That date shall not be affected by any subsequent decision, finding, or
holding by any administrative body or court that the Board of Tax Review did
not have jurisdiction to affirm, reverse, or modify the assessment or any part
of that assessment.
         B.   Ending the later of the 60th day after the date on which the
final determination of the Board of Tax Review becomes final or, if any party
appeals from the determination of the Board of Tax Review, the 60th day after
the date on which the final determination of the Board of Tax Review is either
ultimately affirmed in whole or in part or ultimately reversed and no further
appeal of either that affirmation, in whole or in part, or that reversal is
available or taken.
   (b)   Prosecutions for an offense made punishable under a resolution or
ordinance imposing an income tax shall be commenced within three years after
the commission of the offense, provided that in the case of fraud, failure to
file a return, or the omission of 25 percent or more of income required to be
reported, prosecutions may be commenced within six years after the commission
of the offense.
   (c)   A claim for a refund of municipal income taxes shall be brought within
the time limitation provided in §
883.09.
   (d)   (1)   Notwithstanding the fact that an appeal is pending, the
petitioner may pay all or a portion of the assessment that is the subject of
the appeal. The acceptance of a payment by the city does not prejudice any
claim for refund upon final determination of the appeal.
      (2)   If upon final determination of the appeal an error in the
assessment is corrected by the Tax Administrator, upon an appeal so filed or
pursuant to a final determination of the Board of Tax Review, of the Ohio Board
of Tax Appeals, or any court to which the decision of the Ohio Board of Tax
Appeals has been appealed, so that the resultant amount due is less than the
amount paid, a refund will be paid in the amount of the overpayment as provided
by §
883.09, with interest on that amount as provided by §
883.09(e).
   (e)   No civil action to recover city income tax or related penalties or
interest shall be brought during either of the following time periods:
      (1)   The period during which a taxpayer has a right to appeal the
imposition of that tax or interest or those penalties;
      (2)   The period during which an appeal related to the imposition of that
tax or interest or those penalties is pending.
(Ord. 15-O-60, passed 11-16-2015)
§ 883.13  AUDITS.
   (a)   At or before the commencement of an audit, the Tax Administrator shall
provide to the taxpayer a written description of the roles of the Tax
Administrator and of the taxpayer during the audit and a statement of the
taxpayer's rights, including any right to obtain a refund of an overpayment of
a tax. At or before the commencement of an audit, the Tax Administrator shall
inform the taxpayer when the audit is considered to have commenced.
   (b)   Except in cases involving suspected criminal activity, the Tax
Administrator shall conduct an audit of a taxpayer during regular business
hours and after providing reasonable notice to the taxpayer. A taxpayer who is
unable to comply with a proposed time for an audit on the grounds that the
proposed time would cause inconvenience or hardship must offer reasonable
alternative dates for the audit.
   (c)   At all stages of an audit by the Tax Administrator, a taxpayer is
entitled to be assisted or represented by an attorney, accountant, bookkeeper,
or other tax practitioner. The Tax Administrator shall prescribe a form by
which a taxpayer may designate such a person to assist or represent the
taxpayer in the conduct of any proceedings resulting from actions by the Tax
Administrator. If a taxpayer has not submitted such a form, the Tax
Administrator may accept other evidence, as the Tax Administrator considers
appropriate, that a person is the authorized representative of a taxpayer.
      A taxpayer may refuse to answer any questions asked by the person
conducting an audit until the taxpayer has an opportunity to consult with the
taxpayer's attorney, accountant, bookkeeper, or other tax practitioner.
      This subsection does not authorize the practice of law by a person who is
not an attorney.
   (d)   A taxpayer may record, electronically or otherwise, the audit
examination.
   (e)   The failure of the Tax Administrator to comply with a provision of
this section shall neither excuse a taxpayer from payment of any taxes owed by
the taxpayer nor cure any procedural defect in a taxpayer's case.
   (f)   If the Tax Administrator fails to substantially comply with the
provisions of this section, the Tax Administrator, upon application by the
taxpayer, shall excuse the taxpayer from penalties and interest.
(Ord. 15-O-60, passed 11-16-2015)
§ 883.14  SERVICE OF ASSESSMENT.
   (a)   As used in this section:
      (1)   "Last known address" means the address the Tax Administrator has at
the time a document is originally sent by certified mail, or any address the
Tax Administrator can ascertain using reasonable means such as the use of a
change of address service offered by the postal service or an authorized
delivery service under Ohio R.C. 5703.056.
      (2)   "Undeliverable address" means an address to which the postal
service or an authorized delivery service under Ohio R.C. 5703.056 is not able
to deliver an assessment of the Tax Administrator, except when the reason for
non-delivery is because the addressee fails to acknowledge or accept the
assessment.
   (b)   Subject to subsection (c) of this section, a copy of each assessment
shall be served upon the person affected thereby either by personal service, by
certified mail, or by a delivery service authorized under Ohio R.C. 5703.056. 
With the permission of the person affected by an assessment, the Tax
Administrator may deliver the assessment through alternative means as provided
in this section, including, but not limited to, delivery by secure electronic
mail.
   (c)   (1)   A.   If certified mail is returned because of an undeliverable
address, a Tax Administrator shall utilize reasonable means to ascertain a new
last known address, including the use of a change of address service offered by
the postal service or an authorized delivery service under Ohio R.C. 5703.056. 
If the Tax Administrator is unable to ascertain a new last known address, the
assessment shall be sent by ordinary mail and considered served. If the
ordinary mail is subsequently returned because of an undeliverable address, the
assessment remains appealable within 60 days after the assessment's postmark.
         B.   Once the Tax Administrator or other city official, or the
designee of either, serves an assessment on the person to whom the assessment
is directed, the person may protest the ruling of that assessment by filing an
appeal with the local board of tax review within 60 days after the receipt of
service. The delivery of an assessment of the Tax Administrator under
subsection (c)(1)A. of this section is prima facie evidence that delivery is
complete and that the assessment is served.
      (2)   If mailing of an assessment by a Tax Administrator by certified
mail is returned for some cause other than an undeliverable address, the Tax
Administrator shall resend the assessment by ordinary mail. The assessment
shall show the date the Tax Administrator sends the assessment and include the
following statement:
   "This assessment is deemed to be served on the addressee under applicable
law ten days from the date this assessment was mailed by the Tax Administrator
as shown on the assessment, and all periods within which an appeal may be filed
apply from and after that date."
         Unless the mailing is returned because of an undeliverable address,
the mailing of that information is prima facie evidence that delivery of the
assessment was completed ten days after the Tax Administrator sent the
assessment by ordinary mail and that the assessment was served.
         If the ordinary mail is subsequently returned because of an
undeliverable address, the Tax Administrator shall proceed under subsection (c)
(1)A. of this section.  A person may challenge the presumption of delivery and
service under this subsection in accordance with subsection (d) of this
section.
   (d)   (1)   A person disputing the presumption of delivery and service under
subsection (c) of this section bears the burden of proving by a preponderance
of the evidence that the address to which the assessment was sent by certified
mail was not an address with which the person was associated at the time the
Tax Administrator originally mailed the assessment. For the purposes of this
section, a person is associated with an address at the time the Tax
Administrator originally mailed the assessment if, at that time, the person was
residing, receiving legal documents, or conducting business at the address; or
if, before that time, the person had conducted business at the address and,
when the assessment was mailed, the person's agent or the person's affiliate
was conducting business at the address. For the purposes of this section, a
person's affiliate is any other person that, at the time the assessment was
mailed, owned or controlled at least 20 percent, as determined by voting
rights, of the addressee's business.
      (2)   If a person elects to appeal an assessment on the basis described
in subsection (d)(1) of this section, and if that assessment is subject to
collection and is not otherwise appealable, the person must do so within 60
days after the initial contact by the Tax Administrator or other city official,
or the designee of either, with the person. Nothing in this subsection prevents
the Tax Administrator or other official from entering into a compromise with
the person if the person does not actually file such an appeal with the Local
Board of Tax Review.
   (e)   Nothing in this section prohibits the Tax Administrator or the Tax
Administrator's designee from delivering an assessment by a Tax Administrator
by personal service.
   (f)   Collection actions taken upon any assessment being appealed under
subsection (c)(1)B. of this section, including those on which a claim has been
delivered for collection, shall be stayed upon the pendency of an appeal under
this section.
   (g)   Additional regulations as detailed in the Rules and Regulations shall
apply.
(Ord. 15-O-60, passed 11-16-2015)
§ 883.15  ADMINISTRATION OF CLAIMS.
   (a)   As used in this section, "claim" means a claim for an amount payable
to the city that arises pursuant to the city's income tax imposed in accordance
with this chapter.
   (b)   Nothing in this chapter prohibits a Tax Administrator from doing
either of the following if such action is in the best interests of the
municipal corporation:
      (1)   Compromise a claim;
      (2)   Extend for a reasonable period the time for payment of a claim by
agreeing to accept monthly or other periodic payments.
   (c)   The Tax Administrator's rejection of a compromise or payment-over-time
agreement proposed by a person with respect to a claim shall not be appealable.
   (d)   A compromise or payment-over-time agreement with respect to a claim
shall be binding upon and shall be to the benefit of only the parties to the
compromise or agreement, and shall not eliminate or otherwise affect the
liability of any other person.
   (e)   A compromise or payment-over-time agreement with respect to a claim
shall be void if the taxpayer defaults under the compromise or agreement or if
the compromise or agreement was obtained by fraud or by misrepresentation of a
material fact. Any amount that was due before the compromise or agreement and
that is unpaid shall remain due, and any penalties or interest that would have
accrued in the absence of the compromise or agreement shall continue to accrue
and be due.
(Ord. 15-O-60, passed 11-16-2015)
§ 883.16  TAX INFORMATION CONFIDENTIAL.
   (a)   Any information gained as a result of returns, investigations,
hearings, or verifications required or authorized by this chapter is
confidential, and no person shall access or disclose such information except in
accordance with a proper judicial order or in connection with the performance
of that person's official duties or the official business of the city as
authorized by this chapter. The Tax Administrator or a designee thereof may
furnish copies of returns filed or otherwise received under this chapter and
other related tax information to the Internal Revenue Service, the Tax
Commissioner, and tax administrators of other municipal corporations.
   (b)   This section does not prohibit the city from publishing or disclosing
statistics in a form that does not disclose information with respect to
particular taxpayers.
(Ord. 15-O-60, passed 11-16-2015)
§ 883.17  FRAUD.
   No person shall knowingly make, present, aid, or assist in the preparation
or presentation of a false or fraudulent report, return, schedule, statement,
claim, or document authorized or required by city ordinance or state law to be
filed with the Tax Administrator, or knowingly procure, counsel, or advise the
preparation or presentation of such report, return, schedule, statement, claim,
or document, or knowingly change, alter, or amend, or knowingly procure,
counsel or advise such change, alteration, or amendment of the records upon
which such report, return, schedule, statement, claim, or document is based
with intent to defraud the city or the Tax Administrator.
(Ord. 15-O-60, passed 11-16-2015)
§ 883.18  INTEREST AND PENALTIES.
   (a)   As used in this section:
      (1)   "Applicable law" means this chapter, the resolutions, ordinances,
codes, directives, instructions, and rules adopted by the city provided they
impose or directly or indirectly address the levy, payment, remittance, or
filing requirements of the city.
      (2)   "Federal short-term rate" means the rate of the average market
yield on outstanding marketable obligations of the United States with remaining
periods to maturity of three years or less, as determined under section 1274 of
the Internal Revenue Code, for July of the current year.
      (3)   "Income tax," "estimated income tax," and "withholding tax" means
any income tax, estimated income tax, and withholding tax imposed by the city
pursuant to applicable law, including at any time before January 1, 2016.
      (4)   "Interest rate as described in subsection (a) of this section"
means the federal short-term rate, rounded to the nearest whole number percent,
plus five percent. The rate shall apply for the calendar year next following
the July of the year in which the federal short-term rate is determined in
accordance with subsection (a)(2) of this section.
      (5)   "Return" includes any tax return, report, reconciliation, schedule,
and other document required to be filed with the Tax Administrator or the city
by a taxpayer, employer, any agent of the employer, or any other payer pursuant
to applicable law, including at anytime before January 1, 2016.
      (6)   "Unpaid estimated income tax" means estimated income tax due but
not paid by the date the tax is required to be paid under applicable law.
      (7)   "Unpaid income tax" means income tax due but not paid by the date
the income tax is required to be paid under applicable law.
      (8)   "Unpaid withholding tax" means withholding tax due but not paid by
the date the withholding tax is required to be paid under applicable law.
      (9)   "Withholding tax" includes amounts an employer, any agent of an
employer, or any other payer did not withhold in whole or in part from an
employee's qualifying wages, but that, under applicable law, the employer,
agent, or other payer is required to withhold from an employee's qualifying
wages.
   (b)   (1)   This section applies to the following:
         A.   Any return required to be filed under applicable law for taxable
years beginning on or after January 1, 2016;
         B.   Income tax, estimated income tax, and withholding tax required to
be paid or remitted to the city on or after January 1, 2016.
      (2)   This section does not apply to returns required to be filed or
payments required to be made before January 1, 2016, regardless of the filing
or payment date. Returns required to be filed or payments required to be made
before January 1, 2016, but filed or paid after that date shall be subject to
the ordinances or rules and regulations, as adopted before January 1, 2016, of
the city to which the return is to be filed or the payment is to be made.
   (c)   Should any taxpayer, employer, agent of the employer, or other payer
for any reason fails, in whole or in part, to make timely and full payment or
remittance of income tax, estimated income tax, or withholding tax or to file
timely with the city any return required to be filed, the following penalties
and interest shall apply:
      (1)   Interest shall be imposed at the rate described in subsection (a)
of this section, per annum, on all unpaid income tax, unpaid estimated income
tax, and unpaid withholding tax.
      (2)   A.   With respect to unpaid income tax and unpaid estimated income
tax, the city may impose a penalty equal to 15 percent of the amount not timely
paid.
         B.   With respect to any unpaid withholding tax, the city may impose a
penalty equal to 50 percent of the amount not timely paid.
      (3)   With respect to returns other than estimated income tax returns,
the city may impose a penalty of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for each failure
to timely file each return, regardless of the liability shown thereon for each
month, or any fraction thereof, during which the return remains unfiled
regardless of the liability shown thereon. The penalty shall not exceed one
hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) for each failure.
   (d)   Nothing in this section requires the city to refund or credit any
penalty, amount of interest, charges, or additional fees that the city has
properly imposed or collected before January 1, 2016.
   (e)   Nothing in this section limits the authority of the city to abate or
partially abate penalties or interest imposed under this section when the Tax
Administrator determines, in the Tax Administrator's sole discretion, that such
abatement is appropriate.
   (f)   By the 31st day of October of each year the city shall publish the
rate described in subsection (a) of this section applicable to the next
succeeding calendar year.
   (g)   The city may impose on the taxpayer, employer, any agent of the
employer, or any other payer the city's post-judgment collection costs and
fees, including attorney's fees.
(Ord. 15-O-60, passed 11-16-2015)
§ 883.19  AUTHORITY OF TAX ADMINISTRATOR; VERIFICATION OF INFORMATION.
Authority.
   (a)   Nothing in this chapter shall limit the authority of the Tax
Administrator to perform any of the following duties or functions, unless the
performance of such duties or functions is expressly limited by a provision of
the Ohio Revised Code:
      (1)   A.   Exercise all powers whatsoever of a query nature as provided
by law, including, the right to inspect books, accounts, records, memorandums,
and federal and state income tax returns, to examine persons under oath, to
issue orders or subpoenas for the production of books, accounts, papers,
records, documents, and testimony, to take depositions, to apply to a court for
attachment proceedings as for contempt, to approve vouchers for the fees of
officers and witnesses, and to administer oaths.
         B.   The powers referred to in this subsection shall be exercised by
the Tax Administrator only in connection with the performance of the duties
respectively assigned to the Tax Administrator under the city's income tax
ordinance;
      (2)   Appoint agents and prescribe their powers and duties;
      (3)   Confer and meet with officers of other municipal corporations and
states and officers of the United States on any matters pertaining to their
respective official duties as provided by law;
      (4)   Exercise the authority provided by law, including orders from
bankruptcy courts, relative to remitting or refunding taxes, including
penalties and interest thereon, for any reason overpaid. In addition, the Tax
Administrator may investigate any claim of overpayment and, if the Tax
Administrator finds that there has been an overpayment, make a written
statement of the Tax Administrator's findings, and approve and issue a refund
payable to the taxpayer, the taxpayer's assigns, or legal representative as
provided in this chapter;
      (5)   Exercise the authority provided by law relative to consenting to
the compromise and settlement of tax claims;
      (6)   Exercise the authority provided by law relative to the use of
alternative apportionment methods by taxpayers in accordance with §
883.03;
      (7)   A.   Make all tax findings, determinations, computations, and
orders the Tax Administrator is by law authorized and required to make and,
pursuant to time limitations provided by law, on the Tax Administrator's own
motion, review, re-determine, or correct any tax findings, determinations,
computations, or orders the Tax Administrator has made.
         B.   If an appeal has been filed with the Board of Tax Review or other
appropriate tribunal, the Tax Administrator shall not review, re-determine, or
correct any tax finding, determination, computation, or order which the Tax
Administrator has made, unless such appeal or application is withdrawn by the
appellant or applicant, is dismissed, or is otherwise final;
      (8)   Destroy any or all returns or other tax documents in the manner
authorized by law;
      (9)   Enter into an agreement with a taxpayer to simplify the withholding
obligations described in §
883.04.
Verification of Accuracy of Returns and Determination of Liability.
   (b)   (1)   A Tax Administrator, or any authorized agent or employee thereof
may examine the books, papers, records, and federal and state income tax
returns of any employer, taxpayer, or other person that is subject to, or that
the Tax Administrator believes is subject to, the provisions of this chapter
for the purpose of verifying the accuracy of any return made or, if no return
was filed, to ascertain the tax due under this chapter. Upon written request by
the Tax Administrator or a duly authorized agent or employee thereof, every
employer, taxpayer, or other person subject to this section is required to
furnish the opportunity for the Tax Administrator, authorized agent, or
employee to investigate and examine such books, papers, records, and federal
and state income tax returns at a reasonable time and place designated in the
request.
      (2)   The records and other documents of any taxpayer, employer, or other
person that is subject to, or that a Tax Administrator believes is subject to,
the provisions of this chapter shall be open to the Tax Administrator's
inspection during business hours and shall be preserved for a period of six
years following the end of the taxable year to which the records or documents
relate, unless the Tax Administrator, in writing, consents to their destruction
within that period, or by order requires that they be kept longer. The Tax
Administrator may require any person, by notice served on that person, to keep
such records as the Tax Administrator determines necessary to show whether or
not that person is liable, and the extent of such liability, for the income tax
levied by the city or for the withholding of such tax.
      (3)   The Tax Administrator may examine under oath any person that the
Tax Administrator reasonably believes has knowledge concerning any income that
was or would have been returned for taxation or any transaction tending to
affect such income. The Tax Administrator may, for this purpose, compel any
such person to attend a hearing or examination and to produce any books,
papers, records, and federal and state income tax returns in such person's
possession or control. The person may be assisted or represented by an
attorney, accountant, bookkeeper, or other tax practitioner at any such hearing
or examination. This subsection does not authorize the practice of law by a
person who is not an attorney.
      (4)   No person issued written notice by the Tax Administrator compelling
attendance at a hearing or examination or the production of books, papers,
records, or federal or state income tax returns under this section shall fail
to comply.
Identification Information.
   (c)   (1)   Nothing in this chapter prohibits the Tax Administrator from
requiring any person filing a tax document with the Tax Administrator to
provide identifying information, which may include the person's Social Security
number, federal employer identification number, or other identification number
requested by the Tax Administrator. A person required by the Tax Administrator
to provide identifying information that has experienced any change with respect
to that information shall notify the Tax Administrator of the change before, or
upon, filing the next tax document requiring the identifying information.
      (2)   A.   If the Tax Administrator makes a request for identifying
information and the Tax Administrator does not receive valid identifying
information within 30 days of making the request, nothing in this chapter
prohibits the Tax Administrator from imposing a penalty upon the person to whom
the request was directed pursuant to §
883.18, in addition to any applicable penalty described in §
883.99.
         B.   If a person required by the Tax Administrator to provide
identifying information does not notify the Tax Administrator of a change with
respect to that information as required under §
883.19(c) within 30 days after filing the next tax document requiring such
identifying information, nothing in this chapter prohibits the Tax
Administrator from imposing a penalty pursuant to §
883.18.
         C.   The penalties provided for under subsections (c)(2)A. and B. of
this section may be billed and imposed in the same manner as the tax or fee
with respect to which the identifying information is sought and are in addition
to any applicable criminal penalties described in §
883.99 for a violation of §
883.17 and any other penalties that may be imposed by the Tax Administrator by
law.
(Ord. 15-O-60, passed 11-16-2015)
§ 883.20  REQUEST FOR OPINION OF THE TAX ADMINISTRATOR.
   (a)   An "opinion of the Tax Administrator" means an opinion issued under
this section with respect to prospective municipal income tax liability. It
does not include ordinary correspondence of the Tax Administrator.
   (b)   A taxpayer may submit a written request for an opinion of the Tax
Administrator in accordance with the Rules and Regulations.
   (c)   A taxpayer is not relieved of tax liability for any activity or
transaction related to a request for an opinion that contained any
misrepresentation or omission of one or more material facts.
   (d)   A Tax Administrator may refuse to offer an opinion on any request
received under this section. Such refusal is not subject to appeal.
   (e)   An opinion of the Tax Administrator binds the Tax Administrator only
with respect to the taxpayer for whom the opinion was prepared and does not
bind the Tax Administrator of any other municipal corporation.
   (f)   An opinion of the Tax Administrator issued under this section is not
subject to appeal.
(Ord. 15-O-60, passed 11-16-2015)
§ 883.21  BOARD OF TAX REVIEW.
   (a)   (1)   The Board of Tax Review shall consist of three members. Two
members shall be appointed by the legislative authority of the city, but such
appointees may not be employees, elected officials, or contractors with the
city at any time during their term or in the five years immediately preceding
the date of appointment. One member shall be appointed by the Mayor of the
city. This member may be an employee of the city, but may not be the director
of finance or equivalent officer, or the Tax Administrator or other similar
official or an employee directly involved in municipal tax matters, or any
direct subordinate thereof.
      (2)   The term for members of the Board of Tax Review of the city shall
be two years. There is no limit on the number of terms that a member may serve
if the member is reappointed by the legislative authority. The board member
appointed by the Mayor of the city shall serve at the discretion of the
administrative official.
      (3)   Members of the Board of Tax Review appointed by the legislative
authority may be removed by the legislative authority by majority vote for
malfeasance, misfeasance, or nonfeasance in office. To remove such a member,
the legislative authority must give the member a copy of the charges against
the member and afford the member an opportunity to be publicly heard in person
or by counsel in the member's own defense upon not less than ten days' notice.
The decision by the legislative authority on the charges is final and not
appealable.
      (4)   A member of the Board of Tax Review who, for any reason, ceases to
meet the qualifications for the position prescribed by this section shall
resign immediately by operation of law.
      (5)   A vacancy in an unexpired term shall be filled in the same manner
as the original appointment within 60 days of when the vacancy was created. Any
member appointed to fill a vacancy occurring prior to the expiration of the
term for which the member's predecessor was appointed shall hold office for the
remainder of such term. No vacancy on the Board of Tax Review shall impair the
power and authority of the remaining members to exercise all the powers of the
Board of Tax Review.
      (6)   If a member is temporarily unable to serve on the Board of Tax
Review due to a conflict of interest, illness, absence, or similar reason, the
legislative authority or top administrative official that appointed the member
shall appoint another individual to temporarily serve on the Board of Tax
Review in the member's place. The appointment of such an individual shall be
subject to the same requirements and limitations as are applicable to the
appointment of the member temporarily unable to serve.
   (b)   Whenever a Tax Administrator issues an assessment, the Tax
Administrator shall notify the taxpayer in writing at the same time of the
taxpayer's right to appeal the assessment, the manner in which the taxpayer may
appeal the assessment, and the address to which the appeal should be directed.
   (c)   Any person who has been issued an assessment may appeal the assessment
to the Board of Tax Review by filing a request with the Board of Tax Review.
The request shall be in writing, shall specify the reason or reasons why the
assessment should be deemed incorrect or unlawful, and shall be filed within 60
days after the taxpayer receives the assessment.
   (d)   The Board of Tax Review shall schedule a hearing to be held within 60
days after receiving an appeal of an assessment under subsection (c) of this
section, unless the taxpayer requests additional time to prepare or waives a
hearing. If the taxpayer does not waive the hearing, the taxpayer may appear
before the Board of Tax Review and may be represented by an attorney at law,
certified, public accountant, or other representative. The Board of Tax Review
may allow a hearing to be continued as jointly agreed to by the parties. In
such a case, the hearing must be completed within 120 days after the first day
of the hearing unless the parties agree otherwise.
   (e)   The Board of Tax Review may affirm, reverse, or modify the Tax
Administrator's assessment or any part of that assessment. The Board of Tax
Review shall issue a final determination on the appeal within 90 days after the
Board of Tax Review's final hearing on the appeal, and send a copy of its final
determination by ordinary mail to all of the parties to the appeal within 15
days after issuing the final determination. The taxpayer or the Tax
Administrator may appeal the Board of Tax Review's final determination as
provided in Ohio R.C. 5717.011.
   (f)   The Board of Tax Review created pursuant to this section shall adopt
rules governing its procedures and shall keep a record of its transactions.
Such records are not public records available for inspection under Ohio R.C.
149.43. Hearings requested by a taxpayer before a Board of Tax Review created
pursuant to this section are not meetings of a public body subject to Ohio R.C.
121.22.
(Ord. 15-O-60, passed 11-16-2015)
§ 883.22  AUTHORITY TO CREATE RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   (a)   Nothing in this chapter prohibits the legislative authority of the
city, or a Tax Administrator pursuant to authority granted to the administrator
by resolution or ordinance, to adopt rules to administer an income tax imposed
by the city in accordance with this chapter. Such rules shall not conflict with
or be inconsistent with any provision of this chapter. Taxpayers are hereby
required to comply not only with the requirements of this chapter, but also to
comply with the Rules and Regulations.
   (b)   All rules adopted under this section shall be published and posted on
the internet.
(Ord. 15-O-60, passed 11-16-2015)
§ 883.23  RENTAL AND LEASED PROPERTY.
   (a)   All property owners of real property located in the city, who rent or
otherwise lease the same, or any part thereof, to any person for residential
dwelling purposes, including apartments, rooms and other rental accommodations,
during any calendar year, or part thereof, commencing with the effective date
of this section, shall file with the Tax Administrator on or before the January
31 first following such calendar year a written report disclosing the name,
address and also telephone number, if available, of each tenant known to have
occupied on December 31 during such calendar year such apartment, room or other
residential dwelling rental property.
   (b)   The Tax Administrator may order the appearance before him, or his duly
authorized agent, of any person whom he believes to have any knowledge of the
name, address and telephone number of any tenant of residential rental real
property in the city. The Tax Administrator, or his duly authorized agent, is
authorized to examine any person, under oath, concerning the name, address and
telephone number of any tenant of residential real property located in the
city. The Tax Administrator, or his duly authorized agent, may compel the
production of papers and records and the attendance of all personal before him,
whether as parties or witnesses, whenever he believes such person has knowledge
of the name, address and telephone number of any tenant of residential real
property in the city.
   (c)   Any property owner or person that violates one or more of the
following shall be subject to §
883.99:
      (1)   Fails, refuses or neglects to timely file a written report required
by subsection (a) of this section;
      (2)   Makes an incomplete or intentionally false written report required
by subsection (a) of this section;
      (3)   Fails to appear before the Tax Administrator or any duly authorized
agent and to produce and disclose any tenant information pursuant to any order
or subpoena of the Tax Administrator as authorized in this section; or
      (4)   Fails to comply with the provisions of this section or any order or
subpoena of the Tax Administrator.
(Ord. 15-O-60, passed 11-16-2015)
§ 883.24  SAVINGS CLAUSE.
   This chapter shall not apply to any person, firm or corporation, or to any
property as to whom or which it is beyond the power of Council to impose the
tax herein provided for. Any sentence, clause, section or part of this chapter
or any tax against or exception granted any individual or any of the several
groups of persons, or forms of income specified herein if found to be
unconstitutional, illegal or invalid, such unconstitutionality, illegality or
invalidity shall affect only such clause, sentence, section or part of this
chapter and shall not affect or impair any of the remaining provisions,
sentences, clauses, sections or other parts of this chapter. It is hereby
declared to be the intention of Council that this chapter would have been
adopted had such unconstitutional, illegal or invalid sentence, or part of this
section, not been included therein.
(Ord. 15-O-60, passed 11-16-2015)
§ 883.25  COLLECTION OF TAX AFTER TERMINATION OF CHAPTER.
   (a)   This chapter shall continue effective insofar as the levy of taxes is
concerned until repealed, and insofar as the collection of taxes levied
hereunder and actions or proceedings for collecting any tax so levied or
enforcing any provisions of this chapter are concerned, it shall continue
effective until all of said taxes levied hereunder in the aforesaid periods are
fully paid and any and all suits and prosecutions for the collection of said
taxes or for the punishment of violations of this chapter shall have been fully
terminated, subject to the limitations contained in §§
883.12 and
883.99.
   (b)   Annual returns due for all or any part of the last effective year of
this chapter shall be due on the date provided in §§
883.04 and
883.05 as though the same were continuing.
(Ord. 15-O-60, passed 11-16-2015)
§ 883.26  ADOPTION OF RITA RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The city hereby adopts the Regional Income Tax Agency (RITA) Rules &
Regulations, including amendments that may be made from time to time, for use
as the city's income tax rules and regulations. In the event of a conflict with
any provision(s) of the city income tax ordinance and the RITA Rules &
Regulations, the ordinance will supersede. Until and if the contractual
relationship between the city and RITA ceases, §
883.26 will supersede all other provisions within §§
883.01 through and including
883.99 regarding promulgation of rules and regulations by the Tax
Administrator.
(Ord. 15-O-60, passed 11-16-2015)
§ 883.99  VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES.
   (a)   Whoever violates §§
883.04,
883.16(a) and
883.17 by failing to remit city income taxes deducted and withheld from an
employee, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree and shall be
subject to a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000) or
imprisonment for a term of up to six months, or both. If the individual that
commits the violation is an employee, or official, of the city, the individual
is subject to discharge from employment or dismissal from office.
   (b)   Any person who discloses information received from the Internal
Revenue Service in violation of §
883.16(a) shall be guilty of a felony of the fifth degree and shall be subject
to a fine of not more than five thousand dollars ($5,000) plus the costs of
prosecution, or imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years, or both. If
the individual that commits the violation is an employee, or official, of the
city, the individual is subject to discharge from employment or dismissal from
office.
   (c)   Each instance of access or disclosure in violation of §
883.16(a) constitutes a separate offense.
   (d)   If not otherwise specified herein, no person shall:
      (1)   Fail, neglect or refuse to make any return or declaration required
by this chapter;
      (2)   File any incomplete or false return;
      (3)   Fail, neglect or refuse to pay the tax, penalties or interest
imposed by this chapter;
      (4)   Refuse to permit the Tax Administrator or any duly authorized agent
or employee to examine his books, records, papers and federal and state income
tax returns relating to the income or net profits of a taxpayer;
      (5)   Fail to appear before the Tax Administrator and to produce his
books, records, papers or federal and state income tax returns relating to the
income or net profits of a taxpayer upon order or subpoena of the Tax
Administrator;
      (6)   Refuse to disclose to the Tax Administrator any information with
respect to the income or net profits of a taxpayer;
      (7)   Fail to comply with the provisions of this chapter or any order or
subpoena of the Tax Administrator authorized hereby;
      (8)   Give to an employer false information as to his true name, correct
Social Security number, and residence address, or fail to promptly notify an
employer of any change in residence address and date thereof;
      (9)   Attempt to do anything whatsoever to avoid the payment of the whole
or any part of the tax, penalties or interest imposed by this chapter.
   (e)   Any person who violates any of the provisions in subsection (d) of
this section shall be subject to the penalties provided for in subsection (a)
of this section.
(Ord. 15-O-60, passed 11-16-2015)
CHAPTER 884:  MOTOR VEHICLE LICENSE TAX
Section
884.01   Levy of tax; purposes.
884.02   Rate.
884.03   Motor vehicle defined.
884.04   Effective period.
884.05   Payment of tax.
884.06   Disposition of proceeds.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Display of license plates - see TRAF.
436.09
   Local motor vehicle license tax - see Ohio R.C. Ch. 4504
   Motor vehicle licensing law - see Ohio R.C. Ch. 4503
   Use of illegal license plates - see TRAF.
436.10
§ 884.01  LEVY OF TAX; PURPOSES.
   Pursuant to Ohio R.C. 4504.172, there is hereby levied an annual license tax
upon the operation of motor vehicles on the public roads or highways for the
purposes of paying the costs and expenses of enforcing and administering the
tax provided for in this chapter; to provide additional revenue for the
purposes set forth in Ohio R.C. 4504.06; and to supplement revenue already
available for such purposes.
(Ord. 87-O-44, passed 8-31-1987)
§ 884.02  RATE.
   The tax provided for in §
884.01 shall be at the rate of five dollars ($5.00) per motor vehicle on each
and every motor vehicle, the district of registration of which, as defined in
Ohio R.C. 4503.10, is in the city.
(Ord. 87-O-44, passed 8-31-1987)
§ 884.03  MOTOR VEHICLE DEFINED.
   As used in this chapter, "motor vehicle" means any and all vehicles included
within the definition of motor vehicle in Ohio R.C. 4501.01 and 4505.01.
(Ord. 87-O-44, passed 8-31-1987)
§ 884.04  EFFECTIVE PERIOD.
   The tax imposed by this chapter shall apply to and be in effect for the
registration year commencing January 1, 1988, and shall continue in effect and
application during each registration year thereafter.
(Ord. 87-O-44, passed 8-31-1987)
§ 884.05  PAYMENT OF TAX.
   The tax imposed by this chapter shall be paid to the state Registrar of
Motor Vehicles or to a Deputy Registrar at the time an application for
registration of a motor vehicle is made as provided in Ohio R.C. 4503.10.
(Ord. 87-O-44, passed 8-31-1987)
§ 884.06  DISPOSITION OF PROCEEDS.
   All monies derived from the tax levied under this chapter shall be used by
the city for the purposes specified in this chapter.
(Ord. 87-O-44, passed 8-31-1987)
CHAPTER 885:  TRANSIENT GUEST TAX
Section
885.01   Definitions.
885.02   Rate of tax.
885.03   Exemptions.
885.04   Prohibition against false evidence of tax-exempt status.
885.05   Tax to be separately stated and charged.
885.06   Registration.
885.07   Records, inspection, destruction.
885.08   Reporting and remitting.
885.09   Penalties and interest.
885.10   Failure to collect and report tax, determination of tax by Director of
Finance.
885.11   Appeal.
885.12   Actions to collect.
885.13   Violations.
885.14   Refunds.
885.15   Separability.
885.16   Monies received, where credited.
§ 885.01  DEFINITIONS.
   When used in this chapter and unless otherwise distinctly expressed, the
following words and phrases shall have the meanings set out herein.
   (a)   Director of Finance. "Director of Finance" means the Director of
Finance of the City of Kirtland, Ohio.
   (b)   Hotel, motel. "Hotel" or "Motel" means every establishment kept, used,
maintained, advertised or held out to the public to be a place where sleeping
accommodations are offered for a consideration to guests, in which five or more
rooms are used for the accommodation of such guests, whether such rooms are in
one or several structures.
   (c)   Occupancy. "Occupancy" means the use or possession or the right to the
use or possession of any room or rooms or space or portion thereof, in any
hotel or motel for dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes. The use or
possession or right to use or possess any room or any suite of connecting rooms
as office space, banquet or private dining rooms or exhibit, sample or display
space shall not be considered occupancy within the meaning of this definition
unless the person exercising occupancy uses or possesses or has the right to
use or possess all or any portion of such room or suite of rooms for dwelling,
lodging or sleeping purposes.
   (d)   Operator. "Operator" means the person who is the proprietor of the
hotel or motel, whether in the capacity of owner, lessee, licensee, mortgagee
in possession or any other capacity. Where the operator performs his or her
functions through a managing agent of any type or character, other than an
employee, the managing agent shall be deemed an operator for the purposes of
this chapter, and shall have the same duties and liabilities as his or her
principal. Compliance with provisions of this chapter by either the principal
or the managing agent shall, however, be considered to be compliance by both.
   (e)   Person. "Person" means any individual, firm, partnership, joint
venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company,
corporation, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate or any
other group or combination acting as a unit.
   (f)   Rent. "Rent" means the consideration received for occupancy valued in
money, whether received in money or otherwise, including all receipts, cash,
credits and property or services of any kind or nature, and also any amount for
which the occupant is liable for the occupancy without any deduction therefrom
whatsoever.
   (g)   Transient guests. "Transient guests" means persons occupying a room or
rooms for sleeping accommodations for less than 30 consecutive days.
(Ord. 05-O-55, passed 12-5-2005)
§ 885.02  RATE OF TAX.
   For the purpose of providing revenue with which to meet the needs of the
City of Kirtland, Ohio, for the use of the general fund of the city, there is
hereby levied a tax of three per centum on all rents received by a hotel or
motel for lodging furnished to transient guests. The tax constitutes a debt
owed by the transient guest to the City of Kirtland, which is extinguished only
by payment to the operator as trustee for the city, or to the city. The
transient guest shall pay the tax to the operator of the hotel or motel at the
time the rent is paid. If the rent is paid in installments, a proportionate
share of the tax shall be paid with each installment. The unpaid tax shall be
due upon the transient guests ceasing to occupy space in the hotel or motel. If
for any reason the tax due is not paid to the operator of the hotel or motel,
the Director of Finance may require that such tax shall be paid directly to the
Director of Finance.
(Ord. 05-O-55, passed 12-5-2005)
§ 885.03  EXEMPTIONS.
   No tax shall be imposed under this chapter:
   (a)   Upon rents not within the taxing power of the city under the
constitution or laws of Ohio or the United States; or
   (b)   Upon rents paid by the State of Ohio or any of its political
subdivisions. No exemption claimed under the above paragraphs of this section
shall be granted except upon claim therefor made at the time rent is collected
and under penalty of perjury upon a form prescribed by the Director of Finance.
All claims of exemption shall be made in the manner prescribed by the Director
of Finance.
(Ord. 05-O-55, passed 12-5-2005)
§ 885.04  PROHIBITION AGAINST FALSE EVIDENCE OF TAX-EXEMPT STATUS.
   No transient guest shall refuse to pay the full and exact tax as required by
this chapter or present to the operator false evidence indicating that the
lodging as furnished is not subject to the tax. If the transaction is claimed
to be exempt, the transient guest must furnish to the operator and the operator
must obtain from the transient guest, a certificate specifying the reason that
the sale is not legally subject to the tax. If no certificate is obtained, it
shall be presumed the tax applies.
(Ord. 05-O-55, passed 12-5-2005)
§ 885.05  TAX TO BE SEPARATELY STATED AND CHARGED.
   The tax to be collected shall be stated and charged separately from the rent
and shown separately on any record thereof, at the time when the occupancy is
arranged or contracted and charged for, and upon every evidence of occupancy or
any bill or statement or charge made for the occupancy issued or delivered by
the operator, and the tax shall be paid by the occupant to the operator as
trustee for and on account of the City of Kirtland, and the operator shall be
liable for the collection thereof and for the tax. No operator of a hotel or
motel shall advertise or state in any manner, whether directly or indirectly
that the tax or any part thereof will be assumed or absorbed by the operator,
or that it will not be added to the rent, or that, if added, any part will be
refunded except in the manner hereinafter provided.
(Ord. 05-O-55, passed 12-5-2005)
§ 885.06  REGISTRATION.
   (a)   On or before December 1, 2005, or within 30 days after commencing
business, whichever is later, each operator of any hotel or motel renting
lodging to transient guests shall register the hotel or motel with the Director
of Finance and obtain from him or her a "transient occupancy registration
certificate" to be at all times posted in a conspicuous place on the premises.
   (b)   The certificate shall, among other things, state the following:
      (1)   The name of the operator;
      (2)   The address of the hotel or motel;
      (3)   The date upon which the certificate was issued; and
      (4)   "This Transient Occupancy Registration Certificate signifies that
the person named on the face hereof has fulfilled the requirements of the
Hotel-Motel Tax ordinance by registering with the Director of Finance of the
City of Kirtland for the purpose of collecting from transient guests the Hotel-
Motel Tax and remitting said tax to the Director of Finance. This certificate
does not constitute a permit."
(Ord. 05-O-55, passed 12-5-2005)
§ 885.07  RECORDS, INSPECTION, DESTRUCTION.
   Each operator shall keep complete and accurate records of lodging furnished,
together with a record of the tax collected thereon, which shall be the amount
due under this chapter, and shall keep all invoices, and such other pertinent
documents. If the operator furnished lodging not subject to the tax, the
operator's records shall show the identity of the transient guest, if the sale
was not exempted by reason of such identity, or the nature of the transaction
if exempted for any other reason. Such records and other documents shall be
open during business hours for inspection by the Director of Finance, or his or
her agents, and shall be preserved for a period of four years, unless the
Director of Finance, in writing, consents to their destruction within that
period, or by any order requesting that such records be kept for a longer
period of time.
(Ord. 05-O-55, passed 12-5-2005)
§ 885.08  REPORTING AND REMITTING.
   Each operator shall, on or before the last day of December 31, 2005, and on
or before the last day of each month thereafter make and file a return for the
preceding month, on forms prescribed by the Director of Finance, showing the
receipts from furnishing lodging, the amount of tax due from the operator to
the city for the period covered by the return, and such other information as
the Director of Finance deems necessary for the proper administration of this
chapter. The Director of Finance may extend the time for making and filing
returns. Returns shall be filed by delivering or mailing the same to the
Director of Finance together with payment of the full amount of tax shown to be
due thereon. The Director of Finance may authorize operators whose tax
liability is not such to merit monthly returns, as determined by the Director
of Finance upon the basis of administrative costs of the city, to make and file
returns at less frequent intervals. Such authorization shall be in writing and
shall indicate the intervals at which returns are to be filed. All claims for
exemptions from tax filed by transient guests with the operator during the
reporting period shall be filed with the return. All returns and payments
submitted by each operator shall be treated as confidential by the Director of
Finance and shall not be released by him or her except upon order of a court of
competent jurisdiction or to an officer or agent of the United States, the
State of Ohio, the County of Lake or the City of Kirtland, for official use
only. If for any reason, the hotel or motel shall cease doing business in the
City of Kirtland, all returns and payments are due immediately upon cessation
of business. All taxes collected by operators pursuant to this chapter shall be
held in trust for the account of the City of Kirtland until payment thereof is
made to the Director of Finance. The Director of Finance, if he or she deems it
necessary in order to insure the payment of the tax imposed by this chapter,
may require returns and payments to be made for other than monthly periods. The
returns shall be signed by the operator or his or her authorized agent.
(Ord. 05-O-55, passed 12-5-2005)
§ 885.09  PENALTIES AND INTEREST.
   (a)   Original delinquency. Any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed
by this chapter within the time required shall pay a penalty equal to ten
percent of the amount of the tax, in addition to the tax.
   (b)   Continued delinquency. Any operator who fails to remit any delinquent
remittances on or before a period of 30 days following the date on which the
remittance first became delinquent shall pay a second delinquency penalty equal
to ten percent of the amount of the tax and previous penalty in addition to the
tax and the ten percent penalty first imposed. An additional penalty equal to
ten percent of the total tax and penalty of the previous 30-day period shall be
added for each successive 30-day period that the account remains delinquent.
   (c)   Fraud. If the Director of Finance determines that the nonpayment of
any remittance due under this chapter is due to fraud, a penalty equal to 25
percent of the amount of the tax shall be added thereto in addition to the
penalties stated in subsections (a) and (b) of this section.
   (d)   Interest. In addition to the previous penalties imposed, any operator
who fails to remit any tax imposed by this chapter shall pay interest at the
rate of one-half of one percent per month, or fraction thereof, on the amount
of the tax exclusive of penalties, from the date on which the remittance first
became delinquent until paid.
(Ord. 05-O-55, passed 12-5-2005)
§ 885.10  FAILURE TO COLLECT AND REPORT TAX, DETERMINATION OF TAX BY DIRECTOR
OF FINANCE.
   (a)   If any operator shall fail or refuse to collect the tax and to make,
within the time provided in this chapter, any report and remittance of the tax
or any portion thereof required by this chapter, the Director of Finance shall
proceed in such manner as he or she may deem best to obtain facts and
information on which to base his or her estimate of the tax due. As soon as the
Director of Finance shall procure such facts and information as he or she is
able to obtain upon which to base the assessment of any tax imposed by this
chapter and payable by any operator who has failed or refused to collect the
same and to make such report and remittance, he or she shall proceed to
determine and assess against such operator the tax, interest and penalties
provided for by this chapter. In case such determination is made, the Director
of Finance shall give notice of the amount so assessed by serving it personally
or by depositing it in the United Stated mail, postage prepaid, addressed to
the operator so assessed at his or her last known place of business. Such
operator may within ten days after the serving or mailing of such notice make
application in writing to the Director of Finance for a hearing on the amount
assessed.
   (b)   If application by the operator for a hearing is not made within the
time prescribed, the tax, interest and penalties, if any, determined by the
Director of Finance shall become final and conclusive and immediately due and
payable. If such application is made, the Director of Finance shall give not
less than five days written notice in the manner prescribed herein to the
operator to show cause at a time and place fixed in the notice why the amount
specified therein should not be fixed for such tax, interest and penalties. At
such hearing, the operator may appear and offer evidence why such specified
tax, interest and penalties should not be fixed. After such hearing, the
Director of Finance shall determine the proper tax to be remitted and shall
thereafter give written notice to the person in the manner prescribed herein of
such determination and the amount of such tax, interest and penalties. The
amount determined to be due shall be payable after 15 days unless an appeal is
taken as provided in §
885.11.
(Ord. 05-O-55, passed 12-5-2005)
§ 885.11  APPEAL.
   Any operator aggrieved by any decision of the Director of Finance with
respect to the amount of such tax, interest and penalties, if any, may appeal
to the Mayor by filing a notice of appeal with him or her within 15 days of the
serving or mailing of the determination of tax due. The Mayor shall fix a time
and place for hearing such appeal and shall give notice in writing to such
operator at his or her last known place of business. The findings of the Mayor
shall be final and conclusive and shall be served upon the appellant in the
manner prescribed above for service of notice of hearing. Any amount found to
be due shall be immediately due and payable upon the service of notice.
(Ord. 05-O-55, passed 12-5-2005)
§ 885.12  ACTIONS TO COLLECT.
   Any tax required to be paid by a transient guest under the provisions of
this chapter shall be deemed a debt owed by the transient guest to the city.
Any such tax collected by an operator which has not been paid to the city shall
be deemed a debt owed by the operator to the city. Any person owing money to
the city under the provisions of this chapter shall be liable to an action
brought in the name of the City of Kirtland for the recovery of such amount.
(Ord. 05-O-55, passed 12-5-2005)
§ 885.13  VIOLATIONS.
   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor of the third degree and shall be fined not more than five
hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisoned not more than 60 days, or both.
(Ord. 05-O-55, passed 12-5-2005)
§ 885.14  REFUNDS.
   (a)   Whenever the amount of any tax, interest or penalty has been overpaid
or paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or
received by the city under this chapter, it may be refunded as provided in
subsections (b) and (c) of this section provided a claim in writing therefor,
stating under penalty of perjury the specific grounds upon which the claim is
founded, is filed with the Director of Finance within three years of the date
of payment. The claim shall be on forms furnished by the Director of Finance.
   (b)   Any operator may claim a refund or take as credit against taxes
collected and remitted the amount overpaid, paid more than once or erroneously
or illegally collected or received when it is established in a manner
prescribed by the Director of Finance that the person from whom the tax has
been collected was not a transient guest; provided, however, that, neither a
refund nor a credit shall be allowed unless the amount of the tax so collected
has either been refunded to the transient guest or credited to rent
subsequently payable by the transient to the operator.
   (c)   Transient guests may obtain a refund of taxes overpaid or paid more
than once or erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city by
filing of a claim in the manner provided in subsection (a) of this section, but
only when the tax was paid by the transient guest directly to the Director of
Finance, or when the transient guest having paid the tax to the operator,
establishes to the satisfaction of the Director of Finance that the transient
guest has been unable to obtain a refund from the operator who collected the
tax.
   (d)   No refund shall be paid under the provisions of this section unless
the claimant establishes his or her right thereto by written records showing
entitlement thereto.
(Ord. 05-O-55, passed 12-5-2005)
§ 885.15  SEPARABILITY.
   If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or
phrase of this chapter or any part thereof is for any reason held
unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining
portions of this chapter or any part thereof.
(Ord. 05-O-55, passed 12-5-2005)
§ 885.16  MONIES RECEIVED, WHERE CREDITED.
   The monies received under the provisions of this chapter shall be credited
to the general fund of the City of Kirtland.
(Ord. 05-O-55, passed 12-5-2005)
PART TEN - STREETS, UTILITIES AND PUBLIC SERVICES CODE
   Chapter
      TITLE TWO - STREET AND SIDEWALK AREAS
         
1020.   Streets.
         
1022.   Excavations.
         
1024.   Driveway Drainage Culverts.
         
1026.   Culverts, Storm Sewers and Roadside Ditches.
         
1028.   Driveways and Driveway Aprons.
      TITLE FOUR - UTILITIES
         
1040.   Water.
         
1042.   Sewers and Private Disposal Systems.
         
1043.   Illicit Discharge and Illegal Connection Control.
         
1044.   Gas.
         
1046.   Electricity.
      TITLE SIX - OTHER PUBLIC SERVICES
         
1060.   Garbage and Rubbish Collection and Disposal.
         
1062.   Cemeteries.
         
1064.   Alarm Systems.
         
1066.   Emergency Medical Services.
         
1068.   Kirtland Recreation Park.
TITLE TWO - STREET AND SIDEWALK AREAS
CHAPTER 1020:  STREETS
Section
1020.01   Maintenance of state highways.
1020.02   Snow and ice control on state highways.
1020.03   Centerline painting of state highways.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Dedication and acceptance - see Ohio R.C. 723.03
   Change of name, vacating and narrowing streets - see Ohio R.C. 723.04 et
seq.
   Surface treatment - see Ohio R.C. 723.23, 723.31
   Excavation liability - see Ohio R.C. 723.49 et seq.
   Changing established grade - see Ohio R.C. 727.32
   Obstruction of streets - see TRAF.
412.01
   Driving on streets closed for repair - see TRAF.
432.24
   Trimming trees along public ways - see GEN. OFF.
660.14
§ 1020.01  MAINTENANCE OF STATE HIGHWAYS.
   The city hereby consents to the maintenance of the traveled portions of
state highways U.S.R. 6, S.R. 306 and S.R. 615 in the city by the State
Department of Transportation.
(Ord. 68-O-21, passed 12-30-1968)
§ 1020.02  SNOW AND ICE CONTROL ON STATE HIGHWAYS.
   The city hereby consents to the plowing of snow and the placing of abrasives
for ice control on the traveled portions of state highways in the city under
the supervision of the Ohio Director of Transportation and in accordance with
the standard practices of the State Department of Transportation.
(Ord. 68-O-17, passed 12-10-1968)
§ 1020.03  CENTERLINE PAINTING OF STATE HIGHWAYS.
   The city hereby consents to the centerline painting of state highways in the
city by the State Department of Transportation.
(Ord. 68-O-22, passed 12-30-1968)
CHAPTER 1022:  EXCAVATIONS
Section
1022.01   Permit required; exceptions.
1022.02   Permit requirements.
1022.03   Rules and regulations.
1022.99   Penalty.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Openings by the municipality - see Ohio R.C. 723.02
   Liability for damage - see Ohio R.C. 723.49 et seq.
   Digging, excavating and piling earth on streets - see Ohio R.C. 5589.10
   Gas and oil wells - see B.R. & T.
Ch. 836
   Excavations, landfills and grading - see B. & H.
Ch. 1442
   Excavations for water service - see S.U. & P.S.
1040.04
§ 1022.01  PERMIT REQUIRED; EXCEPTIONS.
   No person, except a contractor performing city work on a regularly awarded
city contract, shall excavate within or bore or tunnel through, along or across
the limits of any street, public way, alley or public grounds in the city or
owned by the city, for the purpose of installing sewer, water or gas lines,
telephone or power conduits or cables or any other structure, except a
structure carrying overhead electric or telephone circuits, without first
having obtained a permit for such work from the city. This section shall not
apply to:
   (a)   Emergency repairs to gas main, water or sewer lines or telephone or
power conduits or cables;
   (b)   Emergency installation of gas service, water or sewer lines or
telephone or power conduits or cables; or
   (c)   Those routine service connections for utility customers that do not
require the cutting or opening of a public street or roadway.
(Ord. 76-O-63, passed 6-7-1976)
§ 1022.02  PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.
   Prior to obtaining the permit provided for in §
1022.01, the applicant shall furnish the city with the following:
   (a)   A plan and general specifications showing the proposed location,
extent and nature of the work contemplated;
   (b)   Indemnity insurance saving the city harmless from any damage to
persons or property arising from such work; and
   (c)   (1)   A bond guaranteeing that the work will be done to the full
satisfaction of the city (represented by the Mayor or his or her representative
and the City Engineer) and that the area affected by the work will be restored,
as nearly as possible, to its original condition and such condition maintained,
at the cost of the permit holder, for a period of one year after the completion
of the work, provided, however, that such bond may be released at an earlier
period if, in the opinion of the Mayor or his or her representative and the
Engineer, such release is warranted. The amount of such bond shall be
commensurate with the extent of the work and shall be determined by the Mayor
or his or her representative and the Engineer, but in no case shall the amount
of such bond be less than as stated in the Fee Schedule in §
236.07 of the City of Kirtland Codified Ordinances for any one project.
      (2)   Parties who, because of their operations, find it necessary to
enter city streets, public ways, alleys or public grounds for construction
purposes at recurring intervals are entitled to furnish a blanket bond with the
same conditions as set forth in this subsection. The amount of such bond shall
be determined by the Mayor or his or her representative and the Engineer, but
in no event shall it be less than as stated in the Fee Schedule in §
236.07 of the City of Kirtland Codified Ordinances, provided that any project
of an extensive nature shall be covered by a specific bond, subject to the
discretion and approval of the Mayor or his or her representative and the
Engineer as to amount and conditions.
(Ord. 76-O-39, passed 3-15-1976; Am. Ord. 17-O-20, passed 7-3-2017)
§ 1022.03  RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The following rules and regulations shall govern the excavation of streets
in the city.
   (a)   Special care shall be taken to reference all city, federal, state,
county or private property monuments encountered in the line of the work so
that such monuments, if disturbed, will be correctly replaced upon completion
of construction.
   (b)   No work shall be performed by the permit holder or his or her agents,
or any excavation backfilled, covered or filled, except in the presence of an
authorized or designated city inspector. The cost of such inspection shall be
borne by the permit holder.
   (c)   City-owned or other publicly owned facilities, such as sewers, water
lines or other facilities or structures, encountered during the work of
construction, shall be carefully protected, at the cost of the permit holder,
to prevent damage thereto.
   (d)   Should it become necessary to remove and replace or relocate such city
or other public facilities, the work shall be done at the expense of the permit
holder in accordance with specific plans and specifications presented by the
permit holder and approved by the Engineer and the Mayor or his or her
representative.
   (e)   Privately owned facilities encountered in the work shall be protected,
removed, replaced or relocated by agreement between the owner of such
facilities and the permit holder, at no expense to the city.
   (f)   When the material excavated from a trench is suitable for backfill, in
the opinion of the City Engineer or the Director of Public Service, it may be
used for that purpose. Otherwise, the excavated material shall be removed from
the site of the work and replaced with sand; fine, clean gravel; or sand and
gravel that is free from clay.
   (g)   In general, trenches excavated in tree lawn areas may be backfilled
with the material excavated, except that where such material is shale or rock,
sand or other suitable material shall be used. The backfill material shall be
rounded over the trench and sufficiently higher than the adjoining ground
surface, except as otherwise noted in this section, to allow for settlement.
   (h)   Where a trench passes through a regularly maintained lawn, the
backfill material shall be thoroughly compacted to minimize settlement and the
top portion brought to the grade of the existing lawn, after not less than
three inches of topsoil has been applied, raked, rolled and seeded so that the
finished area will be equal to the original lawn removed. In lieu of that
process, the original sod may be carefully removed and stockpiled, and after
the trench backfill is compacted, the sod may be replaced, seed added if
necessary and rolled so that the lawn, as disturbed, is equal to the original.
   (i)   Where a trench lies in driveway, parking or other areas subject to
traffic, the backfill material shall be sand, mechanically tamped, in not more
than eight-inch layers, for the full depth of the trench. The material removed
from the surface of such areas shall be replaced in kind and thoroughly
compacted.
   (j)   A trench less than three feet from the back of a curb shall be
mechanically tamped for the full depth of the trench.
   (k)   When the trench passes longitudinally or transversely through an
asphaltic-type brick or concrete pavement, the backfill material shall be sand,
mechanically tamped, for the full depth of the trench, in layers not more than
six inches thick.
   (l)   Under certain conditions, as determined by the Engineer, bar
reinforcement over a trench may be required in the base of brick pavements and
in the lower third of concrete pavements.
   (m)   The surface course for any asphaltic-type brick or concrete pavement
removed during the construction of the project shall be replaced in kind.
   (n)   Pipes, conduits or other facilities may be installed under roadways by
jacking, boring or tunneling. If any of these three methods is to be used, the
applicant for the crossing shall file with the city a plan showing how the work
is to be done with particular reference to the manner in which backfill is to
be placed around the carrying pipe or conduit or around an encasing pipe or
structure. No work shall be done until such plan is approved by the Engineer.
   (o)   Every excavation or trench in any portion of a public right of way,
whether a roadway, tree lawn or sidewalk area, and irrespective of the type of
material with which such excavation or trench is backfilled, shall be filled or
backfilled by mechanical tamping of the backfill or fill material. Any
mechanical tamping equipment used shall be of a type approved by the Engineer.
(Ord. 76-O-39, passed 3-15-1976)
§ 1022.99  PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than one hundred fifty dollars
($150.00) for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each
day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
(Ord. 76-O-39, passed 3-15-1976)
CHAPTER 1024:  DRIVEWAY DRAINAGE CULVERTS
Section
1024.01   Installation requirements; deposit.
1024.02   Installation in rights-of-way; obstructions.
1024.03   Determination of need of culverts; notice to install; action by city.
1024.04   Charges.
1024.05   Interpretation; conflicts.
1024.99   Penalty.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Municipal drains - see Ohio R.C. 715.41, 715.47
   County ditches - see Ohio R.C. Ch. 6131 et seq.
   Drainage of lots - see GEN. OFF.
660.11
   Water - see S.U. & P.S.
Ch. 1040
   Drainage in subdivisions - see P. & Z.
1246.13,
1248.11
§ 1024.01  INSTALLATION REQUIREMENTS; DEPOSIT.
   (a)   No person shall install or replace, or cause to be installed or
replaced, a driveway culvert within the road right-of-way of a street or alley
in the city without prior notification to the city.
   (b)   Prior to the installation of a driveway culvert, a person wishing such
installation shall deposit an amount as stated in the Fee Schedule in §
236.07 of the City of Kirtland Codified Ordinances with the City Clerk to cover
the city’s cost of inspecting such culvert installation.
(Ord. 98-O-25, passed 4-6-1998; Am. Ord. 17-O-20, passed 7-3-2017)
§ 1024.02  INSTALLATION IN RIGHTS-OF-WAY; OBSTRUCTIONS.
   (a)   All driveway culverts installed within the road right of way of a
public street or alley in the city shall be inspected by either the City
Engineer or the Director of Public Service prior to covering to ensure that the
correct culvert size, type and appropriate depth requirements are met. All such
culverts shall be a minimum of 12 inches inside diameter.
   (b)   All driveway culverts within the road right-of-way of a street or
alley in the city shall be maintained in proper working condition and shall be
kept free from obstructions by the property owner for whose benefit the
driveway culvert has been installed. In nonemergency situations, if the
Director determines that a driveway culvert is in need of cleaning, repair or
replacement, the Director shall cause written notice thereof to be served upon
the property owner at the property owner's last known address. Such cleaning,
repair or replacement must be made in accordance with this chapter and shall be
approved by the Director within seven days after service of such notice.
   (c)   If the Director determines that an emergency situation exists, and
immediate cleaning, repair or replacement is needed, or if such property owner
fails or refuses to comply with the notice provided in subsection (b) hereof,
the city may cause the required work to be done by the city and the amount of
money so expended shall be billed to the property owner by certified mail. Upon
the property owner's failure to reimburse the city this amount, within 30 days
after billing, the Director of Law shall collect the same by judicial process.
Any judgment uncollected for 30 days after its date shall be recorded in the
records of the Clerk of the County Common Pleas Court as a lien upon the lands
of the property owner concerned.
   (d)   Whenever it is necessary to remove concrete or asphalt pavement over a
culvert, or within a road right-of-way, for purposes of either removing
obstructions or widening streets or alleys in the city, there shall be no
requirement, on the part of the city or the State Department of Transportation,
to restore any such driveway with concrete or asphalt pavement.
(Ord. 95-O-71, passed 1-15-1996)
§ 1024.03  DETERMINATION OF NEED OF CULVERTS; NOTICE TO INSTALL; ACTION BY
CITY.
   (a)   The Director of Public Service or the City Engineer shall determine if
the installation of a driveway culvert across ditches within a public roadway
is necessary to provide ingress and egress to private drives.
   (b)   The Director or the Engineer shall determine if the crossing of such a
ditch for means of ingress and egress to a private drive is impeding the
passage of water in the ditch and the draining of the public roadway and
obstructing the flow of water in such ditch.
   (c)   If the Director or the Engineer determines, from his or her inspection
of the ditch, that it is necessary to install a driveway culvert in such ditch
to permit ingress and egress to a private drive, without impeding or
obstructing the flow of water in such ditch, he or she shall notify the record
owner of the property that such culvert must be installed within seven working
days of such notification. Such notification shall be in writing and mailed to
the record property owner at his or her last known address.
   (d)   If the property owner does not cause the driveway culvert to be
installed in accordance with the notification of the Director or the Engineer
and this chapter, the Director shall cause a culvert to be installed in the
ditch in accordance with the ordinances of the city for the installation of
driveway culverts.
   (e)   If such property owner fails or refuses to comply with the notice
provided in subsection (c) hereof and the city installs the culvert, the amount
of money so expended by the city shall be billed to the property owner by
certified mail. Upon his or her failure to reimburse the city this amount,
within five days thereafter, the Director of Law shall collect the same by
judicial process. Any judgment uncollected for 30 days after its date shall be
recorded in the records of the Clerk of the County Common Pleas Court, as a
lien upon the lands of the property owner concerned.
(Ord. 88-O-32, passed 5-16-1988)
§ 1024.04  CHARGES.
   The Director of Public Service is hereby authorized and directed to charge
the property owner, for whose benefit a culvert was installed, the actual cost
to the city for the purchase, installation and/or inspection of each culvert
installed.
(Ord. 88-O-32, passed 5-16-1988)
§ 1024.05  INTERPRETATION; CONFLICTS.
   This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair
Chapter 1026, but is deemed to be supplemental thereto. Whenever this chapter
and
Chapter 1026 or any other valid ordinance, building code or restriction
conflict or overlap, the more stringent restriction shall prevail.
(Ord. 88-O-32, passed 5-16-1988)
§ 1024.99  PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than one hundred fifty dollars
($150.00) for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each
day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
(Ord. 88-O-32, passed 5-16-1988)
CHAPTER 1026:  CULVERTS, STORM SEWERS AND ROADSIDE DITCHES
Section
1026.01   Permit required; inspection and approval of City Engineer.
1026.02   Permit fee; installations by city; charges.
1026.03   Work done by city in lieu of property owner; costs.
1026.04   Determinations to be made by City Engineer.
1026.05   Interpretation; conflicts.
1026.99   Penalty.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Municipal drains - see Ohio R.C. 715.41, 715.47
   County ditches - see Ohio R.C. Ch. 6131 et seq.
   Drainage of lots - see GEN. OFF.
660.11
   Water - see S.U. & P.S.
Ch. 1040
   Drainage in subdivisions - see P. & Z.
1246.13,
1248.11
§ 1026.01  PERMIT REQUIRED; INSPECTION AND APPROVAL OF CITY ENGINEER.
   No person shall fill in, cover, regrade or install culverts and basins, or
alter the course or grade of any roadside drainage ditch, tree lawn or other
portion of a dedicated street or highway within the city, without first having
obtained a permit therefor from the City Engineer, and any such filling in,
covering, regrading, culvert and basin installation, or alteration, shall be
subject to the inspection and approval, at all times, of the City Engineer.
(Ord. 87-O-22, passed 6-1-1987)
§ 1026.02  PERMIT FEE; INSTALLATIONS BY CITY; CHARGES.
   (a)   Any property owner who obtains a permit for filling in, covering,
regrading or installing storm sewers and basins, or for altering the course or
grade of a roadside drainage ditch, tree lawn or other portion of a dedicated
street or highway, shall first pay to the city a fee as stated in the Fee
Schedule in §
236.07 of the City of Kirtland Codified Ordinances to defray the cost of
inspection and approval.
   (b)   After obtaining a permit from the City Engineer, the property owner
may request that the city install storm sewers and basins in the roadside
drainage ditch, and if the city has the time and manpower available, the city,
at its sole discretion, may install storm sewers and basins and charge the
property owner the then current prices established by the Director of Public
Service.
(Ord. 95-O-72, passed 1-15-1996; Am. Ord. 17-O-20, passed 7-3-2017)
§ 1026.03  WORK DONE BY CITY IN LIEU OF PROPERTY OWNER; COSTS.
   If a property owner does not fill in, cover, regrade or install storm sewers
and basins, or alter the course or grade of any roadside drainage ditch, tree
lawn or other portion of a dedicated street or highway, as approved by the City
Engineer, the city shall cause the filling in, covering, regrading, storm sewer
and basin installation, or altering, to be done in accordance with the approval
of the City Engineer, and the property owner shall be liable for all costs
associated therewith.
(Ord. 95-O-72, passed 1-15-1996)
§ 1026.04  DETERMINATIONS TO BE MADE BY CITY ENGINEER.
   (a)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the City Engineer
shall view each property separately and shall determine whether or not it is in
the city's best interest to allow any filling in, covering, regrading or
installing of storm sewers and basins, or any alteration of the course or grade
of any roadside drainage ditch, tree lawn or other portion of a dedicated
street or highway within the city. If the City Engineer determines that it is
not in the best interest of the city to make any such changes, then no permit
shall be issued nor shall any changes or alterations be allowed.
   (b)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, no storm sewer
and basin installation shall be allowed without the City Engineer determining
the appropriate number of inlet basins that must be installed for each
property.
(Ord. 95-O-72, passed 1-15-1996)
§ 1026.05  INTERPRETATION; CONFLICTS.
   This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair
Chapter 1024 of these Codified Ordinances, but is deemed to be supplemental
thereto. Whenever this chapter and
Chapter 1024, or any other valid ordinance, building code or restriction,
conflict or overlap, the more stringent restriction shall prevail.
(Ord. 87-O-22, passed 6-1-1987)
§ 1026.99  PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than one hundred fifty dollars
($150.00) for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each
day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
(Ord. 87-O-22, passed 6-1-1987)
CHAPTER 1028:  DRIVEWAYS AND DRIVEWAY APRONS
Section
1028.01   Location, width, number and composition.
1028.02   Permits; fees; approval.
1028.03   Compliance required; notice.
1028.04   Duty of owner or occupant.
1028.05   Work performed by the city.
1028.06   Interpretation; conflicts.
1028.99   Penalty.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Right-of-way at private driveways - see TRAF.
432.20
   Driveway drainage culverts - see S.U. & P.S.
Ch. 1024
   Off-street parking and loading - see P. & Z.
Ch. 1288
   Access driveways - see P. & Z.
1288.05
   Grades and grading - see B. & H.
Ch. 1442
§ 1028.01  LOCATION, WIDTH, NUMBER AND COMPOSITION.
   The location, width, number and composition of driveways and driveway
aprons, for entrance and exit driveways to parking facilities, except for one
and two-family dwellings, shall be as follows.
   (a)   Parking areas having a capacity of ten spaces or less shall have at
least one single lane driveway having a minimum width of ten feet and a maximum
width of 12 feet with the radius of the edge of the driveway apron of at least
30 feet, so that a vehicle may enter from or exit onto the curb lane without
obstructing vehicles in other traffic lanes.
   (b)   Parking areas having a capacity of more than ten spaces shall have at
least two single lane driveways, if possible, each having a minimum width of
ten feet and a maximum width of 12 feet with the radius of the edge of the
driveway apron of at least 30 feet, so that a vehicle may enter from or exit
onto the curb lane without obstructing vehicles in other traffic lanes. If two
single lane driveways are not possible, then there shall be at least one two-
lane driveway having a minimum width of 18 feet and a maximum width of 24 feet
with the radius of the edge of the driveway apron of at least 30 feet, so that
a vehicle may enter from or exit onto the curb lane without obstructing
vehicles in other traffic lanes.
   (c)   Upon approval by the Planning and Zoning Commission or the Director of
Public Service, an entrance or exit driveway may be three lanes in width having
a minimum of 27 feet and a maximum of 34 feet with the radius of the edge of
the driveway apron of at least 30 feet, so that a vehicle may enter from or
exit onto the curb lane without obstructing vehicles in other traffic lanes. No
entrance or exit driveway shall exceed three lanes in width.
   (d)   For all parking areas having a capacity of more than ten vehicles, the
centerline of the driveway apron shall be located not less than 75 feet from
the nearest street intersection right-of-way line.
   (e)   Driveway aprons on the same property shall be spaced at not less than
100-foot intervals measured on the centerline of the driveways.
   (f)   All driveway aprons and driveways to parking facilities, except for
one and two-family dwellings, shall be constructed so as to interfere as little
as possible with the use of adjacent property and the flow of traffic on
adjacent streets.
   (g)   The subgrade of all driveway aprons, except for one and two-family
dwellings, shall consist of granulated slag, gravel or stone, the minimum
thickness of which shall be three inches, and the surface of which shall be of
rigid construction not less than six inches thick, which surface shall be level
with the surface of the street pavement. The surface of all driveway aprons
shall extend from the edge of the street pavement to the edge of the street
right-of-way line unless the Director of Public Service determines that a
shorter distance may be maintained without damage to the street pavement.
(Ord. 89-O-29, passed 8-21-1989)
§ 1028.02  PERMITS; FEES; APPROVAL.
   (a)   The construction, alteration, cutting, change, repair, removal or
replacement of driveway aprons, as provided for by this chapter, shall be
performed under permits obtained from the Director of Public Service, and the
fee for each such permit is as stated in the Fee Schedule in §
236.07 of the City of Kirtland Codified Ordinances.
   (b)   For one and two-family dwellings, all construction, alteration,
cutting, change, repair, removal or replacement of driveway aprons shall be
under the control and direction of the Director of Public Service, shall be
done by a qualified person and shall be approved by the Director. The permit
fee for such work is as stated in the Fee Schedule in §
236.07 of the City of Kirtland Codified Ordinances.
(Ord. 97-O-18, passed 3-17-1997; Am. Ord. 17-O-20, passed 7-3-2017)
§ 1028.03  COMPLIANCE REQUIRED; NOTICE.
   Except for one and two-family dwellings, every owner or occupant of abutting
lots and lands on any public thoroughfare or street in the city whose driveway
aprons do not comply with §
1028.01 shall, within 60 days after receiving written notice from the Director
of Public Service, cause driveway aprons to be constructed and thereafter
maintained in accordance with this chapter.
(Ord. 89-O-29, passed 8-21-1989)
§ 1028.04  DUTY OF OWNER OR OCCUPANT.
   Every owner or occupant of land abutting a public thoroughfare or street in
the city shall maintain his or her driveway aprons so as to prevent damage to
the public thoroughfare or street pavement and roadway ditches.
(Ord. 89-O-29, passed 8-21-1989)
§ 1028.05  WORK PERFORMED BY THE CITY.
   If the Director of Public Service determines that an emergency situation
exists and immediate construction, alteration, repair or replacement of a
driveway apron is needed; and/or if such property owner or occupant of abutting
lots or lands on any public thoroughfare or street fails or refuses to comply
with the notice provided for in §
1028.03, the city may cause the required work to be done by the city, and the
amount of money so expended shall be billed to the property owner by certified
mail. Upon the property owner's failure to reimburse the city this amount
within 30 days after billing, the Director of Law shall collect the same by
judicial process. Any judgment uncollected for 30 days after its date shall be
recorded in the records of the Clerk of the County Common Pleas Court as a lien
upon the lands of such property owner.
(Ord. 89-O-29, passed 8-21-1989)
§ 1028.06  INTERPRETATION; CONFLICTS.
   This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any other
ordinance relating to driveway aprons and/or access driveways, but is deemed to
be supplemental thereto. If this chapter and any other ordinance, building code
or restriction conflict or overlap, the more stringent restriction shall
prevail.
(Ord. 89-O-29, passed 8-21-1989)
§ 1028.99  PENALTY.
   Whoever violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of this
chapter is guilty of a minor misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than one
hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) for each offense. A separate offense shall be
deemed committed each day during or on which a violation or noncompliance
occurs or continues.
(Ord. 89-O-29, passed 8-21-1989)
TITLE FOUR - UTILITIES
CHAPTER 1040:  WATER
Section
1040.01   Definitions.
1040.02   Franchise to Ohio Water Service Company.
1040.03   Company's obligation to furnish water service.
1040.04   Excavations; restoration of city property.
1040.05   Rules and regulations.
1040.06   Rates.
1040.07   Inspections; specifications; plans.
1040.08   Extension of water mains.
1040.09   Ownership of facilities.
1040.10   Bond.
1040.11   Tax increases and decreases.
1040.12   Service to adjacent municipalities.
1040.13   Cooperation by city.
1040.14   Relocation of facilities.
1040.15   Nonliability of city.
1040.16   Transfers of interest in franchise or facilities.
1040.17   Effective period of franchise.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Water pollution - see Ohio R.C. 715.08, 743.24 et seq.; GEN. OFF.
660.04
   Waterworks mortgage revenue bonds - see Ohio R.C. 715.09 et seq.
   Compulsory water connections - see Ohio R.C. 729.06, 743.23
   Management and control of waterworks - see Ohio R.C. 743.02 et seq.; 743.26
et seq.
   Weekly deposit of waterworks money collected - see Ohio R.C. 743.06
   Tampering with hydrants, pipes or meters; unauthorized connections - see
Ohio R.C. 4933.22
   Prosecutions for theft of utilities - see GEN. OFF.
642.26
§ 1040.01  DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this chapter:
   (a)   City. "City" means the City of Kirtland, Ohio.
   (b)   Company. "Company" means the Ohio Water Service Company, its
successors and assigns.
   (c)   Frontage. "Frontage" means the roadway frontage on both sides of a
street within which a water line is located or to be located.
(Ord. 83-O-71, passed 12-5-1983)
§ 1040.02  FRANCHISE TO OHIO WATER SERVICE COMPANY.
   The city hereby grants to the Ohio Water Service Company the right,
franchise and privilege to furnish public water service and water for fire
protection to the city, its residents and water consumers, and consents to the
company installing, operating, repairing, relocating and replacing water mains,
appurtenances and water work facilities in the streets, lanes, alleys and
squares of the city.
(Ord. 83-O-71, passed 12-5-1983)
§ 1040.03  COMPANY'S OBLIGATION TO FURNISH WATER SERVICE.
   The Ohio Water Service Company shall provide a supply of water sufficient to
furnish adequate and uninterrupted public, domestic, commercial and industrial
water service and water for fire protection to the city, its residents and
water consumers, except only such temporary interruptions as may occur as a
result of forces over which the company has no control or during the
installation, repair and maintenance of waterworks and distribution facilities.
The company shall maintain and repair at its own expense the mains,
appurtenances and waterworks facilities in the city which are operated by the
company in furnishing service under this chapter. Should the service which the
company is now providing in areas adjacent to the city be taken over at any
time in the future by another supplier, and if thereby it becomes impossible
for the company to continue furnishing service to the city and its residents,
the company shall give the city as much advance notice as possible of any such
impending takeover, so that the city may make other arrangements for service to
itself and its residents. Upon such takeover, the company shall be relieved of
its obligation under this chapter.
(Ord. 83-O-71, passed 12-5-1983)
§ 1040.04  EXCAVATIONS; RESTORATION OF CITY PROPERTY.
   The Ohio Water Service Company, in excavating in the streets, lanes, alleys
and squares of the city, shall restore them to their former condition and shall
indemnify and save the city harmless from any and all damage arising from the
negligence or wrongful action of the company, its employees or agents, in
excavating in and restoring such streets, lanes, alleys and squares to their
former condition. In excavating in the streets, lanes, alleys and squares of
the city, the company shall comply with all of the ordinances of the city with
respect to such excavations.
(Ord. 83-O-71, passed 12-5-1983)
§ 1040.05  RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The Ohio Water Service Company's rules and regulations governing its service
to the city and its residents and the water consumers thereof shall be the
company's Master Tariff P.U.C.O. No. 1 on file with the Public Utilities
Commission of Ohio as of the effective date of this chapter (Ord. 83-O-71,
passed December 5, 1983), except as otherwise provided in this chapter. The
company may modify or add to such rules and regulations in the following
manner: A requested modification or addition shall be filed with the City Clerk
and the same shall become effective 60 days from the filing unless during such
60-day period the city files a complaint with the Public Utilities Commission
of Ohio against such modification or addition, in which event the Commission
shall determine what, if any, modification or addition shall be made.
(Ord. 83-O-71, passed 12-5-1983)
§ 1040.06  RATES.
   For the period commencing April 1, 1986, and ending December 31, 1988, the
Ohio Water Service Company shall be entitled to charge maximum rates for water,
water service and fire protection furnished within the city as stated in the
Fee Schedule in §
236.07 of the City of Kirtland Codified Ordinances.
   (a)   Prompt payment. The consumer will be entitled to a prompt payment
discount of five percent by payment of the net amount on or before 15 calendar
days after rendition (mailing date) of the bill, after which the gross amount
shall be due and payable.
   (b)   Dishonored checks. A charge of five dollars ($5.00) will be made for
each check which the Company returns to the customer for nonsufficient funds.
(Ord. 88-O-37, passed 5-2-1988; Am. Ord. 17-O-20, passed 7-3-2017)
§ 1040.07  INSPECTIONS; SPECIFICATIONS; PLANS.
   The Ohio Water Service Company shall establish specifications, shall inspect
and approve all construction and extensions of distribution and local service
mains in the city and shall supply water to all persons connecting into such
mains who comply with the company's rules and regulations for obtaining
service. The company shall submit to the city for inspection the plans and
specifications for the construction of all mains or waterworks facilities
within the city, so that the city may have the opportunity of consulting with
the company with respect to plans and specifications prior to the commencement
of construction.
(Ord. 83-O-71, passed 12-5-1983)
§ 1040.08  EXTENSION OF WATER MAINS.
   Nothing in this chapter shall require the Ohio Water Service Company to
construct or extend distribution or local service mains except as may be
provided for in this section or in the company's rules and regulations and
subject to the city's and company's joint determination of the financial
feasibility of such construction.
   (a)   The company may install new water mains as outlined in its long range
plan. Project priorities shall be set jointly by the company and the city.
   (b)   The city and the company shall determine which streets should receive
water service and fire protection. The company shall install new water mains
if:
      (1)   A survey shows that a water main of sufficient size is available
for extension to the area desiring service; and
      (2)   The owners of at least 60 percent of the frontage abutting the
proposed water main have:
         A.   Signed an application for service and agree to connect to the
extension and take service upon its completion;
         B.   Paid, in advance, a related facilities fee; and
         C.   Paid, in advance, a frontage charge per foot of frontage. The
frontage charge per foot shall be determined by dividing the estimated cost of
the main extension by the frontage along the route of such extension. If a
water main larger than eight inches in diameter is required by the company in a
residential area, the frontage charge per foot will be based on the estimated
cost of a main of eight inches in diameter constructed under the same
conditions.
   (c)   All new water mains installed pursuant to subsection (b) hereof shall
be constructed and in service not later than one year after the date on which
the company has received the necessary related facility fees and frontage
charges as described in paragraphs (b)(2)B. and C. hereof.
   (d)   In addition to all other sums of money which the company expends in
its normal operations or as required by this chapter, the company shall commit
the sum of twenty-one thousand six hundred dollars ($21,600) for installation
of transmission, distribution and local service mains, hydrants, emergency
boosters, station power improvements, line pressure improvements and storage
facilities, for expansion, replacement and improvement of the water system
within the city. Such sum shall be used to pay for the cost of those
improvements selected jointly by the company and the City Engineer. The cost of
these improvements shall not exceed the sum of twenty-one thousand six hundred
dollars ($21,600). The company shall complete such improvements, including
restoration, by December 31, 1988.
   (e)   Extension of mains for private fire protection, industrial use, real
estate developments or other special service may be secured under the terms and
conditions outlined below.
      (1)   The applicant for the main extension shall submit to the company a
set of detailed plans of the proposed construction, showing the location,
dimensions and type of proposed construction, the location, dimensions and type
of proposed mains and cost estimates (to be reviewed by the company) of the
proposed construction. The plans shall be in proper form for submittal to the
city. Upon request, the company will inform the developer or other party as to
how the construction plans are to be prepared. Construction shall not commence
until the plans have been approved by the company and the city and a written
main extension agreement has been executed.
         A.   If the applicant desires that the company construct the main
extension, the applicant shall arrange with the company to pay the costs and
expenses which will be incurred by the company in installing such main
extension and placing it in service.
         B.   If the applicant desires to construct the main extension himself
or herself, or to arrange with a third party to have the main extension
constructed, the company shall place such main extension in service when the
following conditions have been met:
            1.   The water main has been pressure tested and disinfected
according to company approved specifications;
            2.   The applicant has paid all costs incurred by the company for
inspection of the waterline construction;
            3.   The applicant has furnished the company with a one-year
maintenance bond for all water main construction within the project. The bond
shall take effect from the date the main is placed in service; and
            4.   The applicant furnishes the company with proof of payment for
all labor, pipe and other materials expended and used in construction of the
project.
      (2)   When the extension is placed in service, it shall become the
property of the company, and the company shall thereafter assume the
responsibility for the operation and maintenance of the same.
      (3)   Should the company and the developer or other party be satisfied
that the proposed extension will enable others situated along such extension to
obtain water service not otherwise available from the system, the company, at
the request of the developer or other party, shall enter into an agreement
establishing a per foot frontage connection charge to be collected from every
applicant for water service having frontage along such extension and desiring
to connect such extension, which charge shall be computed, collected and
disbursed as follows:
         A.   The per foot frontage connection charge shall be computed by
dividing the developer's of other party's total cost of such extension by the
total number of feet or private property frontage, including property owned by
the developer or other party fronting such extension, but not including any
frontage for which water service has been or may become available from a
standard main of the system;
         B.   Each applicant for water service having frontage along such
extension, which frontage was taken into consideration in computing the per
foot frontage connection charge, shall pay to the company, for the account of
the developer or other party, at the time of making application for service, a
connection charge computed by multiplying the per foot frontage charge by the
total front footage of the applicant's lot or parcel of land which is to
receive water service;
         C.   All such connection charges collected by the company shall be
paid over to the developer or other party as collected. When the total of the
charges collected and paid over to the developer or other party equals the
total cost of construction, without interest, or after 15 years from the date
of the agreement with the developer or other party, whichever event first
occurs, no further connection charges shall be made by the company, and at that
time the company shall be fully relieved of its obligation under the agreement;
and
         D.   Upon the initial application for water service for any lot,
parcel of land, unit or facility abutting the main extension, the applicant
shall pay to the company the appropriate related facilities fee.
(Ord. 87-O-10, passed 4-6-1987)
   (f)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, any provision of
§ 3-7 of the Consumers Ohio Water Company Master Tariff P.U.C.O. No. 2 and any
provision of the Ohio Administrative Code rules regarding water main
extensions, including, but not limited to, §§ 4901:1-15-32 and 4901:1-15-33 of
the Ohio Administrative Code:
      (1)   The company, if it so desires, upon the approval by the city, may
construct a water main which will enable parties situated along such main to
obtain water service not otherwise available from the system. The company shall
establish either a lot connection charge or a per foot frontage connection
charge to be collected from each applicant for water service having a frontage
along such main connecting into such main, which charge shall be computed and
collected as follows.
         A.   Lot connection method.
            1.   The lot connection charge shall be computed by taking the
company's total cost of such main if such main is of eight-inch pipe or smaller
or, if such main is larger than eight-inch pipe, then by the estimated cost of
a main of eight-inch pipe constructed under the same conditions and dividing
such cost by the total number of actual and potential lots (receiving service
from the main), but not including any lots for which water service has been or
may become available from an existing main of the system.
            2.   Each applicant for water service situated along such main,
which lots and potential lots were taken into consideration in computing the
lot connection charge, shall pay to the company, at the time of making
application for service, a total lot connection charge computed by multiplying
the lot connection charge by the total number of actual and potential lots of
the parcel of land which are to receive water service.
         B.   Per foot frontage method.
            1.   The per foot frontage charge shall be computed by taking the
company's total cost of such main, if such main is of eight-inch pipe or
smaller, or, if such main is larger than eight-inch pipe, then by the estimated
cost of a main of eight-inch pipe constructed under the same conditions, and
dividing such cost by the total front footage of the lots capable of receiving
service from the extension, but not including any frontage for which water
service has been or may become available from an existing main of the system.
            2.   Each applicant for water service situated along such main,
which frontage was taken into consideration in computing the per foot frontage
charge, shall pay to the company, at the time of making application for
service, a total front footage charge computed by multiplying the per foot
frontage charge by the total foot frontage of the applicant's lot or parcel of
land which is to receive water service.
         C.   The method of calculating the connection charge shall be
determined by the company and approved by the Service Director.
         D.   Each applicant shall also pay a related facilities fee at the
time of making application for service.
      (2)   Residents of an existing residential street not having a water main
may apply to the company for a water main extension, and the company shall
install a new water main when:
         A.   A survey shows that a water main of sufficient size is available
for extension to the area desiring service.
         B.   The owners of at least 60 percent of the actual and potential
lots, or of the frontage abutting the proposed water main, have:
            1.   Signed an application for service and have agreed to connect
to the extension and take service upon its completion.
            2.   Paid, in advance, a lot connection charge or a per foot
frontage charge. The method to be used to calculate the charge shall be
determined in subsection (f)(1)C. hereof, and the amount of the charge shall be
computed as set forth in either subsection (f)(1)A. or subsection (f)(1)B.
hereof.
            3.   Paid, in advance, a related facilities fee.
         C.   The length of the proposed water main does not exceed 1,000 feet.
If the length of the proposed water main exceeds 1,000 feet, the company may
construct the proposed water main in phases. The timetable for the water main
construction may extend beyond one year for large (greater than 1,000 feet)
projects.
      (3)   The company will make no refunds of contributions in aid of
construction or for related facilities charges relative to the extension of any
water main extension constructed after the date of this subsection, except for
advances in excess of actual costs and except as set forth in paragraph (f)(4)
hereof.
      (4)   When in the past the company has installed water main extensions
under the provisions of previous contracts with the city and/or regulations of
the Public Utilities Commission of Ohio, and has accepted certain deposits on
such water main extensions which are subject to refund under the provisions of
such contract, the company shall be required to continue to make such a refund
for the term of such contract.
      (5)   Provisions of the Consumers Ohio Water Company Master Tariff
P.U.C.O. No. 2, § 3-7, and the regulations described therein which are not in
conflict with this subsection, shall continue to apply.
(Ord. 98-O-52, passed 8-31-1998)
   (g)   No extension of a main shall be made until the grade of the street or
road has been legally fixed by the city and until the surface thereof is within
one foot of such grade.
   (h)   As used in this section, "related facilities fee", "frontage charge",
"estimated cost", "cost estimate", "estimated project cost", "cost",
"construction cost", "connection charge", "charge", "total cost" and "pipeline
charge," including any terms of similar import or meaning, regardless of how
modified by adjectives, phrases or other terms, shall exclude any consideration
of the tax imposed on advances and contributions in aid of construction by §
118 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, being U.S.C. Title 26, or any similar
provision enacted hereafter, and shall exclude any consideration of the impact
of any such tax.
   (i)   Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this chapter or
in Master Tariff P.U.C.O. No. 1, and except as set forth in subsection (e)
hereof, there shall be no refund made relative to the extension of any
distribution main constructed after January 5, 1984. The company shall continue
to make the charges and refunds authorized under prior tariffs for mains which
were constructed pursuant to these tariffs.
   (j)   Related facilities charges, when required to be paid pursuant to this
chapter, shall be as stated in the Fee Schedule in §
236.07 of the City of Kirtland Codified Ordinances.
(Ord. 87-O-30, passed 4-6-1987; Am. Ord. 17-O-20, passed 7-3-2017)
§ 1040.09  OWNERSHIP OF FACILITIES.
   Water mains, appurtenances and waterworks facilities heretofore or hereafter
constructed by the Ohio Water Service Company shall be the property of the
company. The company shall require that the title to mains, appurtenances and
waterworks facilities hereafter constructed by third parties be conveyed to the
company as a condition of the company's serving and maintaining them.
(Ord. 85-O-32, passed 5-6-1985)
§ 1040.10  BOND.
   The Ohio Water Service Company shall be exempt from posting any improvement
bond or making any other like deposit with the city, other than a deposit of
two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500) covering house connections.
(Ord. 83-O-71, passed 12-5-1983)
§ 1040.11  TAX INCREASES AND DECREASES.
   If the state levies, assesses or imposes any additional excise tax, or
increases any excise tax presently payable by the Ohio Water Service Company
during the period which this chapter is in force, then the rates fixed in this
chapter shall be so increased by the company, by filing a new schedule, as to
provide sufficient additional revenue to cover such new or additional tax. If
there is a decrease in any tax levied, assessed or imposed against the company
by the state during the period which this chapter is in force, then the rates
fixed in this chapter shall be so decreased by the company, by filing a new
schedule, so as to reflect the decrease.
(Ord. 83-O-71. Passed 12-5-83.)
§ 1040.12  SERVICE TO ADJACENT MUNICIPALITIES.
   The city shall not interfere with the Ohio Water Service Company using mains
now located within the city to furnish a supply of water to the Village of
Waite Hill or to other adjacent areas. If the company finds it necessary to
construct transmission mains, or other transmission facilities inside the city
in order to serve areas adjacent to or beyond the city, the company shall first
submit the plans and specifications for such mains or facilities to the city
for approval. The city shall grant its approval if its professional engineer is
satisfied that construction pursuant to the submitted plans and specifications
will result in the least amount of disruption and inconvenience to the city and
its residents commensurate with the reasonable cost of such construction.
(Ord. 83-O-71, passed 12-5-1983)
§ 1040.13  COOPERATION BY CITY.
   The city shall cooperate with and assist the Ohio Water Service Company in
obtaining any governmental permits, approvals or authorizations required in
connection with the construction or operation of any mains, appurtenances or
waterworks facilities which hereafter may be built by the company to provide
service in the city.
(Ord. 83-O-71, passed 12-5-1983)
§ 1040.14  RELOCATION OF FACILITIES.
   Should the city, or any public authority or agency acting with the consent
of the city, require the relocation of any mains, appurtenances or waterworks
facilities through which the Ohio Water Service Company is furnishing service
in the city, in order to accommodate a change of the grade, widening or
relocation of a street or highway, or the construction of storm or sanitary
sewers, the company shall make all necessary relocations without delay, and the
company shall pay and hold the city harmless for all expenses incurred by the
company so doing.
(Ord. 83-O-71, passed 12-5-1983)
§ 1040.15  NONLIABILITY OF CITY.
   (a)   The Ohio Water Service Company shall hold the city harmless from all
claims for damages arising out of acts or the failure to act of the company,
its agents or employees, in the construction, maintenance and/or operation of
water mains, appurtenances and waterworks facilities.
   (b)   The Ohio Water Service Company, its successors and assigns, hereby
releases and forever discharges the city from any and all claims, demands,
costs, expenses, actions or causes of actions arising from any act, occurrence
or obligation pursuant to § 11 of Ord. 70-O-9, passed February 23, 1970, on the
part of the city, or that may be hereafter sustained by the company as a
consequence of such section, including, but not limited to, the releasing of
the city from all liability and responsibility to pay expenses to the company
for the cost of relocating the water mains, appurtenances and waterworks
facilities to accommodate the widening of State Route 306 within the city.
(Ord. 83-O-71, passed 12-5-1983)
§ 1040.16  TRANSFERS OF INTEREST IN FRANCHISE OR FACILITIES.
   The Ohio Water Service Company shall not assign, lease, sublet or transfer
the franchise granted to it under this chapter, whether in whole or in part, in
any manner, nor shall any title thereto, either legal or equitable, or any
right or interest in the mains, appurtenances and waterworks facilities located
within the city pass to or vest in any other person, company or entity, either
by act of the company or by operation of law, without the consent of the city.
However, nothing in this section shall be deemed to prohibit the company from
using the franchise agreement, water mains, appurtenances and waterworks
facilities as collateral or a pledge, and nothing shall prohibit the company
from placing a mortgage or security agreement on such mains, appurtenances and
waterworks facilities located within the city, for financing purposes or
otherwise.
(Ord. 83-O-71, passed 12-5-1983)
§ 1040.17  EFFECTIVE PERIOD OF FRANCHISE.
   The franchise granted to the Ohio Water Service Company by the city under
this chapter, and the other provisions of this chapter, shall remain in effect
until February 23, 1990, and thereafter from year to year unless terminated by
either party upon giving six months prior written notice to the other party.
(Ord. 83-O-71, passed 12-5-1983)
CHAPTER 1042:  SEWERS AND PRIVATE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS
Section
Editor's note:
   Res. 97-R-30, passed May 19, 1997, authorized the Board of Lake County
Commissioners to include within the Greater Mentor Sewer District all lands
within the City of Kirtland owned by the Lakeland Community College District.
Copies of this resolution may be obtained, at cost, from the Clerk of Council.
1042.01   Payment of rental charges; delinquency.
1042.02   Establishment of rental charges.
1042.03   Tap-ins; permit required; fees.
1042.04   Inclusion of city in Willoughby-Mentor Sewer District. (Repealed)
1042.045   Templeview Sewer District.
1042.047   Connection to Templeview sanitary sewer system required. (Repealed)
1042.05   Septic tanks.
1042.06   Clean water connections prohibited.
1042.07   Non-basement service policy.
1042.08   Connection to sanitary sewer system required.
1042.99   Penalty.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Compulsory sewer connections - see Ohio R.C. 729.06
   Sewerage rates - see Ohio R.C. 729.49, 729.52
   Management and control of sewerage system - see Ohio R.C. 729.50
   Regulations to control house sewers and connections - see Ohio R.C. 799.51
   Untreated sewage - see Ohio R.C. 6111.40
   Sewage Treatment Division - see ADM.
238.02
   Prosecutions for theft of utilities - see GEN. OFF.
642.26
   Relocation and protection of sewers - see B. & H.
1442.11
§ 1042.01  PAYMENT OF RENTAL CHARGES; DELINQUENCY.
   (a)   The Director of Public Service shall cause sewer rental charges to be
collected from every person whose premises are served by a sanitary sewerage
system which is within the jurisdiction of the Sewage Treatment Division,
whether or not the premises have an individual connection.
   (b)   Charges for sewerage service shall be made each quarter of the
calendar year. All bills are to be rendered as of the first day of the quarter
for which charges are made and shall be due and payable on the date of
rendition thereof.
   (c)   If the charges for sewerage service are not paid within 30 days after
rendition of the bill for such service, there shall be added to such quarterly
charge an amount equal to five percent per month on the unpaid balance of that
quarterly charge to a maximum amount of 25 percent of the quarterly charge.
   (d)   The Director of Finance shall collect such unpaid charges in the same
manner other municipal taxes are collected as provided by law, including, but
not limited to, certification of charges for delinquent accounts to the County
Auditor for placement on tax bills. As used in this section, "delinquent
accounts" are those which remain due and unpaid for 30 days.
   (e)   Funds collected under this chapter shall be administered by the
Director of Finance and placed in a special account or accounts for particular
purposes.
   (f)   The Director of Public Service shall appoint the necessary personnel
required to collect all sanitary sewer charges.
(Ord. 83-O-89, passed 1-16-1984)
§ 1042.02  ESTABLISHMENT OF RENTAL CHARGES.
   (a)   Rates for premises served by a sanitary sewerage system which is
within the jurisdiction of the Sewage Treatment Division shall be determined by
the Public Utilities Commission of the city, established in
Chapter 280 of the Administration Code.
   (b)   Such rates shall be sufficient to pay all operating, maintenance,
administrative and capital improvement costs. Costs and expenses to be
collected shall include expenditures made by the city on sewage treatment
systems since October 1, 1975. When the commission has established a rate
schedule, such rates shall not be subject to collection until they are approved
and adopted by a resolution of Council. The commission shall adjust such rates
from time to time, as required, but no change shall become effective until
approved by Council.
(Ord. 83-O-74, passed 12-19-1983)
§ 1042.03  TAP-INS; PERMIT REQUIRED; FEES.
   (a)   No person shall tap into an existing sanitary sewerage package plant
facility of the city without first obtaining a tap-in permit from the city.
   (b)   The minimum fee per home site for such permit shall be in accordance
with the fees as stated in the Fee Schedule in §
236.07 of the City of Kirtland Codified Ordinances.
   (c)   If any tap-in requires the approval of drawings by the City Engineer,
or a change in the existing sanitary sewerage package plant facility or the
sewage lines themselves, then in addition to the minimum fee as provided in
subsection (b) hereof, the applicant shall be charged the actual cost incurred
by the city for the changes to the sanitary sewerage facility, including the
engineering fees.
   (d)   The permit shall be issued by the Zoning Inspector. The actual tap-in
shall not be made until the work is inspected and/or approved by the City
Engineer.
(Ord. 85-O-42, passed 6-3-1985; Am. Ord. 17-O-20, passed 7-3-2017)
§ 1042.04  INCLUSION OF CITY IN WILLOUGHBY-MENTOR SEWER DISTRICT.(Repealed)
Editor's note:
   Section
1042.04 was repealed by Ord. 82-O-73, passed September 20, 1982.
§ 1042.045  TEMPLEVIEW SEWER DISTRICT.
   A sanitary sewer district, to be known as Templeview Sewer District,
comprising those parcels of real property directly adjacent to and located on
Charlesderry, Glen Park and North Star Streets within the city, is hereby
established. The purpose of this District shall be to serve those residents of
the Templeview Subdivision and improve the water quality for the Chagrin River
Basin.
(Res. 96-R-70, passed 12-2-1996)
§ 1042.047  CONNECTION TO TEMPLEVIEW SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM REQUIRED.
(Repealed)
Editor’s note:
   Section 1042.047 was repealed by Ord. 12-O-70, passed January 24, 2013.
§ 1042.05  SEPTIC TANKS.
   (a)   No person shall maintain a septic system or a similar device in the
city so as to create a nuisance or condition detrimental to the health, safety
or well being of a person or so as to pollute the environment.
   (b)   The owner, agent, lessee, tenant or occupant who owns, possesses or
uses such a septic tank or similar device in the city shall have the septic
tank or similar device cleaned and pumped not less than once every three years.
   (c)   This section is not intended to replace or usurp any regulation,
legislation or duty of the County Health Department or any other governmental
authority but is intended to act as an extension thereof.
(Ord. 97-O-31, passed 6-2-1997)
§ 1042.06  CLEAN WATER CONNECTIONS PROHIBITED.
   (a)   No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, clean water sump
pumps, exterior foundation drains, area-way drains or other sources of surface
run-off or ground water to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is
connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.
   (b)   No person shall discharge, or cause or allow to be discharged, any
stormwater, surface water, roof run-off or subsurface drainage to any sanitary
sewer.
   (c)   No person owning or occupying property abutting any street or other
public way shall hereafter allow to remain, construct or maintain any
connection with a sanitary sewer running from the premises and used for storm
drainage purposes. Any such usage is hereby declared to be a public nuisance
and is hereby ordered to be abated.
(Ord. 99-O-42, passed 5-17-1999)
§ 1042.07  NON-BASEMENT SERVICE POLICY.
   It is declared to be the policy of the city that any city project, work or
service, including but not limited to, the design, installation and
construction of a sanitary sewer system, or any other act or deed relating to
or associated with the providing of sanitary sewer service within the city may
not include "basement service".
(Ord. 10-O-4, passed 2-17-2010)
§ 1042.08  CONNECTION TO SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM REQUIRED.
   (a)   No person, firm or corporation shall fail, refuse or neglect to
connect any structure or use of a premises that produces or generates sewage as
the same is defined in Ohio Administrative Code § 3701-29-01 (AA) or the
Service Director has determined is likely to generate or produce sewage within
the city to a sanitary sewerage collection system available for service to the
lot or parcel on which such structure is located or situated, within a period
of 90 days from receipt of notice from the Director of Public Service to such
person, firm or corporation ordering such connection, or within one year of
completion of the sanitary sewerage facilities, whichever occurs sooner, unless
a specific exemption by reason of undue hardship or exceptional circumstances
is granted by the Board of Zoning Appeals and confirmed by Council. Any
existing sewage treatment facilities on the property shall be properly
abandoned in compliance with Lake County General Health District regulations or
Ohio EPA requirements, whichever is applicable.
   (b)   Whenever a sanitary sewer is available for connection to any lot or
parcel of land, the Director of Public Service shall cause written notice to be
given to the owner of such lot or parcel of land to which such connections are
to be made. The notice under this section shall be served by the Clerk of
Council upon the owners of the lots or parcels of land to which such connection
is to be made, by certified mail addressed to such owner at his or her last
known address, or to the address to which tax bills are sent. If it appears by
the return of the certified mail notice, or otherwise, that one or more of such
owners cannot be found, such owners shall be served by publication of the
notice once in a newspaper of general circulation within the city. The returned
receipt for notice forwarded by certified mail, accepted by the addressee or
anyone purporting to act for them, shall be prima-facie evidence of the service
of notice under this section. Such connection shall be installed by the date
specified by the notice. In addition to the penalties set forth in §
1042.99, if said connections are not installed by the time set forth in such
notice, the work may be done by the municipal corporation and/or the
utilization of any sewage disposal system thereon, enjoined until such time as
connection has been accomplished. In the case of the municipal corporation
performing the work, the cost thereof together with a forfeiture of five
percent shall be assessed against the lots and lands for which such connections
are made.
(Ord. 12-O-70, passed 1-24-2013)
§ 1042.99  PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than one hundred fifty dollars
($150.00) for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each
day a violation or noncompliance continues to exist beyond a period of 30 days
following the original conviction.
CHAPTER 1043:  ILLICIT DISCHARGE AND ILLEGAL CONNECTION CONTROL
Section
1043.01   Purpose and scope.
1043.02   Applicability.
1043.03   Definitions.
1043.04   Disclaimer of liability.
1043.05   Conflicts, severability, nuisances and responsibility.
1043.06   Responsibility for administration.
1043.07   Discharge and connection prohibitions.
1043.08   Monitoring of illicit discharges and illegal connections.
1043.09   Enforcement.
1043.10   Remedies not exclusive.
1043.99   Penalty.
§ 1043.01  PURPOSE AND SCOPE.
   The purpose of this regulation is to provide for the health, safety, and
general welfare of the citizens of Kirtland through the regulation of illicit
discharges to the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4). This regulation
establishes methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the MS4
in order to comply with requirements of the National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NPDES) permit process as required by the Ohio Environmental
Protection Agency (Ohio EPA). The objectives of this regulation are:
   (a)   To prohibit illicit discharges and illegal connections to the MS4.
   (b)   To establish legal authority to carry out inspections, monitoring
procedures, and enforcement actions necessary to ensure compliance with this
regulation.
(Ord. 11-O-2, passed 2-23-2011)
§ 1043.02  APPLICABILITY.
   This regulation shall apply to all residential, commercial, industrial, or
institutional facilities responsible for discharges to the MS4 and on any lands
in Kirtland, except for those discharges generated by the activities detailed
in §
1043.07(a)(1) to (a)(3).
(Ord. 11-O-2, passed 2-23-2011)
§ 1043.03  DEFINITIONS.
   The words and terms used in this regulation, unless otherwise expressly
stated, shall have the following meaning:
   (a)   Best management practices (BMPs).  "Best management practices (BMPs)"
means schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, general good house
keeping practices, pollution prevention and educational practices, maintenance
procedures, and other management practices to prevent or reduce the discharge
of pollutants to stormwater. BMPs also include treatment practices, operating
procedures, and practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or
water disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage.
   (b)   Environmental Protection Agency or United States Environmental
Protection Agency (USEPA). "Environmental Protection Agency or United States
Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA)" means the United States Environmental
Protection Agency, including but not limited to the Ohio Environmental
Protection Agency (Ohio EPA), or any duly authorized official of said agency.
   (c)   Floatable material.  "Floatable material" in general this term means
any foreign matter that may float or remain suspended in the water column, and
includes but is not limited to, plastic, aluminum cans, wood products, bottles,
and paper products.
   (d)   Hazardous material.  "Hazardous material" means any material including
any substance, waste, or combination thereof, which because of its quantity,
concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause,
or significantly contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to
human health, safety, property, or the environment when improperly treated,
stored, transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed.
   (e)   Illicit discharge.  "Illicit discharge" as defined at 40 C.F.R. §
122.26 (b)(2) means any discharge to an MS4 that is not composed entirely of
stormwater, except for those discharges to an MS4 pursuant to a NPDES permit or
noted in §
1043.07.
   (f)   Illegal connection.  "Illegal connection" means any drain or
conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, that allows an illicit
discharge to enter the MS4.
   (g)   Kirtland.  "Kirtland" means the City of Kirtland, its designated
representatives, boards, or commissions, or assigns.
   (h)   Municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4).  "Municipal separate
storm sewer system (MS4)" as defined at 40 C.F.R. § 122.26 (b)(8), municipal
separate storm sewer system means a conveyance or system of conveyances
(including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs,
gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm drains):
      (1)   Owned or operated by a state, city, town, borough, county, parish,
district, municipality, township, county, district, association, or other
public body (created by or pursuant to state law) having jurisdiction over
sewage, industrial wastes, including special districts under state law such as
a sewer district, or similar entity, or an Indian tribe or an authorized Indian
tribal organization, or a designated and approved management agency under
section 208 of the Clean Water Act that discharges to waters of the United
States;
      (2)   Designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater;
      (3)   Which is not a combined sewer; and
      (4)   Which is not part of a publicly owned treatment works (POTW) as
defined at 40 C.F.R. § 122.2.
   (i)   National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) stormwater
discharge permit. "National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES)
stormwater discharge permit" means a permit issued by the EPA (or by a state
under authority delegated pursuant to 33 USC § 1342(b)) that authorizes the
discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is
applicable on an individual, group, or general area-wide basis.
   (j)   Off-lot discharging home sewage treatment system.  "Off-lot
discharging home sewage treatment system" means a system designed to treat home
sewage on-site and discharges treated wastewater effluent off the property into
a stormwater or surface water conveyance or system.
   (k)   Owner/operator.  "Owner/operator" means any individual, association,
organization, partnership, firm, corporation or other entity recognized by law
and acting as either the owner or on the owner's behalf.
   (l)   Pollutant.  "Pollutant" means anything that causes or contributes to
pollution. Pollutants may include, but are not limited to, paints, varnishes,
solvents, oil and other automotive fluids, non-hazardous liquid and solid
wastes, yard wastes, refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter or other discarded or
abandoned objects, floatable materials, pesticides, herbicides, fertilizers,
hazardous materials, wastes, sewage, dissolved and particulate metals, animal
wastes, residues that result from constructing a structure, and noxious or
offensive matter of any kind.
   (m)   Stormwater.  "Stormwater" means any surface flow, runoff, and drainage
consisting entirely of water from any form of natural precipitation, and
resulting from such precipitation.
   (n)   Wastewater.  "Wastewater" means the combination of the liquid and
water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants,
and institutions.
(Ord. 11-O-2, passed 2-23-2011)
§ 1043.04  DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   Compliance with the provisions of this regulation shall not relieve any
person from responsibility for damage to any person otherwise imposed by law.
The provisions of this regulation are promulgated to promote the health,
safety, and welfare of the public and are not designed for the benefit of any
individual or for the benefit of any particular parcel of property.
(Ord. 11-O-2, passed 2-23-2011)
§ 1043.05  CONFLICTS, SEVERABILITY, NUISANCES AND RESPONSIBILITY.
   (a)   Where this regulation is in conflict with other provisions of law or
ordinance, the most restrictive provisions, as determined by Kirtland, shall
prevail.
   (b)   If any clause, section, or provision of this regulation is declared
invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, the validity
of the remainder shall not be affected thereby.
   (c)   This regulation shall not be construed as authorizing any person to
maintain a nuisance on their property, and compliance with the provisions of
this regulation shall not be a defense in any action to abate such a nuisance.
   (d)   Failure of Kirtland to observe or recognize hazardous or unsightly
conditions or to recommend corrective measures shall not relieve the site owner
from the responsibility for the condition or damage resulting therefrom, and
shall not result in Kirtland, its officers, employees, or agents being
responsible for any condition or damage resulting therefrom.
(Ord. 11-O-2, passed 2-23-2011)
§ 1043.06  RESPONSIBILITY FOR ADMINISTRATION.
   Kirtland and/or the Lake County Stormwater Management Department shall
administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this regulation.
(Ord. 11-O-2, passed 2-23-2011)
§ 1043.07  DISCHARGE AND CONNECTION PROHIBITIONS.
   (a)   Prohibition of illicit discharges.  No person shall discharge, or
cause to be discharged, an illicit discharge into the MS4. The commencement,
conduct, or continuance of any illicit discharge to the MS4 is prohibited
except as described below:
      (1)   Water line flushing; landscape irrigation; diverted stream flows;
rising ground waters; uncontaminated ground water infiltration; uncontaminated
pumped ground water; discharges from potable water sources; foundation drains;
air conditioning condensate; irrigation water; springs; water from crawl space
pumps; footing drains; lawn watering; individual residential car washing;
charity car washes approved by Kirtland, residential radiator flushing onto
grass, house washing, flows from riparian habitats and wetlands; dechlorinated
swimming pool discharges; street wash water; and discharges or flows from fire
fighting activities. These discharges are exempt until such time as they are
determined by Kirtland to be significant contributors of pollutants to the MS4.
      (2)   Discharges specified in writing by Kirtland as being necessary to
protect public health and safety.
      (3)   Discharges from off-lot discharging home sewage treatment systems
permitted by the Lake County Board of Health for the purpose of discharging
treated sewage effluent in accordance with Ohio Administrative Code 3701-29, or
other applicable Lake County Board of Health regulations, until such time as
the Ohio Environmental Protection Agency issues an NPDES permitting mechanism
for household sewage treatment systems existing prior to January 1, 2007. These
discharges are exempt unless such discharges are deemed to be creating a public
health nuisance by the Lake County Board of Health.
         In compliance with the Kirtland Stormwater Management Program,
discharges from all off-lot discharging home sewage treatment systems must
either be eliminated or have coverage under an appropriate NPDES permit issued
and approved by the Ohio Environmental Protection Agency. When such permit
coverage is available, discharges from off-lot discharging home sewage
treatment systems will no longer be exempt from the requirements of this
regulation.
   (b)   Prohibition of illegal connections. The construction, use,
maintenance, or continued existence of illegal connections to the MS4 is
prohibited.
      (1)   This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illegal
connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was
permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of
connection.
      (2)   A person is considered to be in violation of this regulation if the
person connects a line conveying illicit discharges to the MS4, or allows such
a connection to continue.
(Ord. 11-O-2, passed 2-23-2011)
§ 1043.08  MONITORING OF ILLICIT DISCHARGES AND ILLEGAL CONNECTIONS.
   (a)   Establishment of an illicit discharge and illegal connection
monitoring program. Kirtland shall establish a program to detect and eliminate
illicit discharges and illegal connections to the MS4. This program shall
include the mapping of the MS4, including MS4 outfalls and home sewage
treatment systems; the routine inspection of stormwater outfalls to the MS4,
and the systematic investigation of potential residential, commercial,
industrial, and institutional facilities for the sources of any dry weather
flows found as the result of these inspections.
   (b)   Inspection of residential, commercial, industrial, or institutional
facilities.
      (1)   Kirtland shall be permitted to enter and inspect facilities subject
to this regulation as often as may be necessary to determine compliance with
this regulation.
      (2)   Kirtland shall have the right to set up at facilities subject to
this regulation such devices as are necessary to conduct monitoring and/or
sampling of the facility's stormwater discharge, as determined by Kirtland.
      (3)   Kirtland shall have the right to require the facility owner/
operator to install monitoring equipment as necessary. This sampling and
monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in safe and proper
operating condition by the facility owner/operator at the owner/operator's
expense. All devices used to measure stormwater flow and quality shall be
calibrated by Kirtland to ensure their accuracy.
      (4)   Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and reasonable
access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed
by the facility's owner/operator at the written or oral request of Kirtland and
shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the
facility owner/operator.
      (5)   Unreasonable delays in allowing Kirtland access to a facility
subject to this regulation for the purposes of illicit discharge inspection is
a violation of this regulation.
      (6)   If Kirtland is refused access to any part of the facility from
which stormwater is discharged, and Kirtland demonstrates probable cause to
believe that there may be a violation of this regulation, or that there is a
need to inspect and/or sample as part of an inspection and sampling program
designed to verify compliance with this regulation or any order issued
hereunder, or to protect the public health, safety, and welfare, Kirtland may
seek issuance of a search warrant, civil remedies including but not limited to
injunctive relief, and/or criminal remedies from any court of appropriate
jurisdiction.
      (7)   Any costs associated with these inspections shall be assessed to
the facility owner/operator.
(Ord. 11-O-2, passed 2-23-2011)
§ 1043.09  ENFORCEMENT.
   (a)   Notice of violation. When Kirtland finds that a person has violated a
prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this regulation, Kirtland may
order compliance by written notice of violation. Such notice must specify the
violation and shall be hand delivered, and/or sent by registered mail, to the
owner/operator of the facility. Such notice may require the following actions:
      (1)   The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting;
      (2)   The elimination of illicit discharges or illegal connections;
      (3)   That violating discharges, practices, or operations cease and
desist;
      (4)   The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or
contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property; or
      (5)   The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs.
   (b)   If abatement of a violation and/or restoration of affected property is
required, the notice of violation shall set forth a deadline within which such
remediation or restoration must be completed. Said notice shall further advise
that, should the facility owner/operator fail to remediate or restore within
the established deadline, a legal action for enforcement may be initiated.
   (c)   Any person receiving a notice of violation must meet compliance
standards within the time established in the notice of violation.
   (d)   Administrative hearing. If the violation has not been corrected
pursuant to the requirements set forth in the notice of violation, Kirtland
shall schedule an administrative hearing by the Planning and Zoning Commission
to determine reasons for non-compliance and to determine the next enforcement
activity. Notice of the administrative hearing shall be hand delivered and/or
sent registered mail.
   (e)   Injunctive relief. It shall be unlawful for any owner/operator to
violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this
regulation pursuant to Ohio R.C. 3709.211. If an owner/operator has violated or
continues to violate the provisions of this regulation, Kirtland may petition
for a preliminary or permanent injunction restraining the owner/operator from
activities that would create further violations or compelling the owner/
operator to perform abatement or remediation of the violation.
(Ord. 11-O-2, passed 2-23-2011)
§ 1043.10  REMEDIES NOT EXCLUSIVE.
   The remedies listed in this regulation are not exclusive of any other
remedies available under any applicable federal, state or local law and it is
in the discretion of Kirtland to seek cumulative remedies.
(Ord. 11-O-2, passed 2-23-2011)
§ 1043.99  PENALTY.
   (a)   Any person, firm, entity or corporation; including but not limited to,
the site owner, his agents and assigns, occupant, property manager, and any
contractor or subcontractor who violates or fails to comply with any provision
of this regulation is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree and shall be
fined no more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisoned for no more
than 60 days, or both, for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed each day during or on which a violation or noncompliance occurs or
continues.
   (b)   The imposition of any other penalties provided herein shall not
preclude Kirtland instituting an appropriate action or proceeding in a court of
proper jurisdiction to prevent an unlawful development, or to restrain,
correct, or abate a violation, or to require compliance with the provisions of
this regulation or other applicable laws, ordinances, rules, or regulations, or
the orders of Kirtland.
(Ord. 11-O-2, passed 2-23-2011)
CHAPTER 1044:  GAS
Section
Editor's note:
   There are no sections in
Chapter 1044. This chapter has been established to provide a place for cross
references and any future legislation.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Regulation of electricity, gas and water rates - see Ohio R.C. 743.26,
743.28, 4909.34 et seq.
   Gas contract restrictions - see Ohio R.C. 743.33
   Contract for gas - see Ohio R.C. 743.38
   Compulsory gas connections - see Ohio R.C. 743.37
   Gas, electric and water companies - see Ohio R.C. Ch. 4933
   Prosecutions for theft of utilities - see GEN. OFF.
642.26
CHAPTER 1046:  ELECTRICITY
Section
Editor's note:
   Ord. 00-O-90, passed December 18, 2000, adopted the Plan of Operation and
Governance for the electricity aggregation program for the city. Copies of such
ordinance and of the Plan may be obtained, at cost, from the Clerk of Council.
   There are no sections in
Chapter 1046. This chapter has been established to provide a place for cross
references and any future legislation.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Regulation of electricity, gas and water rates - see Ohio R.C. 743.26,
743.28, 4909.34 et seq.
   Contracts for electricity - see Ohio R.C. 743.38, 4933.04
   Power to require permit for facility construction or location - see Ohio
R.C. 4905.65
   Gas, electric and water companies - see Ohio R.C. Ch. 4933
   Prosecutions for theft of utilities - see GEN. OFF.
642.26
   Interference with wires and cables when moving buildings - see B. & H.
1448.06
TITLE SIX - OTHER PUBLIC SERVICES
CHAPTER 1060:  GARBAGE AND RUBBISH COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL
Section
Editor's note:
   Res. 96-R-66, passed November 18, 1996, approved the Solid Waste Management
Plan for the Lake County Solid Waste Management District. Copies of such
resolution and of such Plan may be obtained, at cost, from the Clerk of
Council.
   The city, from time to time and in accordance with Ohio R.C. 3734.57,
approves the fee schedule for the disposal of solid waste as proposed by the
Solid Waste Management Policy Committee for the Lake County Solid Waste
Management District. Copies of the most recent fee schedule may be obtained, at
cost, from the Clerk of Council.
1060.01   Inclusion in County Refuse District; decision to use services.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Collection and disposal of garbage - see Ohio R.C. 715.43, 717.01
   Employment of scavengers - see Ohio R.C. 3707.39
   Disposal and transportation on public ways - see Ohio R.C. 3767.201 et seq.
   Vehicle loads dropping, sifting and leaking - see TRAF.
440.06
   Littering - see GEN. OFF.
660.03
   Filthy accumulations - see GEN. OFF.
660.04
   Junk vehicles - see GEN. OFF.
660.07
§ 1060.01  INCLUSION IN COUNTY REFUSE DISTRICT; DECISION TO USE SERVICES.
   (a)   Council hereby consents to the inclusion in the County Garbage and
Refuse District No. 1 of all of the lots and lands in the city and requests
that the Board of County Commissioners revise the boundaries of such District
to include such lots and lands.
   (b)   Council shall determine whether or not it will contract to use any
disposal facility constructed or otherwise acquired to service such District
when the amount of charges for such use can be ascertained.
(Res. 78-R-96, passed 8-21-1978)
CHAPTER 1062:  CEMETERIES
Section
1062.01   Services and administration.
1062.02   Fees.
1062.03   Planting and decorating of graves and lots.
1062.99   Penalty.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Burials may be prohibited - see Ohio R.C. 759.05
   Management and control of cemeteries - see Ohio R.C. 759.09
   Union cemeteries - see Ohio R.C. 759.27 et seq.
   Burial permits - see Ohio R.C. 3705.24 et seq.
   Burial of indigent persons - see Ohio R.C. 5101.521
§ 1062.01  SERVICES AND ADMINISTRATION.
   (a)   The Department of Public Service shall provide services for grave
digging and the removal of excess dirt. The Department shall also provide snow
plowing services for the various cemeteries.
   (b)   The placing and maintaining of headstones and monuments shall be in
accordance with the rules  and regulations adopted by the Mayor, concerning the
operation and maintenance of the cemetery, and based upon recommendations of
the Cemetery Sexton.
   (c)   As requested by City Council, the Mayor shall present operating
budgets to be approved by Council, covering operation of the city cemeteries.
   (d)   The Director of Finance shall maintain a separate account covering
operation of the city cemeteries and shall act as the agent of the Mayor and
account for all funds received, disbursed or transferred.
(Ord. 97-O-16, passed 3-17-1997; Am. Ord. 15-O-22, passed 5-18-2015)
§ 1062.02  FEES.
   (a)   Fees for services of the cemeteries of the city, including, but not
limited to, foundation rates, resident grave sales, resident grave openings,
nonresident grave sales and nonresident grave openings, shall be determined by
resolution of Council after receiving the recommendation of the Mayor.
   (b)   The fees for services of the cemeteries of the city shall be as stated
in the Fee Schedule in §
236.07 of the City of Kirtland Codified Ordinances.
(Ord. 98-O-33, passed 4-20-1998; Am. Ord. 15-O-22, passed 5-18-2015; Am. Ord.
17-O-20, passed 7-3-2017)
§ 1062.03  PLANTING AND DECORATING OF GRAVES AND LOTS.
   The planting and decorating of graves and lots shall be in accordance with
the following rules.
   (a)   There shall be no planting of shrubs, trees, flowers or bushes of any
kind without the permission of the Cemetery Sexton.
   (b)   No glass blocks shall be used at any time of the year.
   (c)   All Memorial Day or summer flowers or decorations shall be removed
from cemetery grounds by October 15 of each year.
   (d)   Christmas decorations shall be removed from cemetery grounds by March
1 of each year.
   (e)   Easter and Passover flowers and decorations shall be removed within
two weeks following Easter and Passover.
   (f)   Neat artificial flowers may be used, but the right is reserved to
remove such flowers when they appear dirty, broken or uncared for.
   (g)   All potted plants, baskets or urns of flowers that are dead or dried
up from lack of water or neglect shall be removed.
   (h)   Cut flowers are permitted.
   (i)   Flower beds that are established or that have been in a cemetery for a
number of years shall be permitted to remain, but no new flower beds shall be
permitted.
   (j)   Neither the city nor any of its employees shall be responsible for
stolen or broken pots, urns, baskets or vases.
   (k)   During the grass growing season, wreaths, Styrofoam religious symbols,
shells, toys, metal designs, ornaments and statues are not permitted.
   (l)   The Sexton may remove all floral designs, flowers, weeds, trees,
shrubs, plants or herbage of any kind from a cemetery as soon as, in the
judgment of the Sexton, they become unsightly, dangerous, detrimental or
diseased or when they do not conform to the standards maintained.
   (m)   The Sexton shall not be responsible for frozen plants, pots or herbage
of any kind or for plantings damaged by the elements, thieves or other causes
beyond his or her control.
   (n)   The Sexton reserves the right to prevent the removal of flowers,
floral designs, trees, shrubs or herbage of any kind.
   (o)   The Sexton, and other employees of the city, as the case may be, shall
undertake to maintain, as may be practical, the planting of trees and shrubs to
preserve and maintain landscape features, but such persons shall not be
required to undertake and maintain individual plantings, urns or plants.
   (p)   Receptacles for waste material shall be located at convenient places
in a cemetery. The throwing of rubbish on drives and paths or on any part of
the grounds is prohibited.
   (q)   Persons visiting a cemetery or attending funerals are strictly
prohibited from picking flowers, wild or cultivated; from breaking or injuring
any tree, shrub or plant; and from writing upon, defacing or injuring any
memorial, fence or other structure on the cemetery grounds.
(Ord. 69-O-28, passed 4-8-1969)
§ 1062.99  PENALTY.
   Whoever violates §
1062.03 (q) by writing upon, or otherwise intentionally defacing or injuring
any memorial, fence, or other structure on the cemetery grounds shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor of the first degree as provided in §
698.02. Whoever violates any other provisions of this chapter is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than one hundred fifty dollars
($150.00) for each offense as provided in §
698.02. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on
which a violation occurs or continues.
(Ord. 15-O-22, passed 5-18-2015)
CHAPTER 1064:  ALARM SYSTEMS
Section
1064.01   Automatic dialing devices.
1064.02   Direct connection to Police or Fire Station.
1064.03   False alarms.
1064.04   Liability of city.
1064.05   Fees.
1064.99   Penalty.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Division of Police - see ADM.
Ch. 244
   Division of Fire - see ADM.
Ch. 246
   False alarms - see GEN. OFF.
648.08
   Early warning fire detection systems - see B. & H.
Ch. 1454
§ 1064.01  AUTOMATIC DIALING DEVICES.
   No person shall use or permit or cause to be used any telephone device or
telephone attachment that automatically dials or contacts the Police or Fire
Division with a mechanical or recorded message.
(Ord. 90-O-60, passed 9-4-1990)
§ 1064.02  DIRECT CONNECTION TO POLICE OR FIRE STATION.
   (a)   Upon proper application by any authorized person to connect installed
equipment from a business or other approved use to the Kirtland Police or Fire
Station to receive emergency alarms, the Mayor or an authorized representative
may issue a permit for such connection.
   (b)   Connection to the Police or Fire alarm panel as provided in subsection
(a) hereof shall be contingent upon the applicant having obtained permission
from the company that maintains the alarm panel in the Police or Fire Station
to make such connection. Permission shall not be denied, except as otherwise
provided herein, if the equipment is compatible, if charges are paid to the
company and if the installation is inspected and approved by the Chief of
Police or the Fire Chief or his or her authorized representative.
   (c)   The city will, within its capabilities, endeavor to accommodate every
reasonable application to the Police or Fire alarm panel as provided for in
subsections (a) and (b).
(Ord. 90-O-60, passed 9-4-1990)
§ 1064.03  FALSE ALARMS.
   (a)   As used in this section, "false alarm" means an emergency alarm
activated by inadvertence, negligence or unintentional acts to which the Police
or Fire Division responds, including malfunction of the alarm system. The
definition excludes alarms caused by malfunctions of the indicator at the
Police or Fire Station; malfunction, testing or repairing of telephone
equipment or lines; an attempted illegal entry of which there is visible
evidence; the user acting under a sincere belief that a need exists to call the
Police or Fire Division; and a call to the Police or Fire Division cancelling
the alarm prior to the arrival of the Police or Fire Division. If a doubt
exists as to the cause of a false alarm, the Chief of Police or the Fire Chief
shall resolve it in favor of the alarm user. Multiple alarms received before
the system can be deactivated within a reasonable period of time shall be
considered a single alarm.
   (b)   False alarm charges shall be assessed as follows. No charge shall be
made for the first and second false alarms annually or for a false alarm to
which there is no response by the Police or Fire Division. A charge as stated
in the Fee Schedule in §
236.07 of the City of Kirtland Codified Ordinances shall be made for the third
false alarm annually, and a charge as stated in the Fee Schedule in §
236.07 of the City of Kirtland Codified Ordinances shall be made for each
additional false alarm.
   (c)   False alarm charges shall apply whether the alarm is received from an
automatic dialing device, one connected directly to the Police or Fire Station
or any other alarm service that is utilized within the city.
   (d)   Any charge for a false alarm remaining unpaid for 30 days after the
date of the mailing of the invoice shall be turned over to the Law Director for
collection.
(Ord. 90-O-60, passed 9-4-1990; Am. Ord. 17-O-20, passed 7-3-2017)
§ 1064.04  LIABILITY OF CITY.
   The issuance, nonissuance or cancellation of any permit under this chapter,
and any other act or omission of the city and/or its agents and employees,
shall not constitute acceptance by the city of any liability whatsoever to
maintain any equipment, to answer alarms or to do anything else in connection
therewith. No person shall have any expectation or reliance upon this voluntary
service of the city, and the city's liability in contract, tort or otherwise
shall not exceed a return of the permit fee.
(Ord. 90-O-60, passed 9-4-1990)
§ 1064.05  FEES.
   Each private residence causing a burglary or fire monitoring device to be
installed or monitored by the city shall pay a rental fee as stated in the Fee
Schedule in §
236.07 of the City of Kirtland Codified Ordinances per month for each month
that the device is in use or intended to be in use. Any other user shall pay a
rental fee as stated in the Fee Schedule in §
236.07 of the City of Kirtland Codified Ordinances per month for each month
that the monitoring device is in use or is intended to be in use. Any part of a
calendar month shall constitute use for a full month.
(Ord. 90-O-60, passed 9-4-1990; Am. Ord. 17-O-20, passed 7-3-2017)
§ 1064.99  PENALTY.
   In addition to any other remedy or civil penalty, whoever violates §
1064.01 is guilty of a minor misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than one
hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) for each offense. A separate offense shall be
deemed committed each day during or on which a violation occurs and continues.
(Ord. 90-O-60, passed 9-4-1990)
CHAPTER 1066:  EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES
Section
1066.01   Fees for nonresidents.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   County commissioners may provide for ambulance service - see Ohio R.C.
307.051
   Joint ambulance district - see Ohio R.C. 505.71
   Emergency medical services - see Ohio R.C. 3303.08 et seq.
   Division of Fire - see ADM.
Ch. 246
   Division of Health - see ADM.
Ch. 248
§ 1066.01  FEES FOR NONRESIDENTS.
   (a)   The city will provide ambulance and emergency rescue squad services to
residents and the city shall only bill residents of Kirtland and the Village of
Kirtland Hills and their insurers, including the Federal Health Care Programs
of Medicare and Medicaid, for the services provided but only to the extent of
their insurance coverage, i.e. there will be no out of pocket costs to the
residents of the City of Kirtland and the Village of Kirtland Hills. The city
shall treat the revenues received from Kirtland local taxes and the Kirtland
Hills Fire/EMS contract as payment of any otherwise applicable co-payments and
deductibles that would otherwise be due from the residents of the City of
Kirtland and the Village of Kirtland Hills. The city will not charge or collect
any amount of money in excess of the usual, customary and reasonable (UCR)
payments, including any amounts received from Medicare and/or any Medicare
Supplemental Insurance carriers and/or Medicaid.
   (b)   The city will provide transport and emergency medical service to the
nonresident user and the city will request full payment from the non-resident
user at the rate established by the Mayor for the level of service provided.
The city shall bill the insurance company, if any, and/or the non-resident for
the service as required by this section.
   (c)   The levels of service are as follows:
      (1)   ALS 1;
      (2)   ALS 2;
      (3)   BLS;
      (4)   Mileage ALS; and
      (5)   Mileage BLS.
   (d)   The Mayor is authorized to adjust the charges annually after
considering the actual cost of providing these services and after consideration
of inflationary adjustments allowed by the Federal Government.
   (e)   The Mayor is authorized to enter into an agreement with a company that
will provide electronic claims filing systems for the purpose of collecting
insurance proceeds indicated in subsection (c) hereof or as modified
thereafter.
   (f)   That the Mayor and the Finance Director are authorized to establish
guidelines and procedures to assist the indigent and the financially needy that
are unable to pay for the rescue squad services.
   (g)   That all funds collected pursuant to this section shall be deposited
to the Major Capital Equipment Fund.
(Ord. 98-O-58, passed 9-9-1998; Am. Ord. 04-O-20, passed 3-15-2004; Am. Ord.
05-O-36, passed 8-22-2005; Am. Ord. 06-O-51, passed 10-2-2006)
CHAPTER 1068:  KIRTLAND RECREATION PARK
Section
1068.01   Location; maintenance; use.
1068.02   Prohibited conduct.
1068.03   Discharging firearms; fires; signs.
1068.99   Penalty.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Land appropriation for parks - see Ohio R.C. 715.21, 719.01
   Parks and playgrounds - see Ohio R.C. Ch. 755
   Recreation Park Development Fund - see ADM.
236.11
   Park and Recreation Commission - see ADM.
Ch. 274
   Injuring vines, bushes, trees or crops - see GEN. OFF.
642.06
§ 1068.01  LOCATION; MAINTENANCE; USE.
   (a)   The Kirtland Recreation Park located behind the Kirtland Middle School
is constructed and maintained for the use of the public at large and shall be
operated by the Park and Recreation Commission of the city in conformity with
the City Charter, these codified ordinances and the agreement, and any addendum
thereto, entered into between the city and the Board of Education of the
Kirtland Local School District.
   (b)   The Recreation Park shall be closed from sundown to sunrise, and no
person shall remain in the park while it is closed, except parties who have
been issued a permit by the Commission.
   (c)   All special events, such as tournaments, round-robins, special or
unusual activities or functions, and the like, must be approved by the
Commission which shall coordinate such events with the park scheduler. The
Commission may require the posting of a bond or the paying of a fee to defray
expenses or repair damages, including clean up, after such tournament or
special event.
   (d)   No person shall erect or place a structure, tent or concession stand
on the park property without first receiving the written approval of the
Commission and posting a bond or paying a fee as required by the Commission. No
person shall sell or cause to be sold any food, souvenirs, refreshments or
other item on park property without the written permission of the Commission.
(Ord. 85-O-38, passed 5-20-1985)
§ 1068.02  PROHIBITED CONDUCT.
   No person while on the grounds of the Kirtland Recreation Park shall:
   (a)   Drive or ride any motor vehicle, including, but not limited to, an
automobile, motorcycle, minibike, all terrain vehicle, snowmobile or any other
motor-driven vehicle. This section does not apply to emergency vehicles or
vehicles operated by employees or agents of the Park and Recreation Commission,
the City or the Board of Education of the Kirtland Local School District while
performing their duties;
   (b)   Be allowed to enter or remain in, or be found in, an intoxicated
condition in the park; take into the park any intoxicating liquor either for
sale to others or for his or her own use or the use of others; sell, give away
or dispose of any intoxicating liquor; or have any alcoholic beverages in his
or her possession;
   (c)   Throw stones, sticks, cans or bottles, play golf or hit golf balls, or
throw or hit any other dangerous object. This subsection does not apply to the
throwing or hitting of a baseball, softball, football, soccerball or other
sport object when participating in an authorized sport activity;
   (d)   Write, paint, carve or deface in any manner any tree, bench or
structure, or injure any tree, plant, grass, flower or structure;
   (e)   Permit any dog or other animal to run at large. All owners shall
immediately clean any feces discharged by their pets and remove the same from
the park property or place such feces in a proper disposal receptacle;
   (f)   Engage in any conduct in violation of §
648.04; or
   (g)   Fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of any
public officer.
(Ord. 85-O-38, passed 5-20-1985)
§ 1068.03  DISCHARGING FIREARMS; FIRES; SIGNS.
   No person or organization while on the grounds of the Kirtland Recreation
Park, unless prior written permission has been obtained from the Park and
Recreation Commission, shall:
   (a)   Shoot a bow and arrow, discharge any firearm or fireworks or ignite or
burn any sparkler;
   (b)   Build any fire, except at places provided for that purpose;
   (c)   Carry any shrub, flower, firearm, slingshot, axe, saw, bow and arrow,
shovel or spade into such park;
   (d)   Enter or leave the Recreation Park except at the established entrance
located on the Board of Education Property; or
   (e)   Post or display any sign, banner or advertisement, or offer anything
for sale.
(Ord  85-O-38, passed 5-20-1985)
§ 1068.99  PENALTY.
   Whoever violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of this
chapter is guilty of a minor misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than one
hundred fifty dollars ($150.00).
(Ord. 85-O-38, passed 5-20-1985)
PART TWELVE - PLANNING AND ZONING CODE
   Chapter
      TITLE TWO - PLANNING
         
1220.   Planning and Zoning Commission.
         
1222.   Environmental Quality Overlay District.
         
1224.   Stormwater Management.
         
1226.   Comprehensive General Plan.
         
1228.   Land Reutilization Program.
      TITLE FOUR - SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
         
1240.   General Provisions and Definitions.
         
1242.   Administration, Enforcement and Penalty.
         
1244.   Procedures for Submission of Plats.
         
1246.   Subdivision Design Standards.
         
1248.   Improvements.
      TITLE SIX - ZONING
         
1260.   Intent and Application.
         
1261.   Definitions.
         
1262.   Administration, Enforcement and Penalty.
         
1263.   Establishment of Code and Map.
         
1264.   Board of Zoning Appeals.
         
1266.   Districts Generally. (Repealed)
         
1268.   R-1, R-2 and R-3 Residential Districts.
         
1270.   R-5 Multifamily Dwelling Districts.
         
1271.   Historic Town Center District (HTC). (Repealed)
         
1272.   B-1 and B-2 Business Districts. (Repealed)
         
1273.   Institutional and Office Districts.
         
1274.   B-3 Public and Commercial Districts. (Repealed)
         
1275.   Historic Town Center District (HTC).
         
1276.   B-4 General and Industrial Districts. (Repealed)
         
1277.   Retail Business Districts.
         
1278.   Lot Area and Width Requirements. (Repealed)
         
1279.   Limited Industrial Districts.
         
1280.   Yard Requirements. (Repealed)
         
1282.   Nonconforming Uses.
         
1284.   Site Design Standards.
         
1285.   Conditional Uses.
         
1286.   Signs.
         
1288.   Off-Street Parking and Loading.
         
1290.   Fences.
         
1292.   Wireless Communication Facilities.
         
1294.   Riparian Setbacks.
         
1296.   Outdoor Lighting.
         
1299.   Amending Procedures.
TITLE TWO - PLANNING
CHAPTER 1220:  PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION
Section
1220.01   Compensation. (Repealed)
1220.02   Subdivision proposal deposits. (Repealed)
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Control as to buildings - see Ohio R.C. 713.04
   Employment of architects and engineers - see Ohio R.C. 713.05
   Mandatory zoning referendum - see CHTR.
Art. V, § 5
   Permits requiring Planning and Zoning Commission approval - see P. & Z.
1262.04
   Planning and Zoning Commission - see CHTR.
Art. III, § 2
   Planning Commission shall be Platting Commission - see Ohio R.C. 713.03
   Powers and duties - see Ohio R.C. 713.02
§ 1220.01  COMPENSATION.(Repealed)
Editor's note:
   Section
1220.01 was repealed by Ord. 03-O-25, passed July 7, 2003.
§ 1220.02  SUBDIVISION PROPOSAL DEPOSITS.(Repealed)
Editor's note:
   Section
1220.02 was repealed by implication by Ord. 89-O-23, passed July 3, 1989.  See
§
236.07 of the Administration Code.
CHAPTER 1222:  ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY OVERLAY DISTRICT
Section
1222.01   Purpose and scope.
1222.02   Title.
1222.03   Administration.
1222.04   Application.
1222.05   Description of transparent Mylar Districts.
1222.06   Preservation of natural features.
1222.07   Preservation of historic and cultural features.
1222.08   Procedures for subdivision approval.
1222.09   Procedures for zoning permit approval.
1222.10   Amendments.
1222.11   Conflict of laws.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Environmental health science - see Ohio R.C. 4736.01 et seq.
   Environmental Protection Agency - see Ohio R.C. 3745.01 et seq.
   Public sites and open spaces - see P. & Z.
1246.12
§ 1222.01  PURPOSE AND SCOPE.
   This chapter establishes procedures and regulations for the consideration of
natural and human-made environmental features in the city which are deemed
worthy of protection and preservation for reasons of the public health, safety
and general welfare.
(Ord. 76-O-43, passed 7-6-1976)
§ 1222.02  TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known and may be cited and referred to as the
"Environmental Quality Overlay District Ordinance".
(Ord. 76-O-43, passed 7-6-1976)
§ 1222.03  ADMINISTRATION.
   This chapter shall be administered by the Planning and Zoning Commission in
conjunction with the administration of the Zoning Code and the Subdivision
Regulations.
(Ord. 76-O-43, passed 7-6-1976)
§ 1222.04  APPLICATION.
   This chapter shall be applicable to all zoning permit applications and to
all subdivisions of land within the city.
(Ord. 76-O-43, passed 7-6-1976)
§ 1222.05  DESCRIPTION OF TRANSPARENT MYLAR DISTRICTS.
   Transparent Mylar Environmental Overlay Districts have been prepared at a
scale of one inch equals 1,000 feet depicting areas or districts containing the
following environmental features:
   (a)   Soil and geological conditions consisting of alluvial soils; well
drained, very shallow soils over sandstone bedrock on slopes of 12 to 25
percent; drainageways with side walls having slopes of 12 to 25 percent; and
all highly unstable slopes exceeding 25 percent;
   (b)   Forest cover consisting primarily of diverse lowland forests found
within flood plains and forests of uncommon species found in the ravine areas
of the city; and
   (c)   Historic and cultural features significant to the heritage of the
community and consisting of an historic and cultural district encompassing the
original settlement area of the community and individual sites and places
identified as significant to the historic and cultural heritage of the
community.
(Ord. 76-O-43, passed 7-6-1976)
§ 1222.06  PRESERVATION OF NATURAL FEATURES.
   The natural features included in the Environmental Overlay Districts are
intended to remain undeveloped to the extent possible for the following
reasons.
   (a)   The alluvial soils are flood-prone and are subject to the requirements
of
Chapter 1446 of the Building and Housing Code.
   (b)   The remaining soil areas are generally excessively steep, are highly
unstable and would be subject to erosion and mass movement if ground cover were
to be removed and the soil exposed. Development should generally not be
permitted in these areas.
   (c)   Lowland forests are generally found within flood plains and the high
diversity of vegetation types provides a wide range of potential wildlife
niches. The forest canopy along the East Branch of the Chagrin River and its
tributaries helps to maintain soil stability by preventing erosion, protects
surface and ground water resources and water quality and provides a habitat
conducive to the diverse fish species population presently found. This forest
cover should be preserved and protected to the extent possible and any removal
should be highly selective.
   (d)   The ravine forests have characteristics of ecological associations
common in locations farther to the north and thus provide local habitat for
wildlife species uncommon to the Kirtland area. The ravine forests help to
maintain soil stability and prevent soil erosion on the highly unstable steep
slope areas and protect surface and ground water resources by helping to
control run-off rates, infiltration and siltation. This forest cover should be
preserved and protected to the extent possible and any removal should be highly
selective.
(Ord. 76-O-43, passed 7-6-1976)
§ 1222.07  PRESERVATION OF HISTORIC AND CULTURAL FEATURES.
   The historic and cultural features included in the Environmental Overlay
Districts are intended to be preserved to the extent possible for the following
reasons.
   (a)   The historic zone encompassing the original settlement area of
Kirtland contains a number of historically and culturally significant sites and
places, including the nationally registered Kirtland Temple. The architectural
character and the historic heritage of the District should be preserved and
protected to the extent possible in all intended development within the
District.
   (b)   The individual sites and places, including the nationally registered
Old South Church, have also been identified as important to the historic and
cultural heritage of the community. The architectural character and the
historic heritage of these individual sites and places should be preserved and
protected to the extent possible in all intended development.
(Ord. 76-O-43, passed 7-6-1976)
§ 1222.08  PROCEDURES FOR SUBDIVISION APPROVAL.
   The following procedures shall be a part of the pre-application meeting as
required by
Chapter 1244 of the Subdivision Regulations.
   (a)   The Planning and Zoning Commission and the subdivider shall accurately
locate the proposed subdivision on a one inch equals 1,000-foot scale base map
of the city.
   (b)   The transparent overlay districts shall be placed over the base map to
determine if any of the environmental elements are included within the
boundaries of the  proposed subdivision.
   (c)   The Commission shall carefully review with the subdivider the intent
of the Environmental Quality Overlay Districts.
   (d)   If it is determined by the Commission that the proposed development
will encroach upon any or all of the environmental elements, the Commission may
impose necessary and reasonable conditions and restrictions on the development
to help ensure that the appropriate environmental elements are protected and
preserved to the extent possible.
   (e)   Adherence to the conditions and restrictions relating to the
Environmental Quality Overlay Districts is required for approval of the
subdivision plat.
(Ord. 76-O-43, passed 7-6-1976)
§ 1222.09  PROCEDURES FOR ZONING PERMIT APPROVAL.
   The following procedures shall apply as part of the requirements of
Chapter 1262 for issuance of a zoning permit for construction of, changing the
use of or altering any building, including accessory buildings, or changing the
use of any premises.
   (a)   The proposed construction, alteration or change of use shall be
located on a one inch equals 1,000-foot scale base map of the city.
   (b)   The Environmental Quality Overlay Districts shall be examined to
determine if any of the environmental elements are included within the
boundaries of the property for which a zoning permit application is being made.
   (c)   If it is determined that the property in question does apparently
encroach upon any or all of the environmental elements, the Zoning Inspector
shall request a review of the application by the Planning and Zoning
Commission.
   (d)   The Commission shall carefully review with the applicant the intent of
the Environmental Quality Overlay Districts and review with the applicant the
purpose of the zoning permit application.
   (e)   If it is determined by the Commission that the proposed construction,
alteration or change of use will encroach upon any or all of the environmental
elements, the Commission may impose necessary and reasonable conditions upon
the issuance of the zoning permit to help ensure that the appropriate
environmental elements are protected and preserved to the extent possible.
(Ord. 76-O-43, passed 7-6-1976)
§ 1222.10  AMENDMENTS.
   This chapter may be amended in accordance with the provisions of
Article III, § 2, of the City Charter.
(Ord. 76-O-43, passed 7-6-1976)
§ 1222.11  CONFLICT OF LAWS.
   The provisions of this chapter shall supplement any and all ordinances of
the city and any and all rules and regulations promulgated under authority of
this chapter relating to the purpose and scope of this chapter. Whenever the
requirements of this chapter are at variance with the requirements of any other
lawfully adopted rule, regulation, ordinance or resolution, the more
restrictive or that imposing the higher standard shall govern.
(Ord. 76-O-43, passed 7-6-1976)
CHAPTER 1224:  STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
Section
1224.01   Stormwater Management Program adopted.
§ 1224.01  STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PROGRAM ADOPTED.
   The Stormwater Management Program, the same being attached to the ordinance
codified herein, marked Exhibit "A" and made a part hereof, adopted by the City
of Kirtland Planning and Zoning Commission and further recommended by the
Planning and Zoning Commission to the Council of the City of Kirtland Ohio, is
hereby adopted in full and in all of its particulars as the Stormwater
Management Program of the City of Kirtland, Ohio.
(Ord. 03-O-3, passed 3-3-2003)
CHAPTER 1226:  COMPREHENSIVE GENERAL PLAN
Section
1226.01   Comprehensive General Plan adopted.
§ 1226.01  COMPREHENSIVE GENERAL PLAN ADOPTED.
   The Comprehensive General Plan, the same being attached to Ordinance 03-O-
01, and further amended in Ordinance 12-O-56 as the Comprehensive Plan Update
and marked as Exhibit “A” and made a part hereof, adopted by the City of
Kirtland, Planning and Zoning Commission on December 9, 2002 and amended on
December 17, 2012, and further recommended on those dates by the same Planning
and Zoning Commission to the Council of the City of Kirtland, Ohio, is hereby
adopted in full as the Comprehensive General Plan of the City of Kirtland,
Ohio.
(Ord. 03-O-01, passed 3-3-2003; Am. Ord. 12-O-56, passed 12-17-2012)
CHAPTER 1228:  LAND REUTILIZATION PROGRAM
Section
1228.01   Land reutilization program adopted; implementation of procedures.
§ 1228.01  LAND REUTILIZATION PROGRAM ADOPTED; IMPLEMENTATION OF PROCEDURES.
   (A)   The city hereby adopts and implements the procedure set forth in Ohio
R.C. Chapter 5722 as amended, to facilitate the effective reutilization of non-
productive land situated within the boundaries of the city, to foster the
return of such non-productive land to tax generating status and/or the devotion
to public use which shall be known as the City of Kirtland Land Reutilization
Program (the “Program”).
   (B)   The Clerk of Council is hereby authorized and directed, upon passage
of this section, to transmit certified copies of this section to the County
Auditor, the County Treasurer, and the County Prosecutor, as provided in Ohio
R.C. Chapter 5722.
   (C)   Pursuant to the authority in Ohio R.C. Chapter 5722, the city may use
the program to reutilize nonproductive land by obtaining such land through a
sale pursuant to a foreclosure proceeding initiated by the Treasurer of Lake
County (Ohio R.C. § 5722.03) and/or through a sale of forfeited lands by the
Auditor of Lake County (Ohio R.C. § 5722.04), conveyance in lieu of foreclosure
(Ohio R.C. § 5722.10) and/or any other method that may be permitted by Ohio
R.C. Chapter 5722.
   (D)   The Mayor or his or her designee shall administer the land
reutilization program in accordance with this section and Ohio R.C. § 5722.06.
   (E)   The city may, without competitive bidding, sell any land acquired by
it as part of the program at such times, to such persons, as permitted by law
and may impose redevelopment and reutilization restrictions as the city deems
necessary or appropriate for the land as a condition of sale.
   (F)   Upon the approval of the legislative authorities of those taxing
districts entitled to share in the proceeds from the sale of the land acquired
by the city, as part of the program the city may either retain such land for
devotion by it to public use, or sell, lease, or otherwise transfer any such
land to another political subdivision for the devotion to public use by such
political subdivision in accordance with Ohio R.C. § 5722.07.
   (G)   The proceeds of the sale of any land acquired as part of this land
reutilization program shall be applied and distributed in accordance with Ohio
R.C. § 5722.08.
   (H)   The Mayor may establish, from time to time, one or more separate
neighborhood advisory committees consisting of persons living or owning
property within each neighborhood affected by the program. If formed, such
neighborhood advisory committees shall be operated in accordance with and
pursuant to Ohio R.C. § 5722.09(B).
   (I)   All lands acquired and held by the city pursuant to the program, shall
be deemed real property used for a public purpose and shall be exempt from
taxation until sold.
   (J)   The city may discontinue this land reutilization program at any time
in accordance with Ohio R.C. § 5722.12.
   (K)   The Law Director of the City of Kirtland, from time to time may, and
when appropriate, make inquiry of county officials and shall participate in
necessary administrative and judicial actions to obtain possession and title to
such lands.
(Ord. 14-O-70, passed 1-5-2015)
TITLE FOUR - SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1240:  GENERAL PROVISIONS AND DEFINITIONS
Section
Editor's note:
   Ord. 78-O-31, passed March 6, 1978, being the Subdivision Regulations of the
city, codified herein as Title Four of Part Twelve - Planning and Zoning Code,
was approved by the voters in a referendum held on June 6, 1978.
1240.01   Title.
1240.02   Jurisdiction.
1240.03   Conflicts of laws.
1240.04   Amendments.
1240.05   Separability.
1240.06   Cost of copies.
1240.07   Definitions.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Authority to adopt subdivision regulations - see Ohio R.C. 711.101
   Plat and subdivision defined - see Ohio R.C. 711.001
   Revision of plats - see Ohio R.C. 711.28 et seq.
   Subdivision proposals in flood hazard areas - see B. & H.
1446.04
   Vacating plats - see Ohio R.C. 711.17 et seq.
   Violation of regulations - see Ohio R.C. 711.102
§ 1240.01  TITLE.
   This Title Four of Part Twelve of the Codified Ordinances shall be known and
may be cited and referred to as the "City of Kirtland Subdivision Ordinance" or
just the "Subdivision Regulations".
(Ord. 78-O-31, passed 3-6-1978)
§ 1240.02  JURISDICTION.
   These Subdivision Regulations shall be applicable to all subdivisions of
land within the corporate limits of the city.
(Ord. 78-O-31, passed 3-6-1978)
§ 1240.03  CONFLICTS OF LAWS.
   These Subdivision Regulations shall supplement any and all ordinances of the
city and any and all rules and regulations promulgated by authority of such
ordinances, relating to the purpose and scope of these Subdivision Regulations.
Whenever the requirements of these Subdivision Regulations are at variance with
the requirements of any other lawfully adopted rule, regulation, ordinance or
resolution, the more restrictive or that imposing the higher standard shall
govern.
(Ord. 78-O-31, passed 3-6-1978)
§ 1240.04  AMENDMENTS.
   These Subdivision Regulations may be amended in accordance with
Article III, § 2, of the City Charter.
(Ord. 78-O-31, passed 3-6-1978)
§ 1240.05  SEPARABILITY.
   If any clause, sentence, paragraph, section or other part of these
Subdivision Regulations is decided by a court of competent jurisdiction to be
invalid, such judgement shall not affect the validity of these Subdivision
Regulations as a whole or any part thereof other than the part so held to be
invalid.
(Ord. 78-O-31, passed 3-6-1978)
§ 1240.06  COST OF COPIES.
   The cost of a copy of these Subdivision Regulations is as stated in the Fee
Schedule in §
236.07 of the City of Kirtland Codified Ordinances.
(Res. 79-R-33, passed 5-7-1979; Am. Ord. 17-O-20, passed 7-3-2017)
§ 1240.07  DEFINITIONS.
   As used in these Subdivision Regulations, “shall” indicates a mandatory
requirement, “may” a permissive requirement and “should” a preferred
requirement. In addition:
   (a)   Active recreation. “Active recreation” means  leisure time activities
characterized by repeated and concentrated use of land, often requiring
equipment and taking place at prescribed places, sites or fields. Examples of
active recreation facilities include golf courses, tennis courts, swimming
pools, softball, baseball and soccer fields. For the purpose of these
regulations, active recreation facilities do not include paths for bike riding,
hiking, horseback riding and walking and picnic areas.
   (b)   Association. “Association” means a legal entity operating under
recorded land agreements or contracts through which each unit owner in a
conservation development is a member and each dwelling unit is subject to
charges for a proportionate share of the expenses of the organization's
activities such as maintaining common open space and other common areas and
providing services needed for the development. An association can take the form
of a homeowners' association, community association, condominium association or
other similar entity.
   (c)   Building envelope. “Building envelope” means an area within a
conservation development that is designated as a location within which a
dwelling unit is to be placed in compliance with the building setback and
spacing requirements established by the zoning regulations. A building envelope
may or may not be located within a sublot and may or may not have frontage on a
public street.
   (d)   Building Line. See subsection (yy) hereof.
   (e)   Buffer. “Buffer” means a designated area between uses or adjacent to
the perimeter of natural features designed and intended to provide protection
and which shall be permanently maintained.
      (1)   Land use buffer. “Land use buffer” means land area used to separate
or visibly shield and/or screen one use from another.
      (2)   Riparian buffer. “Riparian buffer” means a naturally vegetated area
located adjacent to streams and rivers that is intended to stabilize banks and
limit erosion approved in accordance with
Chapter 1294.
      (3)   Wetlands buffer. “Wetlands buffer” means an area of undisturbed
natural vegetation located adjacent to the perimeter of the wetlands.
   (f)   Charter. “Charter” means the Charter of the city.
   (g)   City. “City” means the City of Kirtland.
   (h)   City Engineer. “City Engineer” means the Engineer of the city.
   (i)   Common area. “Common area” means any land area, and associated
facilities, within a conservation development that is held in common ownership
by the residents of the development through a Homeowners’ Association,
Community Association or other legal entity, or which is held by the individual
members of a Condominium Association as tenants-in-common.
   (j)   Common open space. “Common open space” means the portion of the common
area within a conservation development that is of sufficient size and shape to
meet the minimum zoning requirements.
   (k)   Comprehensive Plan. “Comprehensive Plan” means a plan adopted by the
Planning and Zoning Commission and Council establishing the goals, objectives
and policies of the community. Such Plan shall include the general location and
extent of present and proposed facilities, including housing, industrial and
commercial uses, major streets, parks, schools and other community facilities.
   (l)   Conservation development. “Conservation development” means a
contiguous area of land to be planned and developed as a single entity, in
which housing units are accommodated under more flexible standards, such as
building arrangements and setbacks, than those that would normally apply under
single-family district regulations, allowing for the flexible grouping of
houses in order to conserve common open spaces and existing natural resources.
   (m)   Conservation easement. “Conservation easement” means an incorporeal
right or interest in land that is held for the public purpose of retaining
land, water or wetland areas predominantly in their natural, scenic, open or
wooded condition, in agricultural, horticultural silvicultural or other farming
or forest use or that imposes any limitations on the use or development of the
areas that are appropriate at the time of creation of the conservation easement
to achieve one or more of such purposes; and that includes appropriate
provisions for the holder to enter the property subject to the easement at
reasonable times to ensure compliance with its provisions.
   (n)   Corner Lot. See subsection (jj) hereof.
   (o)   Council. “Council” means the City Council.
   (p)   Covenant. “Covenant” means a written promise or pledge.
   (q)   Cul-de-sac. See subsection (hhh) (1) C. hereof.
   (r)   Culvert. “Culvert” means a transverse drain that channels under a
bridge, street or driveway.
   (s)   Dead-end Street. See subsection (hhh)(1) D. hereof.
   (t)   Development area. “Development area” means an area of land identified
as a conservation development and consisting of the entire parcel.
   (u)   Development plan. “Development plan” means a proposal including
drawing(s) and map(s) for a conservation development, prepared in accordance
with these regulations, illustrating the proposed design, layout and other
features for the development and including all elements set forth in §
1244.14.
   (v)   Developer. See “Subdivider” in subsection (ddd) hereof.
   (w)   Director of Law. “Director of Law” means the Director of Law of the
city.
   (x)   Dwelling Unit. “Dwelling unit” means one or more rooms which are
arranged, designed or used as living quarters for one family and its household
employees. Individual bathrooms and complete kitchen facilities, permanently
installed, shall be included for each dwelling unit.
   (y)   Easement. “Easement” means an authorization by a property owner for
the use of a designated part of his or her property by someone else for a
specified purpose.
   (z)   Engineer. “Engineer” means a person registered to practice
professional engineering by the State Board of Registration for Professional
Engineers and Surveyors, as specified in Ohio R.C. 4733.14.
   (aa)   Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). “Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA)” means the agency with the overall responsibility for
administering the National Flood Insurance Program.
   (bb)   Green Road. “Green Road” means a street serving ten or fewer sublots,
each containing an area suitable for construction of the permitted main and
accessory use of at least five acres per sublot.
   (cc)   Highway Director. “Highway Director” means the Ohio Director of
Transportation.
   (dd)   Improvements. “Improvements” means street pavement or resurfacing,
curbs, gutters, sidewalks, water lines, sewer lines, storm drains, street
lights, flood control and drainage facilities, utility lines, landscaping and
other related matters normally associated with the development of raw land into
building sites.
   (ee)   Location Map. See subsection (lll) hereof.
(Ord. 78-O-31, passed 3-6-1978)
   (ff)   Lot. “Lot” means a parcel of land of sufficient size to meet minimum
zoning requirements for use, coverage and area and to provide such yards and
other open spaces as herein required. A lot shall have frontage on an improved
public street and may consist of a single lot of record, a portion of a lot of
record or a combination of complete lots of record and portions of lots of
record. “Lot” includes the words “sublot”, “plot”, “piece” and “parcel”.
   (gg)   Lot Frontage. “Lot frontage” means the front of a lot which shall be
construed to be the portion nearest the street. For the purpose of determining
yard requirements only on corner lots and through lots, all sides of a lot
adjacent to streets shall be considered frontage and yards shall be provided as
indicated in subsection (ppp) hereof.
(Ord 94-O-28, passed 7-5-1994)
   (hh)   Lot, Minimum Area of. “Minimum area of a lot” means the lot area
computed exclusive of the following:
      (1)   Any portion of the right-of-way of any public street or easement
for a street;
      (2)   Of the total area of all other easements, the portion that exceeds
20 percent of the total area of the lot; and
      (3)   The areas of ponds, lakes, rivers, streams and federally designated
flood plains, on lots that do not meet the requirements of §
1246.02(b).
   (ii)   Lot of Record. “Lot of record” means a lot which is part of a
subdivision recorded in the office of the County Recorder or a lot or parcel
described by metes and bounds, the description of which has been so recorded.
(Ord. 78-O-31, passed 3-6-1978)
   (jj)   Lot Types.
         (1)   “Corner lot” means a lot located at the intersection of two or
more streets. A lot abutting on a curved street shall be considered a corner
lot if straight lines drawn from the foremost points of the side lot lines to
the foremost point of the lot meet at an interior angle of less than 135
degrees.
         (2)   “Interior lot” means a lot other than a corner lot with only one
frontage on a street.
         (3)   “Through lot” means a lot other than a corner lot with frontage
on more than one street. Through lots abutting two streets may be referred to
as “double frontage lots.”
   (kk)   Minor Subdivision. “Minor subdivision” means a division of a parcel
of land that does not require a plat to be approved by a planning authority
according to §
1244.01. A minor subdivision is also known as a “lot split”.
(Ord. 94-O-28, passed 7-5-1994)
   (ll)   Monuments. “Monuments” means permanent concrete or iron markers used
to definitely establish all lines of the plat of a subdivision, including
boundary line corners and points of change in street alignment.
   (mm)   Natural feature. “Natural feature” means an existing component of the
landscape maintained as a part of the natural environment and having ecological
value in contributing beneficially to air quality, erosion control, groundwater
recharge, noise abatement, visual amenities, the natural diversity of plant and
animal species, human recreation, reduction of climatic stress and energy
costs.
   (nn)   Non-access Reservation. “Non-access reservation” means a strip of
land across which vehicular access is prohibited by a plat restriction.
   (oo)   Open Space. “Open space” means an area open to the sky which may be
on the same lot with a building. The area may include, along with the natural
environmental features, swimming pools, tennis courts and other recreational
facilities that the Planning and Zoning Commission deems permissible. Streets,
structures for habitation and the like are not permitted in such area.
   (pp)   Out Lot. “Out lot” means property shown on a subdivision plat outside
of the boundaries of the land which is to be developed and which is to be
excluded from the development of the subdivision.
   (qq)   Pad. “Pad” means a building site prepared by artificial means,
including, but not limited to, grading, excavation, filling or any combination
thereof.
   (rr)   Parking Space, Off-Street. “Off-street parking space” means an area
not less than nine feet by 20 feet, with properly related access to a public
street and maneuvering room, located totally outside of a street right-of-way.
   (ss)   Performance Bond or Surety Bond. “Performance bond” or “surety bond”
means an agreement by a subdivider or developer with the city for the amount of
the estimated construction cost guaranteeing the completion of physical
improvements, according to plans and specifications, within the time prescribed
by the subdivider’s agreement.
   (tt)   Person. “Person” means an individual, firm, association,
organization, partnership, trust, company or corporation.
   (uu)   Planning and Zoning Commission. “Planning and Zoning Commission”
means the Planning and Zoning Commission of the city.
   (vv)   Plat. “Plat” means the map, drawing or chart on which the developer’s
plan of subdivision (the preliminary plat) is presented to the Planning and
Zoning Commission for approval and, after such approval, to the County Recorder
(the final plat) for recording.
   (ww) Public Way. “Public way” means any alley, avenue, bikeway, boulevard,
bridge, channel, ditch, easement, expressway, freeway, highway land, parkway,
right-of-way, road, sidewalk, street, subway, tunnel, viaduct, walk or other
way in which the general public or a public entity has a right or which are
dedicated, whether improved or not.
   (xx)   Right-of-Way. “Right-of-way” means a strip of land taken or dedicated
for use as a public way. In addition to the roadway, a right-of-way normally
incorporates curbs, lawn strips, sidewalks, lighting and drainage facilities
and may include special features (required by the topography or treatment) such
as grade separation, landscaped areas, viaducts and bridges.
   (yy)   Set-back Line. “Set-back line” means a line, established by the
Zoning Code, generally parallel with and measured from the lot line, defining
the limits of a yard in which no building or structure may be located above
ground, except as may be provided in the Zoning Code. (See subsection (ppp)
hereof.)
   (zz)   Sewers, Central. “Central sewers” means an approved sewage disposal
system which provides a collection network, disposal system and central sewage
treatment facility for a single development, community or region.
   (aaa)   Sewers, On-site. “On-site sewers” means a septic tank or similar
installation on an individual lot which utilizes an aerobic bacteriological
process or equally satisfactory process for the elimination of sewage and
provides for the proper and safe disposal of the effluent, subject to the
approval of health and sanitation officials having jurisdiction.
   (bbb)   Sidewalk. “Sidewalk” means that portion of the road right-of-way
outside the roadway, which is improved for the use of pedestrian traffic. (See
subsection (mmm) hereof.)
   (ccc)   Stream bank or river bank. “Stream bank or river bank” means the
ordinary high water mark of the stream or river, otherwise known as the
bankfull stage of the stream or river channel. Indicators used in determining
the bankfull stage may include changes in vegetation, slope or bank materials,
evidence of scouring and stain lines.
   (ddd)   Subdivider. “Subdivider” means an individual, developer, firm,
association, syndicate, partnership, corporation, trust or any other legal
entity commencing proceedings under these Subdivision Regulations to effect a
subdivision of land hereunder for himself, herself or for another.
   (eee)   Subdivision. “Subdivision” means:
      (1)   The division of a parcel of land, shown as a unit or as contiguous
units on the last preceding tax roll, into two or more parcels, sites or lots,
any one of which is less than five acres, for the purpose of transfer of
ownership. However, the division or partition of land into parcels of more than
five acres not involving any new streets or easements of access and the sale or
exchange of parcels between adjoining lot owners, where such sale or exchange
does not create additional building sites, shall be exempted (may be considered
a minor subdivision).
      (2)   The improvement of one or more parcels of land for residential,
commercial or industrial structures or groups of structures, involving the
division or allocation of land for the opening, widening or extension of any
street, or the division or allocation of land as open spaces for common use by
owners, occupants or lease holders, or as easements for the extension and
maintenance of public sewer, water, storm drainage or other public facilities.
   (fff)   Surveyor. “Surveyor” means a person registered to practice surveying
in the state.
   (ggg)   Thoroughfare Plan. “Thoroughfare Plan” means that portion of the
Comprehensive Plan adopted by the Planning and Zoning Commission and Council
indicating the general location recommended for arterial, collector and local
thoroughfares within the corporate limits of the city.
(Ord. 78-O-31, passed 3-6-1978)
   (hhh)   Thoroughfare, Street or Road; Approved Private Drive.
      (1)   “Street or road thoroughfare” means the full width between property
lines bounding a public way or the full width of the right-of-way dedicated to
the city with a part thereof to be used for vehicular traffic. Street or road
thoroughfares may be designated as follows.
         A.   “Arterial street” means a highway primarily for through traffic,
carrying heavy loads and a large volume of traffic, usually on a continuous
route.
         B.   “Collector street” means a thoroughfare in a residential,
industrial, commercial or other type of development, which primarily carries
traffic from local streets to arterial streets, including the principal
entrance and circulation routes in residential subdivisions.
         C.   “Cul-de-sac” means a local street with one end open to traffic
and the other end terminating in a vehicular turn-around.
         D.   “Dead-end street” means a street temporarily having only one
outlet for vehicular traffic and intended to be extended or continued in the
future.
         E.   “Half street” means a street for which only a portion of the
required right-of-way width has been dedicated.
         F.   “Local street” means a street primarily for providing access to
residential, commercial or other abutting property.
         G.   “Marginal access street” means a local or collector street,
parallel and adjacent to an arterial or collector street, providing access to
abutting properties and protection from arterial or collector streets.
      (2)   “Approved private drive” means the full width of an easement with a
part thereof being paved as a private drive and not dedicated to the city for
public use, providing access to residential or other abutting  property in
those subdivisions which were authorized to construct approved private drives
in lieu of dedicated streets prior to the adoption of Ord. 10-O-35, passed on
7-12-2010.
(Ord. 94-O-28, passed 7-5-1994)
   (iii)   Through Lot. See subsection (jj)(3) hereof.
   (jjj)   Used or Occupied. “Used” or “occupied” includes the words “intended,
designed or arranged to be used or occupied”.
   (kkk)   Variance. “Variance” means a modification of the strict terms of the
relevant regulations where such modification will not be contrary to the public
interest and where, owing to conditions peculiar to the property and not the
result of the action of the applicant, a literal enforcement of the regulations
would result in unnecessary and undue hardship.
   (lll)   Vicinity Map. “Vicinity map” means a drawing located on the plat
which sets forth, by dimensions or other means, the relationship of the
proposed subdivision or use to other nearby developments or landmarks and
community facilities and  services within the city, in order to better locate
and orient the area in question.
   (mmm)   Walkway. “Walkway” means a dedicated public way, four feet or more
in width, for pedestrian use only, whether or not along the side of a road.
   (nnn)   Watershed. “Watershed” means the drainage basin in which the
subdivision drains or that land whose drainage is affected by the subdivision.
   (ooo)   Wetland. “Wetland” means an area that is inundated or saturated by
surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and
that under normal circumstances does support, a prevalence of vegetation
typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally
include swamps, marshes, bogs and similar areas. The three criteria that must
exist on a site for an area to be designated a wetland are hydric soils,
hydrophytic vegetation and wetland hydrology.
   (ppp)   Yard. “Yard” means a required open space unoccupied and unobstructed
by a structure or a portion of a structure from three feet above the general
ground level of the graded lot upward, provided that accessories, ornaments,
fences, hedges and furniture may be permitted in a yard, subject to height
limitations and requirements limiting obstruction of visibility. Yard types are
as follows:
      (1)   “Front yard” means a yard extending between side lot lines across
the front of a lot and from the front lot line to the front of the principal
building;
      (2)   “Rear yard” means a yard extending between side lot lines across
the rear of a lot and from the rear lot line to the rear of the principal
building; and
      (3)   “Side yard” means a yard extending from the principal building to
the side lot line on both sides of the principal building between the lines
establishing the front and rear yards.
(Ord. 78-O-31, passed 3-6-1978)
(Am. Ord. 04-O-43, passed 8-30-2004; Am. Ord. 05-O-63, passed 12-5-2005; Am.
Ord. 13-O-59, passed 12-16-2013)
CHAPTER 1242:  ADMINISTRATION, ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTY
Section
1242.01   Administration generally.
1242.02   Final approval of plat required.
1242.03   Revision of plat after approval.
1242.04   Sale of land before plat approval.
1242.05   Fees.
1242.06   Variances.
1242.07   Violations.
1242.08   Construction noise control. (Repealed)
1242.99   Penalty.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Authority to adopt subdivision regulations - see Ohio R.C. 711.101
   Plat and subdivision defined - see Ohio R.C. 711.001
   Revision of plats - see Ohio R.C. 711.28 et seq.
   Subdivision proposals in flood hazard areas - see B. & H.
1446.04
   Vacating plats - see Ohio R.C. 711.17 et seq.
   Violation of regulations - see Ohio R.C. 711.102
§ 1242.01  ADMINISTRATION GENERALLY.
   These Subdivision Regulations shall be administered by the Planning and
Zoning Commission.
(Ord. 78-O-31, passed 3-6-1978)
§ 1242.02  FINAL APPROVAL OF PLAT REQUIRED.
   No plat of a subdivision shall be recorded by the County Recorder or have
any validity until such plat has received final approval in the manner
prescribed in these Subdivision Regulations.
(Ord. 78-O-31, passed 3-6-1978)
§ 1242.03  REVISION OF PLAT AFTER APPROVAL.
   No changes, erasures, modifications or revisions shall be made of a plat of
a subdivision after approval has been given by the Planning and Zoning
Commission and endorsed in writing on the plat, unless the plat is first
resubmitted to the Commission.
(Ord. 78-O-31, passed 3-6-1978)
§ 1242.04  SALE OF LAND BEFORE PLAT APPROVAL.
   No owner or agent of the owner of any land located within a subdivision
shall transfer or sell such land by a metes and bounds description or by
reference to, exhibition of or use of a plat of the subdivision, before such
plat has been approved and recorded in the manner prescribed in these
Subdivision Regulations.
(Ord. 78-O-31, passed 3-6-1978)
§ 1242.05  FEES.
   (a)   Filing fee. At the time of submitting a preliminary plat, the
subdivider shall pay a filing fee as stated in the Fee Schedule in §
236.07 of the City of Kirtland Codified Ordinances.
   If a plat is disapproved by the Planning and Zoning Commission before any
physical inspection has been made of the site, the Commission may, at its
discretion, order that the developer be refunded any amount not to exceed one-
half of the fee paid.
(Ord. 78-O-31, passed 3-6-1978; Am. Ord. 17-O-20, passed 7-3-2017)
   (b)   Minor subdivision fee. Application for approval of a minor subdivision
shall be accompanied by a one-time fee as stated in the Fee Schedule in §
236.07 of the City of Kirtland Codified Ordinances.
(Ord. 96-O-21, passed 3-18-1996; Am. Ord. 17-O-20, passed 7-3-2017)
   (c)   Inspection fee.
      (1)   The subdivider shall pay an inspection fee to the city for the cost
of inspection and/or supervision of all improvements in the subdivision which
fall under its jurisdiction.
      (2)   The amount of deposit and the method of payment shall be as
required by the City Engineer.
      (3)   The fee shall be for all time spent by the City Engineer or his or
her duly authorized representative in inspecting and/or supervising the
subdivider's improvements.
   (d)   Payment of fees. All fees shall be paid in legal tender or by check or
money order made payable to the city and deposited with the City Clerk.
(Ord. 78-O-31, passed 3-6-1978)
§ 1242.06  VARIANCES.
   (a)   Where the Planning and Zoning Commission finds that extraordinary and
unnecessary hardship may result from strict compliance with these Subdivision
Regulations, due to exceptional topographic or other physical conditions, the
Commission may vary the regulations so as to relieve such hardship, provided
that such relief may be granted without detriment to the public interest and
without impairing the intent and purpose of these Subdivision Regulations or
the desirable and compatible development of the neighborhood and/or community.
Such modifications shall not nullify the intent and purpose of these
Subdivision Regulations nor shall such modifications in any way be interpreted
as a variance from the regulations of the City’s Zoning Code.
   (b)   The subdivider shall apply to the Zoning Inspector in writing for such
variance. Any variance or associated conditions granted or established by the
Planning and Zoning Commission shall be attached to and made a part of the
final plat.
(Ord. 78-O-31, passed 3-6-1978; Am. Ord. 13-O-59, passed 12-16-2013)
§ 1242.07  VIOLATIONS.
   (a)   Whoever violates any rule or regulation adopted by Council for the
purpose of setting standards and requiring and securing the construction of
improvements within a subdivision, or fails to comply with any order made
pursuant thereto, is guilty of creating a public nuisance and the creation
thereof may be enjoined and maintenance thereof may be abated by action at suit
of the city or any resident thereof, in addition to the penalty provided in §
1242.99.
   (b)   The County Recorder shall not record a plat contrary to the provisions
of these Subdivision Regulations.
   (c)   No owner or agent of the owner of any land in the city shall transfer
a lot, parcel or tract of such land from or in accordance with a plat of a
subdivision before such plat has been recorded in the office of the County
Recorder. The description of such lot, parcel or tract by metes and bounds in
the deed or transfer shall not serve to exempt the seller from the penalty set
forth in §
1242.99.
   (d)   No person shall dispose of or offer for sale or lease, for a time
exceeding five years, a lot or part of a lot in a subdivision before these
Subdivision Regulations are complied with.
(Ord. 78-O-31, passed 3-6-1978)
§ 1242.08  CONSTRUCTION NOISE CONTROL. (Repealed)
Editor's note:
   Section
1242.08 was repealed by Ord. 00-O-88, passed January 3, 2001. See §
648.10(b)(2) of the General Offenses Code.
§ 1242.99  PENALTY.
   (a)   Whoever violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of
these Subdivision Regulations for which no penalty is otherwise provided shall
forfeit and pay not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00), nor more than
three thousand dollars ($3,000.00). Such sum may be recovered with costs in a
civil action brought in the Willoughby Municipal Court.
   (b)   Whoever violates §
1242.07(b) shall forfeit and pay not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00),
nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), to be recovered with costs in a
civil action by the Director of Law in the name and for the use of the city.
   (c)   Whoever violates §
1242.07(c) shall forfeit and pay not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00),
nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), for each lot, parcel or tract of
land sold. Such sum may be recovered in a civil action brought in the
Willoughby Municipal Court.
   (d)   Whoever violates §
1242.07(d) shall forfeit and pay not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00),
nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), for each lot or part of a lot
sold, offered for sale or leased. Such sum may be recovered with costs in a
civil action brought in the Willoughby Municipal Court.
(Ord. 96-O-95, passed 1-22-1997)
CHAPTER 1244:  PROCEDURES FOR SUBMISSION OF PLATS
Section
Editor's note:
   
Chapter 1244, previously a codification of Ord. 78-O-31, passed March 6, 1978,
was re-enacted in its entirety by Ord. 94-O-28, passed July 5, 1994. Ord. 94-O-
28 was in turn repealed and this chapter was re-enacted in its entirety by Ord.
97-O-63, passed March 2, 1998.
1244.01   Subdivision classification and application requirements.
1244.02   Minor subdivision procedures.
1244.03   Minor subdivision requirements.
1244.035   Major subdivision procedures.
1244.04   Preliminary plat requirements.
1244.05   Filing date; fee. (Repealed)
1244.06   Public hearings. (Repealed)
1244.07   Notification of and action by State Transportation Director.
1244.08   Approval of preliminary plat. (Repealed)
1244.09   Effective period of approval.
1244.10   Final plat requirements.
1244.11   Filing period; official filing date.
1244.12   Approval of final plat.
1244.13   Filing with County Recorder.
1244.14   Procedures for conservation developments.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Authority to adopt subdivision regulations - see Ohio R.C. 711.101
   Final approval of plat required - see P. & Z.
1242.02
   Plat and subdivision defined - see Ohio R.C. 711.001
   Revision of plat after approval - see P. & Z.
1242.03
   Revision of plats - see Ohio R.C. 711.28 et seq.
   Sale of land before plat approval - see P. & Z.
1242.04
   Subdivision proposals in flood hazard areas - see B. & H.
1446.04
   Vacating plats - see Ohio R.C. 711.17 et seq.
   Violation of regulations - see Ohio R.C. 711.102
§ 1244.01  SUBDIVISION CLASSIFICATION AND APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS.
   The City Engineer shall determine whether a proposed subdivision of land is
a minor subdivision or a major subdivision as defined in
Chapter 1240 of these regulations.
(Ord. 97-O-63, passed 3-2-1998)
§ 1244.02  MINOR SUBDIVISION PROCEDURES.
   (a)   Application. The applicant shall present all information as required
in these regulations and all information subsequently requested by the Planning
and Zoning Commission to determine whether the proposed arrangement of lots is
satisfactory and will serve the public interest.
   (b)   Review by the City Engineer and Zoning Inspector.
      (1)   If the application and documentation submitted do not include all
the information required as provided in this section, the City Engineer shall
reject the application and inform the applicant in writing.
      (2)   When the Zoning Inspector receives a complete application, the
Zoning Inspector shall determine whether the parcel or parcels comply with
existing zoning regulations. Within ten days (a "day" is defined as a "working
day") after receiving a completed application, the Zoning Inspector shall
either deny the application and notify the applicant in writing or certify that
the parcels created comply with the existing Zoning Code, and shall submit the
proposed subdivision to the Planning and Zoning Commission.
      (3)   A complete application must be received by the Zoning Inspector at
least 20 days prior to a regularly scheduled Planning and Zoning Commission
meeting in order to be placed on the agenda for that meeting.
   (c)   Review by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
      (1)   The Zoning Inspector will submit a complete application to the
Planning and Zoning Commission for review.
      (2)   The Zoning Inspector shall notify known owners of contiguous
property of meetings scheduled to discuss the minor subdivision in question.
The applicant shall provide a list of contiguous property owners on gummed
labels.
      (3)   Within 30 days after a minor subdivision application has been
reviewed at a Planning and Zoning Commission meeting or within a mutually
agreed upon extension, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall either approve
or disapprove the application.
      (4)   The Secretary of the Planning and Zoning Commission shall notify
the applicant, in writing, of the decision of the Planning and Zoning
Commission. If the Planning and Zoning Commission approves the transfer without
a recorded plat, then the conveyance shall be stamped “Approved for Transfer
without Plat” and the Chairman of the Planning and Zoning Commission shall
affix his or her signature and the date of such approval. The approval shall
expire within 12 months, unless the conveyances are recorded in the office of
the County Recorder by the applicant during the 12-month period.
(Ord. 97-O-63, passed 3-2-1998; Am. Ord. 10-O-1, passed 2-1-2010)
§ 1244.03  MINOR SUBDIVISION REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   Documentation. Any person proposing to create a minor subdivision
shall submit the following information to the Zoning Inspector:
      (1)   Proof of ownership;
      (2)   A minor subdivision fee, as provided in §
1242.05;
      (3)   A legal description of the parcel or parcels sought to be
transferred, the description to be prepared and stamped by a registered
surveyor; and
      (4)   A list of contiguous property owners with addressed gummed labels.
   (b)   Survey plat. The survey plat shall be prepared on an eight and one-
half inch by 14 inch sheet or multiple thereof at a scale of not less than one
inch equals 50 feet and shall:
      (1)   Indicate the names and parcel numbers of adjoining property owners;
      (2)   Have a north arrow;
      (3)   Indicate acreage to three decimal places;
      (4)   Be based on and tied into the County Coordinate System for all
areas where county control has been established;
      (5)   Indicate proposed lots;
      (6)   Indicate the location of pipes found and pipes to be set. Iron
pipes must be set at all parcel corners and at the intersection of the property
lines with the right-of-way line. In cases where the pipe cannot be set as
indicated above, witness pipes shall be set and their location noted on the
plat;
      (7)   Indicate any surveys which incorporate either a township lot line,
property line, road center line or other boundary line as part of its boundary
and have these lines run out their entire length with bearings and distances to
the corners and/or road alignment control. Where the point cannot be found or
reasonably established, the surveyor shall indicate on the plat by what
evidence its location was determined;
      (8)   Contain a statement of recommendation on the private survey plat or
on a copy of the plat by the Lake County Health Department that individual
sewerage systems have been approved or that no building site approval is
granted;
      (9)   Indicate existing drainage courses, including storm sewers, tile
lines and roadway culverts within 100 feet of the new lot line;
      (10)   Show the locations of all structures on the parcel and on the land
from which the parcel is being split, if within 100 feet of the new lot line;
      (11)   Show the location of power lines or other utility easements, where
known;
      (12)   Show the proposed building setback lines; and
      (13)   Show any other unusual features, such as large rock outcroppings
or underground mines, gas wells, driveways, ravines and sudden grade changes
and the like.
(Ord. 97-O-63, passed 3-2-1998)
§ 1244.035  MAJOR SUBDIVISION PROCEDURES.
   (a)   Preapplication conference.
      (1)   The subdivider shall confer with the Planning and Zoning Commission
prior to submitting the preliminary plat. The request for a preapplication
conference shall be made by the developer not less than 14 days prior to the
next regularly scheduled meeting. The purpose of such conference is to discuss
early and informally the purpose and effect of these Subdivision Regulations
and the criteria and standards contained therein and to familiarize the
developer with the Comprehensive Plan, the Thoroughfare Plan, the Community
Facility Plan, the Zoning Code, the utility system, the historical and
environmental considerations of the city and the procedure for subdivision
approval.
      (2)   The following information should be presented at the preapplication
conference:
         A.   The names and addresses of the owner and the subdivider; and
         B.   A map or sketch showing the location, approximate acreage, number
of lots and proposed use of the subdivision.
      (3)   The staff shall visit the site and review the conceptual plan to
explore alternative roadway alignments, sublot arrangements, the environmental
overlay districts, access to adjacent properties, effects of the proposed
improvements on the property, the general character of the subdivision relative
to the surrounding neighborhood, and how the subdivision fits into the city’s
future development plans.
      (4)   The Planning and Zoning Commission may retain the services of
consultants as it deems necessary to review the conceptual plan. The cost of
such services shall be paid by the applicant.
      (5)   Ten copies of the conceptual plan shall be delivered to the City
Engineer for distribution to a representative of City Council, to the
administrative staff, consultants and other affected agencies. The applicant
shall be responsible for delivering copies of the conceptual plan to:
         A.   Consumers Ohio Water Company;
         B.   Lake County Soil and Water Conservation District;
         C.   Lake County General Health District; and
         D.   U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (if necessary).
   (b)   Application. The applicant shall present all information as requested
in this section and all information subsequently requested by the Commission to
determine that the proposed plan is satisfactory and will serve the public
interest.
   (c)   Review by the City Engineer and Zoning Inspector.
      (1)   If the application and documentation submitted do not comply with
all the requirements of the preliminary plat, the City Engineer shall reject
the application and inform the applicant in writing.
      (2)   When the Zoning Inspector receives a complete preliminary plan
application, the Zoning Inspector shall determine whether the parcel or parcels
comply with the existing zoning regulations. Within ten days (a “day” is
defined as a “working day”) after receiving a completed application, the Zoning
Inspector will either certify that the drawings meet the requirements of the
existing Zoning Code as submitted or note any violations of the existing Zoning
Code and notify the applicant in writing. The applicant may either request that
the application be submitted to the Planning and Zoning Commission or may
modify the application to eliminate the zoning violations. If the Zoning
Inspector finds that the parcel or parcels comply with existing zoning
regulations, the Zoning Inspector shall submit the application to the Planning
and Zoning Commission for review at its next regularly scheduled meeting.
      (3)   An application must be submitted at least 20 days prior to a
regularly scheduled Planning and Zoning Commission meeting in order to be
placed on the agenda for that meeting.
   (d)   Review by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
      (1)   The Zoning Inspector shall notify known owners of contiguous
property, and/or known interested parties, of a public hearing at which the
subdivision in question will be considered by the Planning and Zoning
Commission. The applicant shall provide a list of contiguous property owners on
gummed labels.
      (2)   Within 45 days after a preliminary plan application has been
properly submitted to the Planning and Zoning Commission or within a mutually
agreed upon extension, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall either approve
or deny the application.
      (3)   The Secretary of the Planning and Zoning Commission shall notify
the applicant and Council, in writing, of the decision of the Planning and
Zoning Commission.
      (4)   Approval of a preliminary plan is not an acceptance of the
subdivision for record. It is an approval of a general plan as a guide for the
preparation of the final plat and the improvement plans. Approval of a
preliminary plan shall be effective for a period of one year following the date
of approval unless an extension of time is granted. Upon expiration of
preliminary plan approval, no approval of a final plat shall be given until the
preliminary plan has been resubmitted and approved. Construction shall not
begin until the improvement plans have been approved by the City Engineer.
   (e)   Action by Council. After approval by the Planning and Zoning
Commission, the preliminary plans shall be submitted to Council for review and
approval.
(Ord. 97-O-63, passed 3-2-1998; Am. Ord. 13-O-59, passed 12-16-2013)
§ 1244.04  PRELIMINARY PLAT REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   Documentation. The subdivider shall provide the following to the
Zoning Inspector:
      (1)   Proof of ownership;
      (2)   A major subdivision fee as provided in §
1242.01;
      (3)   The Zoning Inspector's statement as to compliance with the City's
Zoning Code; and
      (4)   Names and addresses of all property owners within 500 feet of the
proposed subdivision, the names and addresses to be on gummed labels.
(Ord. 97-O-63, passed 3-2-1998)
   (b)   Contents; specifications.  The preliminary plat shall be drawn at a
scale of not less than 100 feet to the inch, shall be on one or more sheets not
larger than 36 inches by 48 inches and shall contain the following information:
      (1)   The names, addresses and phone numbers of the owner, subdivider and
professional engineer and/or registered surveyor who prepared the plat, with
appropriate registration numbers and seals;
      (2)   The proposed name of the subdivision, which shall not duplicate or
closely approximate the name of any other subdivision in the city;
      (3)   The location of the subdivision, by lot, tract, city, county and
state;
      (4)   The scale of the plat, the north point and the date;
      (5)   The boundaries of the subdivision, indicated by a heavy line, and
the approximate acreage and boundaries of contiguous land owned by the
subdivider or owner;
      (6)   The names of adjacent subdivisions and owners of adjoining parcels
of unsubdivided land and the location of their property lines;
      (7)   The location, widths and names of existing streets and easements;
the location and names of parks, permanent buildings and county, corporation,
lot and tract lines; and the location of historical sites, streams, floodlands,
drainage channels, lakes, ponds, wetlands, wooded areas and other significant
topographic and natural features in the subdivision and within 500 feet
thereof;
      (8)   The zoning classification of the tract and adjoining properties;
      (9)   The boundaries and features of applicable Environmental Overlay
Districts if and as defined in the Zoning Code;
      (10)   The existing contours, at an interval of not more than two feet if
the slope of the ground is 15 percent or less, and at an interval of not more
than five feet if the slope is more than 15 percent;
      (11)   The existing sewers, water lines, culverts and other underground
structures and power transmission poles and lines, within and adjacent to the
tract;
      (12)   The location, names and widths of proposed streets and easements;
      (13)   The building setback lines, with dimensions;
      (14)   The location and dimensions of all proposed utility and sewer
lines, showing their connections with the existing system;
      (15)   The layout, numbers and approximate dimensions of each lot. When a
lot is located on a curved street or when side lot lines are not at 90-degree
angles, the width at the building setback line shall be shown;
      (16)   The parcels of land, in acres, to be reserved for public use or to
be reserved by covenant for residents of the subdivision;
      (17)   A clear indication of the sequential order in which the subdivider
proposes to record and develop the subdivision, if other than that indicated in
subsection (b)(5) hereof; and
      (18)   A vicinity map at a scale of not less than 2,000 feet to the inch,
which shall be shown on or accompany the preliminary plat.
(Am. Ord. 13-O-59, passed 12-16-2013)
   (c)   Supplementary information. The following information shall be supplied
in addition to the requirements of subsection (b) hereof:
      (1)   A statement of the proposed use of lots, giving the type and number
of dwelling units and the type of business or industry;
      (2)   Evidence of an adequate source of water supply;
      (3)   For multifamily dwellings and commercial or industrial development,
the location, dimensions and approximate grades of proposed parking and loading
areas, alleys, pedestrian walks and streets and the points of vehicular ingress
and egress to the development;
      (4)   A description and the location and approximate dimensions of
proposed drainage control measures, including provisions to control siltation,
erosion and sedimentation during construction;
      (5)   A description of proposed covenants and restrictions;
      (6)   The type of sewage disposal the subdivider proposes to use, such
information to be provided in a letter accompanying the request for preliminary
plat approval. If other than a central sewer is proposed, the letter shall be
accompanied by a letter from the County Health Department stating what type of
sewage disposal will be approved for the soil conditions encountered in the
area of the proposed subdivision. A central sewage treatment plant and a
central water system shall be constructed by the subdivider when deemed
necessary by the city;
      (7)   A description of proposed zoning changes, if any;
      (8)   Wetlands affirmation by the Army Corps of Engineers, where
necessary; and
      (9)   A subdivider shall be required to prepare a street plan of the
entire tract, based upon proper topographic surveys, before approval of any
portion of such plat is granted.
(Ord. 97-O-63, passed 3-2-1998)
§ 1244.05  FILING DATE; FEE.(Repealed)
Editor's note:
   Section
1244.05 was repealed by Ord. 97-O-63, passed March 2, 1998.
§ 1244.06  PUBLIC HEARINGS.(Repealed)
Editor's note:
   Section
1244.06 was repealed by Ord. 97-O-63, passed March 2, 1998.
§ 1244.07  NOTIFICATION OF AND ACTION BY STATE TRANSPORTATION DIRECTOR.
   In accordance with Ohio R.C. 5511.01, before any plat is approved affecting
any land within 300 feet of the centerline of a proposed new highway or a
highway for which changes are proposed, as described in the certification to
local officials by the Ohio Director of Transportation, or any land within 500
feet from the point of intersection of such centerline with any public road or
highway, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall give notice by registered or
certified mail to the Director. The Commission shall not approve a plat for 120
days from the date the notice is received by the Director. If the Director
notifies the Commission that he or she will proceed to acquire the land needed,
then the Commission shall refuse to approve the plat. If the Director notifies
the Commission that acquisition at the time is not in the public interest or
upon the expiration of the 120-day period or any extension thereof agreed upon
by the Director and the property owner, the Commission shall, if the plat is in
conformity with these Subdivision Regulations, approve the plat.
(Ord. 97-O-63, passed 3-2-1998)
§ 1244.08  APPROVAL OF PRELIMINARY PLAT.(Repealed)
Editor's note:
   Section
1244.08 was repealed by Ord. 97-63, passed March 2, 1998.
§ 1244.09  EFFECTIVE PERIOD OF APPROVAL.
   The approval of the preliminary plat shall be effective for not more than 12
months and shall guarantee that the terms under which the approval was granted
will not be affected by changes and/or amendments to these Subdivision
Regulations.
(Ord. 97-O-63, passed 3-2-1998)
§ 1244.10  FINAL PLAT REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   General requirements.
      (1)   The subdivider, having received approval of the preliminary plat of
the proposed subdivision, shall submit a final plat of the subdivision,
together with drawings and specifications of the improvements. The final plat
drawings and specifications of improvements shall be a set of construction and
utility plans prepared by a registered professional engineer. The plans shall
include typical sections, plan and profile views, construction details and
estimates of quantities. All streets and utility engineering details shall be
approved in advance by the City Engineer before completion of the plans.
      (2)   The final plat shall have incorporated all changes in the
preliminary plat required by the Planning and Zoning Commission. Otherwise, it
shall conform to the preliminary plat, and it may constitute only that portion
of the approved preliminary plat which the subdivider proposes to record and
develop at the time.
   (b)   Contents; specifications. The final plat shall be drawn at a scale of
not less than 100 feet to the inch, shall be on one or more sheets 18 inches by
30 inches and shall contain the following information:
      (1)   The name of the subdivision; its location by lot, tract, city and
state; the scale, the north point, the date and the acreage;
      (2)   All plat boundaries, with length of courses in feet and hundredths
and bearings to not more than half seconds;
      (3)   Bearings and distances to nearest established street lines or other
recognized permanent monuments, which shall be accurately described on the
plat;
      (4)   The exact location, right-of-way and names of all streets within
and adjoining the plat and building setback lines;
      (5)   Radii, internal angles, points of curvature, tangent bearings,
lengths of arcs and lengths and bearings of chords of all curvilinear streets
within the plat area;
      (6)   All easements and rights-of-way provided for public services or
utilities;
      (7)   All lot numbers and lines, with accurate dimensions in hundredths
of feet and bearings.  When lots are located on a curve, the lot width at the
building setback line shall be shown;
      (8)   The accurate location and description of monuments as provided in §
1248.07;
      (9)   Accurate boundaries of areas to be dedicated or reserved for public
use or any area to be reserved for the common use of all property owners. The
use shall be shown for each parcel of land to be dedicated;
      (10)   Certification by a registered surveyor to the effect that the plat
represents a survey made by him or her and that all dimensional details are
correct;
      (11)   A notarized certification by the owner of the adoption of the plat
and the dedication of streets and other public areas;
      (12)   A signature of approval by the Director of Law. The subdivider
shall present to the Director evidence that all taxes against proposed roads
and streets have been paid and evidence that all encumbrances or liens of
record against such proposed roads have been released; and
      (13)   A signature of approval by the City Engineer.
   (c)   Supplementary information. The following information shall be supplied
in addition to the requirements of subsections (a) and (b) hereof:
      (1)   Five copies of detailed engineering drawings and specifications,
prepared by a registered engineer, of all street, utility, and other related
improvements to be constructed in the proposed subdivision. The detailed
engineering drawings and specifications shall have the prior review and
approval in writing of the City Engineer;
      (2)   A copy of any restriction or covenant the subdivider intends to
include in the deeds to the lots in the subdivision;
      (3)   If a zoning change is involved, certification from the City Zoning
Inspector indicating that the change has been approved and is in effect; and
      (4)   Certification showing that all required improvements have been
installed and approved by the proper officials or agencies or that a bond or
other surety has been furnished and accepted by the city in accordance with §
1248.01.
(Ord. 97-O-63, passed 3-2-1998; Am. Ord. 13-O-59, passed 12-16-2013)
§ 1244.11  FILING PERIOD; OFFICIAL FILING DATE.
   The final plat shall be filed with the Planning and Zoning Commission not
later than 12 months after the date of approval of the preliminary plat.
Otherwise, it shall be considered void unless an extension is requested by the
developer and granted in writing by the Commission. The final plat shall be
considered officially filed on the tenth working day prior to the meeting at
which it is to be considered.
(Ord. 97-O-63, passed 3-2-1998)
§ 1244.12  APPROVAL OF FINAL PLAT.
   (a)   The Planning and Zoning Commission shall approve or disapprove the
final plat within 45 days after it has been filed. The failure of the
Commission to act upon the final plat within such time shall be deemed approval
of the plat. If the plat is disapproved, the grounds for disapproval shall be
stated in the records of the Commission and a copy of such statement shall be
forwarded to the subdivider.
   (b)   The subdivider shall be notified of the final approval of the plat by
the Commission. The final plat shall be signed by the Secretary of the
Commission and shall then be recommended to Council for approval.
(Ord. 97-O-63, passed 3-2-1998)
§ 1244.13  FILING WITH COUNTY RECORDER.
   When the final plat has been approved by Council, the original tracing
thereof shall be returned to the subdivider for filing with the County Recorder
after all necessary certifications are received.
(Ord. 97-O-63, passed 3-2-1998)
§ 1244.14  PROCEDURES FOR CONSERVATION DEVELOPMENTS.
   (a)   Purpose. The purpose of these procedures is:
      (1)   To establish development review criteria which promote creative
design solutions in a manner which best conserves the area's resources;
      (2)   To establish a review process which maintains local review and
approval of the overall development plan and which results in the timely
consideration of an application; and
      (3)   To ensure the proposed conservation development is in compliance
with the goals and objections of the city's Comprehensive Plan.
   (b)   Project review procedures.
      (1)   Preliminary development plan. The applicant shall submit a
preliminary development plan application to the Zoning Inspector. The
application shall include documentation illustrating compliance with the
standards and criteria set forth in this section. The documentation shall be
indicated on a drawing at a scale of one inch equals 100 feet and shall include
the following:
         A.   Site characteristics.
            1.   Boundaries of the area proposed for development, dimensions
and total acreage;
            2.   Contour lines at vertical intervals of not more than five
feet, highlighting ridges, rock outcroppings and other significant
topographical features;
            3.   Location of wetlands (and potential wetlands), the floodway
boundary and floodway elevation as delineated by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency, rivers and streams and their related river or stream bank,
ponds and water courses;
            4.   Existing soil classifications;
            5.   Locations of all wooded areas, tree lines, hedgerows and
specimen trees;
            6.   Delineation of existing drainage patterns on the property,
existing wells and well sites;
            7.   Description of significant existing vegetation by type of
species, health, quality and the like;
            8.   Existing buildings, structures and other significant human-
made features on the site and within 200 feet of the project boundary;
            9.   Description of all structures and areas of known or potential
historical significance; and
            10.   Existing viewsheds and identification of unique vistas.
         B.   Preliminary site plan. The preliminary site plan shall be drawn
at a scale of not less than one inch equals 100 feet and shall include all the
information and data for a preliminary plat as provided in §
1244.04 of the Subdivision Regulations of the City of Kirtland and in addition
shall include the following:
            1.   A summary of the proposed development including the total
acreage, number of residential units, type of dwellings, density by type of
dwelling and acreage of common open space to be conserved;
            2.   A sketch layout of standard single family lots, if any;
            3.   The location of the common open space and any proposed
recreational facilities;
            4.   Natural features to be conserved and any required buffer
areas;
            5.   Natural features to be altered or impacted by the development
and areas where new landscaping will be installed and the like;
            6.   General location of public street rights-of-way; and
            7.   Proposed utility easement locations along duly established
right-of-way.
         C.   Open space management. The applicant shall outline the method/
structure to perpetually preserve the required common open space which
indicates:
            1.   The structure of the Association;
            2.   Membership requirements;
            3.   Financial responsibilities;
            4.   The relationship of the entity to public agencies having
responsibilities related to the project; and
            5.   Deed restrictions likely to preserve the value of the
development.
         D.   Phasing of development. A description of the project phasing
including the phased construction of open space improvements.
      (2)   Review of application. Within five business days of receiving the
application, the Zoning Inspector and City Engineer shall review the
application to determine that the application includes all the items required
herein. If the application is deemed complete and the application fee paid, the
Zoning Inspector shall officially accept the application on that date.
      (3)   Review of plan by others. The developer shall distribute the
general development plan application to the following for review and comment:
         A.   Regulatory agencies which have statutory authority to
subsequently review and approve any aspect of the development, including but
not limited to the Lake County Health Department, Lake County Soil and Water
Conservation District, Lake County Stormwater Management Department and the
Ohio EPA;
         B.   Other agencies, at the discretion of the city, which may have
appropriate technical expertise;
         C.   Appropriate local administrative officials, including the City
Law Director and City Engineer; and
         D.   Consultants retained by the city. All comments shall be returned
to the city within 30 days from the date distributed.
      (4)   Site visit. The Planning and Zoning Commission as a whole or by
designated committee along with the standing committee of Council, shall,
together with the applicant and the applicant's consultant(s), visit the site
to gain a thorough understanding of the characteristics of the site.
      (5)   Planning and Zoning Commission action.
         A.   The Planning and Zoning Commission shall review the general
development plan and shall take action on the submitted general development
plan by:
            1.   Approving the general development plan as submitted;
            2.   Approving the general development plan subject to specific
conditions not included in the plan as submitted, such as, but not limited to,
improvements to the general building layout or open space arrangement; or
            3.   Denying approval of the general development plan.
         B.   Failure of the Commission to act within 60 days from the date the
application was determined to be complete by the Commission or an extended
period as may be agreed upon, shall at the election of the applicant be deemed
a denial of the general development plan. Approval of the preliminary
development plan and preliminary plat may be concurrent.
      (6)   Action by Council. After approval of the preliminary development
plan by the Planning and Zoning Commission and prior to the construction of any
improvements, the preliminary development plan shall be submitted to Council
for review and approval.
      (7)   Final development plan. After a general development plan has been
approved by both the Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council, an
applicant shall submit for review and approval a final development plan. The
final development plan may be submitted for the entire project. The final plan
shall be drawn at a scale not less than one inch equals 100 feet and shall
include all the information and data required for a final plat as provided in §
1244.10 of the Subdivision Regulations of the City of Kirtland and in addition
shall include the following:
         A.   Boundaries of the area proposed for development, accurate
dimensions and total acreage;
         B.   The exact location and dimension of common drives and public
street rights-of-way;
         C.   Exact location of building footprints or envelopes within which
dwelling units are to be constructed and lot lines with dimensions for all
residential units for which individual ownership is proposed;
         D.   Dimensions of building/unit spacing;
         E.   The extent of environmental conservation and change and the exact
location of all no cut/no disturb zones;
         F.   Designated common open space areas and a description of proposed
open space improvements;
         G.   A grading plan drawn at a scale of one inch equals 100 feet,
showing all information pertaining to surface drainage;
         H.   A detailed landscaping plan for new landscaping, including entry
features and signs;
         I.   The declaration, articles of incorporation and either bylaws (for
a condominium association) or code of regulations (for a homeowners’
association) and any other final covenants and restrictions and maintenance
agreements to be imposed upon all the use of land and pertaining to the
ownership, use and maintenance of all common areas, including common open
space; and
         J.     Conditions imposed by other regulatory agencies.
(Am. Ord. 13-O-59, passed 12-16-2013)
      (8)   Review of application. Within five business days of receiving the
application, the Zoning Inspector shall review an application to determine that
the application includes all the items required. If the application is deemed
complete and the application fee paid, the Zoning Inspection shall officially
accept the application on that date.
      (9)   Review of final development plan. The Zoning Inspector shall
distribute the final development plan application to the Planning and Zoning
Commission, the City Engineer, City Law Director and other appropriate
administrative departments or professional consultants for review and comment.
Any reports, comments or expert opinions shall be compiled by the Zoning
Inspector and transmitted to the Commission prior to the time of the
Commission's review.
      (10)   Review by Law Director. The Law Director of the city shall review
the declaration, articles of incorporation and either bylaws (for a condominium
association) or code of regulations (for a homeowners' association) and any
other final covenants and restrictions and maintenance agreements to be imposed
upon the conservation development. He or she shall provide a written opinion to
the Planning and Zoning Commission documenting that the above demonstrate full
compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
      (11)   Approval of final development plan.
         A.   The Planning and Zoning Commission shall approve or disapprove
the final development plan within 45 days after the complete application has
been filed. If the plan has been disapproved, the reasons shall be entered in
the record of the Commission.
         B.   After the Planning and Zoning Commission has approved the final
plan, it shall be forwarded to the City Council for approval.
         C.   Action on the final development plan and final plat may be
concurrent.
(Ord. 04-O-43, passed 8-30-2004)
CHAPTER 1246:  SUBDIVISION DESIGN STANDARDS
Section
1246.01   Intent of chapter.
1246.02   General requirements for streets.
1246.03   Intersections for dedicated streets.
1246.04   Streets.
1246.05   Curbs.
1246.06   Shoulders.
1246.07   Sidewalks.
1246.08   Easements.
1246.09   Blocks.
1246.10   Lots.
1246.11   Street names.
1246.12   Public sites and open spaces.
1246.13   Drainage.
1246.14   Common open space in conservation developments.
1246.15   Design standards for conservation developments.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Authority to adopt subdivision regulations - see Ohio R.C. 711.101
   Construction and material specifications - see P. & Z.
1248.06
   Driveway drainage culverts - see S.U. & P.S.
Ch. 1024
   Plat and subdivision defined - see Ohio R.C. 711.001
   Revision of plats - see Ohio R.C. 711.28 et seq.
   Streets - see S.U. & P.S.
Ch. 1020
   Subdivision proposals in flood hazard areas - see B. & H.
1446.04
   Vacating plats - see Ohio R.C. 711.17 et seq.
   Violation of regulations - see Ohio R.C. 711.102
§ 1246.01  INTENT OF CHAPTER.
   This chapter shall control the manner in which streets, lots and other
elements of a subdivision are arranged on the land. The design controls set
forth in this chapter are intended to help ensure the convenience and safety of
streets, the creation of usable lots, the provision of space for public
utilities, the provision for adequate drainage controls and the control of land
for recreational areas.
(Ord. 94-O-28, passed 7-5-1994; Am. Ord. 13-O-59, passed 12-16-2013)
§ 1246.02  GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR STREETS.
   (a)   Every subdivision requiring the construction of streets or roads shall
be required to construct improved streets as defined in §
1240.07, and such streets shall be dedicated to the city.
   (b)   The general requirements for all streets and roads shall be as
follows.
      (1)   In general. The classification, arrangement, character, extent,
width, and location of all streets shall conform to the thoroughfare plan, as
amended, and shall be considered in their relation to existing and planned
streets, topographical conditions, public convenience and safety, and
appropriate relation to the proposed uses of the land to be served by such
streets. The subdivider shall provide, within the boundaries of the subdivision
plat, the necessary right-of-way for the widening, continuance, or alignment of
such streets.
      (2)   Pattern. The pattern of local streets shall be designed so as to
discourage through traffic.
      (3)   Protection of residential properties. If a subdivision abuts or
contains an existing or proposed arterial street, the Commission may require
marginal access streets, double frontage lots with screen planting contained in
a non-access reservation along the rear property line or such other treatments
as may be necessary for the adequate protection of residential properties and
to afford separation of through and local traffic.
      (4)   Half streets. Half streets are prohibited except where there exists
a dedicated or platted half street adjacent to the tract being subdivided. In
such cases, the other half shall be platted, if deemed necessary by the
Commission.
      (5)   Dead-end streets. Dead-end streets are permitted only where it is
necessary to provide circulation to undeveloped property adjacent to the
boundaries of the proposed subdivision and where provision is made for a
temporary cul-de-sac easement with a reversion clause specifying the portion of
the street outside any required dedicated right-of-way on which a temporary
cul-de-sac is located that shall revert to the abutting property owner upon
completion of a through street to the adjacent property. A temporary cul-de-sac
is not required for a deadend street of 250 feet or less, provided that it does
not serve as exclusive frontage for any lot.
      (6)   Cul-de-sac dimensions. A cul-de-sac street may be permitted up to
2,250 feet in length, provided there is a public water supply with the capacity
to flow 750 gallons per minute at a residual pressure of 20 PSI, and shall be
provided at the closed end with a turn-around that is 130 feet in diameter (100
feet pavement in diameter) to permit fire, emergency, and service vehicles
access to the abutting properties. The Commission may approve a cul-de-sac
street in excess of 2,250 feet if the land cannot otherwise be subdivided as
determined by the Planning and Zoning Commission, and further provided that the
public water supply will have the capacity to flow 750 gallons per minute at a
residual pressure of 20 PSI.
(Ord. 99-O-10, passed 4-19-1999)
      (7)   Cul-de-sac intersections. A cul-de-sac may intersect with another
cul-de-sac, provided that the combined length of one cul-de-sac and the
distance from its intersection with the other cul-de-sac to a through street
does not exceed 2,250 feet, provided the street is served by a public water
supply.
      (8)   Local streets. Local streets function to provide direct and full
access to each lot. They shall be planned for convenient circulation toward the
principal directions of travel, bus routes, schools, and playgrounds. The
street pattern shall be sufficiently indirect to discourage through traffic.
Three-way or “T” intersections shall predominate; four-way or cross-
intersections shall be avoided.
      (9)   Nonconforming widths. Where property abuts a street which does not
conform to the width required by the thoroughfare plan of the city or by the
County Highway Department or the Ohio Department of Transportation or by these
Subdivision Regulations, the additional width shall be dedicated when such land
is subdivided. Streets of less than the required width shall not be permitted.
      (10)   Reserve strips adjoining streets. Reserve strips adjoining
streets, or other provisions to control access or extensions to pavement and/or
utilities to a nearby property, shall not be permitted except where provisions
for the control and disposal of land comprising such strips have been assigned
to the city under conditions approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
      (11)   Multifamily developments. Streets for multifamily developments
shall be planned to connect only with major or secondary streets so that large
volumes of traffic will not be generated on local residential streets.
Vehicular and pedestrian access shall be planned so that a street, service
drive, parking area, or delivery area will be located not more than 100 feet
from every main or service entrance of a building and will be available for
each dwelling unit.
      (12)   Business and industrial developments. Streets for business and
industrial developments shall be planned to connect only with major streets so
that large volumes of traffic will not be generated on local residential
streets. The intersection of service streets or access driveways to parking
areas with major streets shall be located so as to cause the least possible
interference with the movement of traffic on the major streets. Access
driveways (measured on the centerline) shall be located not less than 50 feet
from the right-of-way line of the nearest intersecting street and spaced at not
less than 130-foot intervals.
(Ord. 97-O-63, passed 3-2-1998; Am. Ord. 13-O-59, passed 12-16-2013)
§ 1246.03  INTERSECTIONS FOR DEDICATED STREETS.
   (a)   The angle of intersection between an arterial or collector street and
any other street shall be not less than 80 degrees.
   (b)   Streets shall intersect as nearly as possible at right angles and no
street shall intersect at an angle less than 60 degrees.
   (c)   No more than two streets shall intersect at one point.
   (d)   The minimum centerline offset distance between streets entering a
common right-of-way from opposite sides shall be 160 feet.
   (e)   Right-of-way lines at street intersections shall be rounded with a
radius of not less than 25 feet for intersections with local streets and 35
feet for intersections with collector or arterial streets.
   (f)   The minimum radius at the pavement edge of intersecting streets shall
be 35 feet.
   (g)   The street grade at the intersection of a local street with an
arterial or collector shall be not more than one percent within 100 feet of the
intersection.
   (h)   No street shall intersect another street which does not provide for a
minimum stopping sight distance along each approach leg.
(Ord. 94-O-28, passed 7-5-1994; Am. Ord. 13-O-59, passed 12-16-2013)
§ 1246.04  STREETS.
   (a)   All streets shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the
standards as specified in the following table. The design and improvement
standards are suggested minimums.
 
Design Criteria Unit Street Classification
                     Arterial Collector Local
Minimum right-of-way width      feet    80   60   50
Minimum pavement width          feet    24   22   18
Minimum design speed            mph     45   35   25
Minimum degree of horizontal    degrees 9.5  16.5 33.5
curvature
Minimum horizontal radius       feet    600  350  170
Minimum horizontal sight        feet    500  300  160
distance
Minimum stopping sight distance feet    310  240  160
Minimum length of vertical      —     Designed to provide minimum stopping
curves                                  sight distance
Maximum gradient                percent 6    7    8
Minimum gradient                percent 0.04 0.4  0.5
 
   (b)   All green roads shall be designed and constructed in accordance with
the standards as specified in the following table. The design and improvement
standards are suggested minimums.
 
Design Criteria Unit Roadway
Minimum right-of-way width      feet    50**
Minimum pavement width          feet    20
Minimum design speed            mph     25
Minimum horizontal radius       feet    170
Minimum stopping sight distance feet    160
Maximum gradient                percent 10
Minimum gradient                percent 0.5
**With roads having curb and gutter, otherwise 60-foot with roadside ditches.
 
   (c)   The pavement of cul-de-sacs shall be designed as follows:
      (1)   The pavement diameter as measured to the edge of pavement shall be
30 feet less than the right-of-way diameter; and
      (2)   The center of the cul-de-sac shall be paved when the pavement
diameter is less than 120 feet.
(Ord. 99-O-10, passed 4-19-1999; Am. Ord. 13-O-59, passed 12-16-2013)
§ 1246.05  CURBS.
   (a)   Concrete curbs shall be required on all streets with the exception of
green roads.
(Am. Ord. 13-O-59, passed 12-16-2013)
   (b)   Curb types shall be straight curb and gutter and shall have a minimum
width of two and one-half feet and a minimum six-inch rise from the gutter line
to the top of the curb.
(Ord. 99-O-10, passed 4-19-1999)
§ 1246.06  SHOULDERS.
   Green roads that do not have curbs shall provide shoulders having a minimum
width of four feet on each side of the pavement.
(Ord. 99-O-10, passed 4-19-1999; Am. Ord. 13-O-59, passed 12-16-2013)
§ 1246.07  SIDEWALKS.
   Concrete sidewalks shall be required in residential districts which have lot
frontages averaging 80 feet or less and in all R-5 and Business Districts as
set forth in the Zoning Code.
(Ord. 78-O-31, passed 3-6-1978; Am. Ord. 11-O-38, passed 7-11-2011)
§ 1246.08  EASEMENTS.
   (a)   Easements of at least ten feet in width shall be provided on each side
or rear lot lines and along side lot lines where necessary for poles, wires,
conduits and gas mains. Easements may also be required along or across lots
where engineering design or special conditions may necessitate the installation
of water and sewer lines outside a public right-of-way.
   (b)   Easements shall be provided on both sides of drainage ditches or open
watercourses. The width of a drainage easement shall be sufficient to provide
for access to the drainage course and wide enough for its reasonable
protection, widening, deepening, realignment or enclosure.
   (c)   Easements for access shall be provided where necessary.
(Ord. 78-O-31, passed 3-6-1978)
§ 1246.09  BLOCKS.
   (a)   The length, width and shape of a block shall be determined with regard
to:
      (1)   The provision of adequate building sites suitable to the needs of
the type of use contemplated;
      (2)   Zoning requirements as to lot sizes and dimensions;
      (3)   The need for convenient access, circulation, control and safety of
traffic; and
      (4)   Limitations and opportunities of topography.
   (b)   Blocks that abut an arterial or collector street or approved private
drive may be required by the Planning and Zoning Commission and be designed to:
      (1)   Align blocks with their greater dimension parallel to and adjoining
the arterial or collector street or approved private drive;
      (2)   Provide property access or service streets parallel to and
adjoining the arterial or collector street or approved private drive; and
      (3)   Abut the arterial or collector street or approved private drive
with lot lines across which vehicular access is prohibited by plat restriction
(non-access reservation).
   (c)   Where a block is over 900 feet in length, a crosswalk easement not
less than ten feet in width may be required, if necessary, to provide for
access to schools, playgrounds, shopping areas and other facilities.
(Ord. 94-O-28, passed 7-5-1994)
§ 1246.10  LOTS.
   (a)   Arrangement and design. Lot arrangement and design shall provide for
satisfactory and desirable building sites and be properly related to topography
and the character of surrounding development.
   (b)   Conformity to zoning requirements. Lots shall be arranged and designed
to meet all the zoning requirements of the district in which they are located.
   (c)   Area requirements. Lots that are not served by a public water and/or
central sanitary sewer shall meet the area requirements established by the
County Board of Health.
   (d)   Through lots. Through lots are prohibited except where they are deemed
necessary by the Planning and Zoning Commission to provide for separation of
residential development from traffic on arterial or collector streets or to
overcome unusual topographic conditions.
(Ord. 97-O-63, passed 3-2-1998)
   (e)   Area and width. The area and width of lots shall be not less than
required by the Zoning Code. Lot width shall be measured at the minimum front
yard setback line.
(Ord. 99-O-10, passed 4-19-1999; Am. Ord. 05-O-63, passed 12-5-2005)
   (f)   Depth. The depth to width ratio of a lot (one-family subdivision)
shall be not less than one to one for lots less than 250 in depth. The maximum
depth to width ratio of a lot (one-family subdivision) shall be not more than
five and one-half to one for all lots less than 225 feet in width. Such
roadside subdivisions shall be planned to achieve uniform rear lot lines. The
depth of lots abutting on collector streets shall also be increased in depth
proportionate to the increased setback.
   (g)   Corner lots. Corner lots shall have extra width to obtain the required
side yards and building setback from and appropriate orientation to both
streets and as may be required by the Zoning Code.
   (h)   Side lot lines. Side lot lines shall be designed to be at right angles
to straight street lines or radial to curved street lines, except that such
lines may be modified to accommodate topography or natural features. At a
three-way or "T" intersection, the side lot lines shall be adjusted so that a
dwelling site will not be directly on the projected line of the street which
terminates.
   (i)   Each lot shall have direct access to a public street.  A driveway
across or through a lot to gain access to an adjacent lot shall not be
permitted.
(Am. Ord. 13-O-59, passed 12-16-2013)
(Ord. 97-O-63, passed 3-2-1998; Am. Ord. 10-O-59, passed 12-20-2010)
§ 1246.11  STREET NAMES.
   All new streets shall be named. Names for new streets shall not duplicate
the names of existing streets of record. New streets which are extensions of or
in alignment with existing streets shall bear the name of the existing streets.
All names shall meet with the approval of the Planning and Zoning Commission.
(Ord. 94-O-28, passed 7-5-1994; Am. Ord. 13-O-59, passed 12-16-2013)
§ 1246.12  PUBLIC SITES AND OPEN SPACES.
   (a)   Where a park, historic site, school or other community facility which
is shown in the Comprehensive Plan is located in whole or in part in the
proposed subdivision, the Planning and Zoning Commission may request the
dedication of such area within the subdivision.
   (b)   If a subdivision contains open space for park or recreational purposes
for the exclusive benefit of the residents therein, adequate provision by deed
restriction or trust agreement shall be made by the subdivider for the
continued improvement and maintenance of such open space.
   (c)   A subdivider may dedicate open space to public use subject to
acceptance by the Commission and Council.
(Ord. 78-O-31, passed 3-6-1978)
§ 1246.13  DRAINAGE.
   (a)   Generally.
      (1)   The subdivider shall provide for the design of drainage facilities
and improvements in accordance with this section and to the satisfaction of the
City Engineer.
      (2)   The Engineer may require the subdivider to evaluate the flooding
and drainage hazards downstream from the subdivision that may be caused or
compounded by the proposed subdivision.
      (3)   Subdivisions shall be protected from flood hazard and inundation by
stormwater, springs and other surface waters.
      (4)   Natural watercourses entering the subdivision shall be received and
discharged from the subdivision as nearly as possible in the manner that
existed prior to construction of the drainage facilities within the
subdivision.
      (5)   Outlets for all drainage facilities shall be approved by the
Engineer and provide for permanent control of erosion, scouring, siltation and
sedimentation.
      (6)   Where property damage is a possibility, stricter design standards
than those specified in these Subdivision Regulations shall be required.
   (b)   Hydrologic design.
      (1)   As used in this section:
         A.   Major waterways. "Major waterways" means those waterways with a
tributary area in excess of six square miles. Such major waterways shall be
designed for a minimum storm frequency of 50 years.
         B.   Minor waterways. "Minor waterways" means those waterways with 320
acres or less of tributary area. Such minor waterways shall be designed for a
minimum storm frequency of five years.
         C.   Secondary waterways. "Secondary waterways" means those waterways
with a tributary area of between one-half and six square miles. Such secondary
waterways shall be designed for a minimum storm frequency of ten years.
      (2)   Design quantities of flow for major waterways shall be provided to
the subdivider by the County Engineer. Design flows for secondary waterways
shall be in accordance with the procedures contained in the most current
publication of the Ohio Department of Natural Resources, Division of Water,
Bulletin 43, Floods in Ohio. Design flows for minor drainage facilities shall
be computed by use of the rational formula: Q = CIA. The method for determining
design flows may be modified where deemed advisable by the City Engineer.
   (c)   Drainage plans. The detailed engineering drawing shall include and
shall have appended to it sufficient data for the City Engineer to check the
feasibility of the drainage system as proposed by the subdivider. The following
data shall be provided:
      (1)   Tributary drainage areas delineated on a map, times of
concentration, intensity, run-off coefficients and design flow for all critical
points in the subdivision;
      (2)   The plan and profile of all drainageways, including a cross-section
of open channels showing the maximum depth of flow;
      (3)   Sizes and types of drainage improvements, including all special
structures, typical sections, permanent erosion control features and easement
widths; and
      (4)   The erosion and sediment control plan during the construction
period, including the location of temporary seeding of exposed areas, temporary
erosion and sediment controls and any other proposed measure.
(Ord. 78-O-31, passed 3-6-1978)
§ 1246.14  COMMON OPEN SPACE IN CONSERVATION DEVELOPMENTS.
   (a)   Area required. The minimum amount of common open space in a
Conservation Development shall be not less than as follows:
      (1)   R-2A and R-3A Districts – 50 percent of development area; and
      (2)   R-2B, R-2C, R-3B, R-3C and R-3D Districts – 60 percent of
development area.
   (b)   General standards.
      (1)   Common open space shall conserve significant local features,
historical and cultural elements.
      (2)   Common open space shall be designed and intended for use and
enjoyment of residents and whenever possible shall be interconnected with open
space areas on adjoining parcels.
      (3)   Sewage service, stormwater management and/or water supply
facilities may be located within common open space areas.
      (4)   Areas that should not be considered common open space include:
         A.   Public road rights-of-way;
         B.   Parking areas, accessways and driveways;
         C.   Required setbacks between buildings, parking areas and project
boundaries;
         D.   Required setbacks between buildings and streets;
         E.   Minimum spacing between buildings and between buildings and
parking areas;
         F.   Private yards; and
         G.   Other small fragmented or isolated open space areas that have a
dimension of less than 100 feet in any direction.
(Am. Ord. 13-O-59, passed 12-16-2013)
      (5)   Open space for recreational uses. Not more than five percent of the
common open space may be used for active recreation such as tennis courts,
pools and fields for football, baseball or soccer.
   (c)   Permanent dedication of open space.
      (1)   Dedication to an authorized entity. All open space in a
conservation development shall be permanently restricted from further
subdivision or development by a conservation easement conveyed to a land trust
or a third party, not the landowner, which is capable of accepting such
conservation easement pursuant to Ohio R.C. 5301.68 and 5301.69; which has
sufficient funds and other resources dedicated to monitoring compliance with
and enforcement of the conservation easement; and which can be reasonably
expected to fulfill its obligations to monitor and enforce the conservation
easement. The conservation easement and organization and arrangements for
future monitoring and enforcement are subject to approval by the city.
      (2)   Transfer of conservation easement. The owner(s) of the open space
may transfer a conservation easement to any of the entities listed in Ohio R.C.
5301.67 et seq.; provided:
         A.   The entity is acceptable to the city;
         B.   The provisions of the conservation easement are acceptable to the
city; and
         C.   The conveyance contains provisions for assignment of the
conservation easement to another entity authorized to hold conservation
easements under Ohio R.C. 5301.67 et seq., in the event the original grantee
becomes unwilling or unable to ensure compliance with the provisions of the
conservation easement.
(Ord. 04-O-43, passed 8-30-2004)
§ 1246.15  DESIGN STANDARDS FOR CONSERVATION DEVELOPMENTS.
   (a)   Development design criteria.
      (1)   Conservation of water resources.
         A.   Steep slopes should be conserved and protected from clearing,
filling or construction.
         B.   Impervious surfaces should be utilized to the minimum extent
necessary.
         C.   Alteration or construction within natural drainage ways should be
avoided.
         D.   Low impact stormwater management techniques, such as grassy
swales, should be utilized only where hard pipe management techniques including
but not limited to, perforated pipe and catch basins, are shown to be
impractical.
      (2)   Conservation of sloping land.
         A.   Road system and buildings should be located so as to minimize
changes in topography and the need for cutting and filling.
         B.   Construction of buildings, parking areas and roads should be
avoided on land having a slope greater than 15 percent.
      (3)   Conservation of woodlands and the like.
         A.   Development should conserve and maintain mature woodlands and/or
orchards.
            1.   Trees with diameter (BHD) of ten inches or greater should be
conserved.
            2.   When any woodland is developed, great care shall be taken to
design all disturbed areas (buildings, roads, septic fields and the like) in
locations where there are no large trees.
            3.   Trees with diameter (BHD) of five inches or greater shall be
shown on both the Preliminary Development Plan and Final Development Plan.
         B.   Development shall conserve and maintain existing fields, pastures
and meadows.
         C.   Development shall incorporate existing hedgerows and tree lines
between fields or meadows.
         D.   Wildlife habitat areas of endangered species shall be protected.
      (4)   Conservation of farmland. Conservation of prime farmland that
satisfied USDA definition of "prime" or "locally unique" farmland shall be
conserved.
      (5)   Conservation of existing scenic vistas and visual quality of the
environment. Buildings shall be located to ensure that scenic views and vistas
are not blocked or interrupted.
      (6)   Conservation of cultural resources. Sites of historic,
archaeological or cultural value shall be protected.
      (7)   General street design criteria.
         A.   Streets shall follow natural contours.
         B.   Streets shall avoid excessive stormwater runoff.
         C.   Streets and related pavement shall be the minimum necessary to
provide safe and adequate movement throughout the development.
      (8)   Pedestrian circulation systems.
         A.   A system shall be included in a conservation development and
designed so pedestrians can walk safely throughout the development.
         B.   System shall provide connections between properties and
activities.
   (b)   Resource protection regulations.
      (1)   Floodway protection. All buildings, structures or land within a
floodway shall be used and buildings or structures hereafter shall be erected,
altered, enlarged, repaired or rebuilt, moved or designed to be used in whole
or in part only for a use listed below:
         A.   Agriculture;
         B.   Public or private park and outdoor recreational facilities;
         C.   Fencing that allows the passage of water; and
         D.   Accessory off-street parking areas, provided they are improved
with pervious materials.
      (2)   Wetlands protection. Wetlands that are required by the Army Corps
of Engineers or the Ohio EPA to be retained shall be protected by a buffer
having a width of not less than 20 feet measured from the edge of the building
and pavement setback or not less than 35 feet measured from the edge of the
designated wetland.
      (3)   Conservation of riparian zones. Subject to and in accordance with
Chapter 1294, a riparian buffer shall be provided along the entire length on
both sides of the riparian area as defined in §
1294.04(j). The buffer shall have a width as recommended by the City Engineer.
      (4)   Sewage disposal. All dwellings and permitted accessory recreational
Buildings shall be served by individual or public sewage disposal systems as
approved by the Lake County Health Department.
(Ord. 04-O-43, passed 8-30-2004)
CHAPTER 1248:  IMPROVEMENTS
Section
1248.01   Completion or guarantee required prior to final plat approval.
1248.02   Part performance.
1248.03   Failure to complete.
1248.04   Construction of asphalt concrete pavement; special conditions for
paving.
1248.05   Maintenance of facilities by lot owners.
1248.06   Construction and material specifications.
1248.07   Monuments.
1248.08   Streets and bridges.
1248.09   Sidewalks.
1248.10   Signs.
1248.11   Drainage.
1248.12   Water.
1248.13   Sanitary sewers; treatment facilities.
1248.14   Telephone and electric service.
1248.15   Street lighting.
1248.16   Landscaping and entranceways.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Authority to adopt subdivision regulations - see Ohio R.C. 711.101
   Drainage - see P. & Z.
1246.13
   Plat and subdivision defined - see Ohio R.C. 711.001
   Revision of plats - see Ohio R.C. 711.28 et seq.
   Sidewalk design - see P. & Z.
1246.07
   Street design - see P. & Z.
1246.04
   Subdivision proposals in flood hazard areas - see B. & H.
1446.04
   Vacating plats - see Ohio R.C. 711.17 et seq.
   Violation of regulations - see Ohio R.C. 711.102
§ 1248.01  COMPLETION OR GUARANTEE REQUIRED PRIOR TO FINAL PLAT APPROVAL.
   (a)   All improvements required in these Subdivision Regulations shall be
constructed prior to the granting of the final plat approval by the Planning
and Zoning Commission. However, the subdivider may furnish the city with a
surety bond, a cashier's or certified check, a pledge agreement with a passbook
or any other method approved by the city, for the amount of the estimated
construction cost for the ultimate installation and initial maintenance of the
improvements, guaranteeing to the city that such improvements will be
constructed and completed in a satisfactory manner within a period specified by
the City Engineer, but not to exceed two years from the date of the final plat
approval, except as provided in §
1248.04. Such guarantee shall be approved by the Director of Law and shall be
made payable to, and enforceable by, the city, and shall provide that the
subdivider, his or her heirs, successors and assigns and their agents or
servants will comply with all applicable terms, conditions, provisions and
requirements of these Subdivision Regulations. Upon the satisfactory completion
of the improvements and the approval of the same in writing by the Engineer,
and with the presentation of letters of certification of payment in full of all
contractors, subcontractors, suppliers of materials, engineers and surveyors
and all inspection fees or other fees incurred by the installation of the
improvements by the subdivider, the bonds may be released, in writing, by the
Director of Finance or the cashier's or certified check may be returned to the
subdivider, except that an amount equal to 15 percent of the estimated
construction cost of the improvements shall be retained for a period of 24
months beyond the completion date of the project. Upon the completion of the
24-month period and with the approval in writing of the Engineer, the amount of
the retainage shall be released, except as provided in §
1248.04, to the subdivider.
   (b)   Improvements shall also be subject to the following chapters of these
codified ordinances.
      (1)   Requirements of
Chapter 1464 Erosion and Sediment Control shall apply to all land disturbing
activity. Plans shall be reviewed by Lake County Soil and Water Conservation
District.
      (2)   Requirements of
Chapter 1466 Comprehensive Stormwater Management shall apply to drainage
improvements. Figure 1248-1 shall be followed for detention basin outlet
facilities.
(Ord. 17-O-35, passed 11-20-2017)
§ 1248.02  PART PERFORMANCE.
   When a portion of the improvements has, upon inspection by the City
Engineer, been satisfactorily completed, a reduction in the bonds or a partial
withdrawal of funds relating to the estimated costs of such completed
improvements may be authorized; provided, however, that, all requirements of §
1248.01 have been properly executed.
(Ord. 17-O-35, passed 11-20-2017)
§ 1248.03  FAILURE TO COMPLETE.
   If the developer fails to complete the installation of all improvements
according to the terms and conditions of the agreement, the city, upon proper
notice, may complete the same and appropriate such portion of money or bonds
posted for the faithful performance of such work as may be necessary to
complete the same.
(Ord. 17-O-35, passed 11-20-2017)
§ 1248.04  CONSTRUCTION OF ASPHALT CONCRETE PAVEMENT; SPECIAL CONDITIONS FOR
PAVING.
   Section
1248.08(e) provides for the application of the final pavement surface course
for asphalt concrete pavement to take place two years after the completion of
the initial surface course. Therefore, subdividers who elect to construct
asphalt concrete pavement shall be subject to the following special conditions.
   (a)   The final asphalt pavement surface course shall be exempt from §
1248.01 as to the guarantee to the city that improvements be completed within a
period of two years.
   (b)   The amount of the retainage released to the subdivider as provided in
§
1248.01 shall be reduced by an amount equal to twice the estimated construction
cost of the final asphalt pavement surface course. After completion of the
final asphalt pavement surface course, and with the approval in writing of the
City Engineer, the remainder of the retainage shall be released to the
subdivider.
(Ord. 17-O-35, passed 11-20-2017)
§ 1248.05  MAINTENANCE OF FACILITIES BY LOT OWNERS.
   Where the subdivision contains existing approved private drives, as defined
in §
1240.07 "Thoroughfare, Street or Road; Approved Private Drive," and/or drainage
facilities, sewers, sewage treatment plants, water supply systems, landscaped
cul-de-sacs, park areas, or other physical facilities which are necessary or
desirable for the welfare of the area, and which are of common use or benefit
within the subdivision and of such character that the city or other public
agency does not desire or intend to maintain them, the proper and continuous
maintenance and supervision of such facilities shall be jointly and
collectively by the lot owners in the subdivision to the satisfaction of the
City Engineer and Service Director to assure safe and appropriate ingress and
egress and utilization by any emergency equipment and waste disposal vehicles.
Any resubdivision of the plat will not be permitted unless brought into
conformity with existing subdivision regulations approved by the city.
(Ord. 17-O-35, passed 11-20-2017)
§ 1248.06  CONSTRUCTION AND MATERIAL SPECIFICATIONS.
   The subdivider shall design and construct improvements not less than the
standards outlined in these Subdivision Regulations. The work shall be done
under the observation of the City Engineer. The minimum requirements for
construction and materials shall be as specified in this chapter, and if not so
specified, shall be in accordance with the standards of the most current volume
of the State of Ohio Department of Transportation Construction and Material
Specifications (otherwise referred to in this chapter as ODOT Items), ODOT
Standard Roadway Construction Drawings as approved by the City Engineer, and
the requirements of the State Department of Health. All observation costs shall
be paid for by the subdivider.
(Ord. 17-O-35, passed 11-20-2017)
§ 1248.07  MONUMENTS.
   Permanent monuments, each consisting of a solid iron rod, one inch in
diameter, centered in a concrete post, six inches in diameter and not less than
30 inches long, and embedded in the soil so that its top is at existing grade,
shall be accurately set and established at the intersections of all outside
boundary lines of a plat. A monument box with a solid iron rod, one inch in
diameter, shall be set at all road centerline intersections and at such other
points as are necessary to establish definitely all lines of the plat, except
those outlining individual lots. All lot corners shall be marked with pins of a
size, dimension and material consistent with accepted surveying practices of
the county.
(Ord. 17-O-35, passed 11-20-2017)
§ 1248.08  STREETS AND BRIDGES.
   (a)   Generally.  A street shall be graded to its full width, including side
slopes, and improved in conformity with Figure 1248-2 and the standards given
or referred to in these Subdivision Regulations. In certain special instances
where it is proposed to use an existing dedicated street with an inadequate
pavement as a principal access street to the proposed subdivision, the Planning
and Zoning Commission may require that new pavement be constructed on such
principal access streets at no expense to the city.
   (b)   Subgrade for streets.
      (1)   All culverts and utility crossings shall be constructed prior to
preparing the subgrade.
      (2)   For streets, the subgrade shall be free of sod, vegetative or
organic matter, soft clay, and other objectionable materials for a depth of at
least two feet below the finished surface. For streets, the subgrade shall be
shaped, chemically stabilized, compacted, and rolled with a roller of not less
than seven tons in weight. Subgrade grade tolerance shall be not more than one
inch in 16 feet.
      (3)   On all proposed streets, the top six inches or more of subgrade
shall be chemically stabilized per ODOT Item 206. The developer shall have the
soil analyzed by a geotechnical engineer who shall provide a written
recommendation specifying the depth to be stabilized and the chemical agent to
be used for the stabilization. The recommendation shall take into account the
expected traffic on the finished road and the possibility of factors which may
cause the chemically stabilized soil to heave.
      (4)   Approval of the plan for subgrade preparation shall be obtained
from the City Engineer prior to the application of the chemical stabilizing
material. The developer shall protect the subgrade from deterioration until
such time as the chemical stabilizing material is applied.
   (c)   Underdraws for streets.  Pipe underdrains shall be constructed on both
sides of the proposed pavement for all streets. The underdrain trench shall be
12 inches wide and a minimum of 30 inches deep as measured from the top of the
subgrade. The trench shall be lined with ODOT Item 712.09, Type A filter
fabric. An ODOT Item 707.17 perforated PVC pipe shall be laid in the bottom of
the trench, and the trench shall be backfilled with No. 57 aggregate (no slag
will be allowed). The trench shall be located two feet outside the proposed
edge of pavement. The pipe shall be designed to have a free draining outlet.
   (d)   Sub-base for street. A four-inch thick sub-base of compacted ODOT Item
304 limestone aggregate shall be placed on the chemically treated subgrade and
shall extend 12 inches beyond the outside edge of the underdrain trench.
   (e)   Base course for streets. The thickness and the method of constructing
the base course will vary, depending upon the soil conditions and the amount of
anticipated traffic. Specific material and thickness recommendations shall be
approved by the City Engineer. The base course grade tolerance shall not be
more than one inch in 16 feet.
   (f)   Surface course for streets. After the base course has been constructed
according to specifications, and after the major building period is over, the
surface course for streets shall be constructed using either asphalt concrete
or Portland cement concrete. Specific material and thickness recommendations
shall be approved by the City Engineer.
   (g)   Pavement for streets.  The subdivider shall elect to construct streets
using one of the following minimum pavement requirements:
      (1)   Portland cement concrete.  Minimum base and surface shall meet the
requirements of Figure 1248-2.;
      (2)   Asphalt concrete.  Minimum base and surface shall meet the
requirements of Figure 1248-2. All courses of asphalt shall have a tack coat
which shall meet the requirements of ODOT Item 407. Application of the surface
course shall be two years after completion of the intermediate course.
      (3)   Green streets may have the following modifications:
         A.   Portland cement concrete. The concrete thickness may be reduced
to seven inches.
         B.   Asphalt concrete. The asphalt base may be reduced to three
inches.
   (h)   Curbs and gutters for streets.  Curbs and gutters shall be constructed
of Portland cement concrete and shall meet the requirements of ODOT 609,
Curbing, as amended.
   (i)   Shoulders for green roads.  Shoulders for green roads shall be
constructed to meet the following requirements:
      (1)   ODOT Item 653, Topsoil, as amended, two-inches thick; and
      (2)   ODOT Item 659, Seeding and Mulching, as amended, using a mixture
for residential seeding, or ODOT Item 660, Sodding, as amended.
   (j)   Bridges.  In the event bridges are necessary for access to residential
structures, all such bridges must be able to support fire-fighting equipment
and must be approved by the City Engineer.
(Ord. 17-O-35, passed 11-20-2017)
§ 1248.09  SIDEWALKS.
   Sidewalks shall be constructed of Portland cement concrete with a minimum
width of five feet and a minimum thickness of four inches, except at drive
aprons where the thickness shall be six inches, all constructed to meet the
requirements of ODOT Item 608, Walks and Steps, as amended. Curb ramps shall be
constructed at intersections.
(Ord. 17-O-35, passed 11-20-2017)
§ 1248.10  SIGNS.
   (a)   All streets shall be assigned names in accordance with §
1246.11. Street and existing private drive (approved prior to adoption of
Ordinance No. 10-O-35, passed 7-12-2010) name signs, of a type specified by the
city, shall be erected by the subdivider at all intersections.
   (b)   Traffic control signs whose type and location shall be determined by
the City Engineer, shall be erected by the subdivider in accordance with the
Ohio Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices.
(Ord. 17-O-35, passed 11-20-2017)
§ 1248.11  DRAINAGE.
   (a)   Generally.  All necessary facilities, including underground pipe,
inlets, catch basins or open drainage ditches, as determined by the City
Engineer, shall be installed to provide for the adequate disposal of stormwater
within the subdivision and shall connect to an adequate drainage course.
   (b)   Storm sewers.  All storm sewers located under pavement shall be
concrete or polypropylene corrugated double wall pipe meeting the requirements
of ODOT Item 603, Type B Conduit, as amended. All storm sewers not located
under pavement shall be concrete, vitrified clay or corrugated polyethylene
smooth-lined pipe meeting the requirements of ODOT Item 611, Type C Conduits,
as amended. The minimum diameter of a storm sewer pipe shall be 12 inches.
      (1)   All drainage facilities within the right-of-way shall be piped.
      (2)   Any proposed drainage course having a grade in excess of five
percent or under two percent shall be a storm sewer with adequate
appurtenances.
   (c)   Culverts and bridges.  When natural drainage channels intersect a
street right-of-way, the subdivider shall have satisfactory bridges and
culverts designed and constructed. Where culverts are required, the following
minimum requirements shall be observed:
      (1)   Culverts shall extend across the entire right-of-way width of the
proposed road. The culvert capacity, the culvert material and construction and
the cover over the culvert shall be subject to the approval of the City
Engineer. The culvert shall be 12 inches larger than the size needed for
hydraulic conveyance, and the bottom 12 inches shall be filled with natural
stone so as to mimic natural habitat. The minimum diameter of a culvert pipe
shall be 30 inches. Head walls are required; and
      (2)   For green roads driveway culverts shall have a minimum length of 20
feet and a minimum diameter of 12 inches. The length and diameter of driveway
culverts for each lot shall be identified on the subdivision improvement plans,
subject to the approval of the City Engineer. The driveway culverts shall be
laid so as to maintain the flow line of the ditch or gutter. Head walls may be
required.
   (d)   Construction and material specifications. Construction and material
specifications for drainage shall meet the requirements of the following ODOT
Items:
      Item 601, Slope and Channel Protection, as amended;
      Item 602, Masonry, as amended;
      Item 605, Underdrains, as amended;
      Item 611, Pipe Culverts, Sewers, Drains and Drainage Structures.
(Ord. 17-O-35, passed 11-20-2017)
§ 1248.12  WATER.
   (a)   Public supply.  Where a public water supply is reasonably accessible
or required because of pollution problems, the subdivision shall be provided
with a complete water distribution system, including a connection for each lot
and appropriately spaced fire hydrants. Public water distribution and public
well systems shall meet the requirements of the State Department of Health as
cited in R.C. §§ 6111.44 through 6111.46.
   (b)   Private supply.
      (1)   Where a public water supply is not available or required, the
subdivider shall supply acceptable evidence of the availability of water. The
subdivider may be required to make one or more test wells in the area to be
platted if such evidence is deemed not acceptable. Copies of well logs which
are obtained shall include the name and address of the well driller and shall
be submitted with the plat to the Planning and Zoning Commission.
      (2)   Individual private wells shall be located at least 25 feet from
property lines; 100 feet from all septic tanks; 100 feet from all tile fields
and other sewage disposal facilities; 40 feet from streams, lakes, ponds and
ditches; 20 feet from all cast iron sanitary sewer lines; 100 feet from any
vitrified or plastic sewer tile lines; and not within any area of flooding. As
a precaution against seepage, a watertight seal shall be provided around the
well casing.
      (3)   In all cases where it has been determined that individual water
supplies from private wells are not feasible, a public water distribution
system is required.
   (c)   Installation of lakes.  Where no public water supply is reasonably
accessible or required, a lake or lakes must be installed as directed by the
Fire Chief, necessary for the fire protection of all residential structures.
Any such lake or lakes must be installed with a minimum of 120,000 gallons of
water and a dry hydrant. Access must be provided to the lake for fire-fighting
equipment. Any lake so installed must be approved by the City Engineer.
(Ord. 17-O-35, passed 11-20-2017)
§ 1248.13  SANITARY SEWERS; TREATMENT FACILITIES.
   (a)   General requirements.  If a subdivision can be reasonably served by
the extension of an existing public sanitary sewer, as determined by the City
Engineer, the subdivider shall provide a system of sanitary sewer mains and
shall provide lateral connections for each lot. Whenever main lines are
installed, sewers and water shall be extended to property lines of the
subdivision. Sanitary sewers shall be constructed in accordance with the
specifications of the County Sanitary Engineer.
   (b)   Central sewage treatment plant facilities.  The effluent standards and
the construction of a central sewage treatment plant facility shall meet the
most current requirements of the Ohio Environmental Protection Agency and the
city.
   (c)   Individual on-site sewage treatment facilities.  Where a public
sanitary sewer is not reasonably accessible, the subdivider may provide
individual on-site sewage treatment facilities for each lot, provided that such
facilities are installed in accordance with State and County Board of Health
requirements. The subdivider shall confer with officials of the County Board of
Health as to the requirements and procedure to be observed.
(Ord. 17-O-35, passed 11-20-2017)
§ 1248.14  TELEPHONE AND ELECTRIC SERVICE.
   (a)   Utility lines for telephone and electric service shall be placed
underground in all subdivisions.
   (b)   The preliminary plat shall be submitted to all utility companies
serving the subdivision for their recommendations.
   (c)   Utility easements 12 feet in width for communication, electric power
and street lighting distribution lines and facilities shall be provided on all
front lot lines and along certain side or rear lot lines where necessary.
   (d)   Prior to the granting of final approval, the subdivider shall have
installed or furnished adequate bond for the ultimate installation in
accordance with the requirements of the following:
      (1)   Underground communication cables;
      (2)   Underground distribution cables for power and street lighting from
a common distribution system, and the equipment and housing necessary in the
operation of the distribution system; and
      (3)   Adequate provision for street light lamps and standards in
accordance with a design approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
   (e)   The Commission may authorize a variance from this section when undue
hardship may result from strict compliance herewith. In granting any such
variance, the Commission shall prescribe only conditions that it deems
necessary or desirable for the public interest and only if it finds that there
are special circumstances or conditions affecting such property such that the
strict application of this section would deprive the applicant of the
reasonable use of his or her land.
(Ord. 17-O-35, passed 11-20-2017)
§ 1248.15  STREET LIGHTING.
   Street lighting may be required and shall be installed in accordance with
current minimum standards as set forth by the American Society of Illuminating
Engineers. Such installation shall be completed within one year after the
completion of subdivision construction, where deemed necessary by the Planning
and Zoning Commission.
(Ord. 17-O-35, passed 11-20-2017)
§ 1248.16  LANDSCAPING AND ENTRANCEWAYS.
   (a)   All exposed areas within the dedicated street area shall be graded and
seeded in accordance with ODOT Item 659, seeding and mulching, as amended, and
according to a Landscaping Plan approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
Street trees may be required and planted in the public street right-of-way not
less than four feet from a sidewalk or curb and not less than 50 feet apart.
   (b)   Each entrance to or exit from a subdivision shall be adequately
landscaped according to an approved landscaping plan that shall be clearly set
forth, upon the plat. Such landscaping may include structures such as walls or
fences as approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission provided the structure
has a height of no more than four feet above grade. The landscaping plan, once
approved, may not be modified without the prior approval of the Planning and
Zoning Commission. The Planning and Zoning Commission may approve a structure
with a height greater than four feet and the structure may consist of
additional decorative features, including, but not limited to, railings,
pillars, arches, gateways and lampposts, and other suitable architectural
design features, if it finds that:
      (1)   The structure and landscaping will not interfere with traffic by
impairing sight lines or otherwise unduly interfering with vehicular, bicycle
or pedestrian traffic;
      (2)   The feature is part of the overall architectural theme of the
entrance and does not unreasonably detract from the surrounding residential
areas;
      (3)   The structure is placed upon an appropriate foundation and is
composed of suitable, durable material; and
      (4)   The proper upkeep and maintenance of the structure is assured
through appropriate deed restrictions, approved by the city, placing
responsibility for the maintenance and upkeep upon the owners of the sublots
within the subdivision that can be legally enforced by the owner or owners of
sublots within the subdivision as well as the city, at the expense of the owner
or owners upon the failure of the owner or owners to do so.
(Ord. 17-O-35, passed 11-20-2017)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ec7ad15d617dbba9e0ee3d1ed637d1d7d3b2411d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3778.jpg]
 
(Ord. 17-O-35, passed 11-20-2017)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ec7ad15d617dbba9e0ee3d1ed637d1d7d3b2411d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3776.jpg]
 
(Ord. 17-O-35, passed 11-20-2017)
TITLE SIX - ZONING
CHAPTER 1260:  INTENT AND APPLICATION
Section
1260.01   Purpose and intent.
1260.02   Relation to other laws.
1260.03   Interpretation.
1260.04   Separability.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Basis of districting or zoning; classification of buildings or structures -
see Ohio R.C. 713.10
   Division of municipal corporation into zones - see Ohio R.C. 713.06
   Restrictions on location, bulk and height of buildings and structures - see
Ohio R.C. 713.07
   Restrictions on percentage of lot occupancy and set-back building lines -
see Ohio R.C. 713.09
§ 1260.01  PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   The purpose of this Zoning Code and the intent of Council in its adoption is
to promote and protect the public health, safety, convenience, comfort and
prosperity and the general welfare of the city, by regulating the use of
buildings, other structures and land for residences, public facilities,
institutions, business, services, industry or other purposes; by regulating and
restricting the bulk, height, design, percent of lot occupancy and location of
buildings; by regulating and limiting population density; and, for the
aforesaid purposes, to divide the land within the city into districts of such
number and dimensions in accordance with the objectives of the Comprehensive
Plan; and to provide procedures for the administration, interpretation,
amendment and enforcement of the Zoning Code.  This Zoning Code is intended to
achieve, among others, the following objectives:
   (a)   To protect the character and values of residential, institutional and
public uses, business and industrial uses, and to insure their orderly and
beneficial development;
   (b)   To provide adequate open spaces for light, air and outdoor uses;
   (c)   To prevent overcrowding of the land;
   (d)   To prevent excessive concentration of population;
   (e)   To regulate and control the location and spacing of buildings on the
lot and in relation to the surrounding property so as to carry out the
objectives of the Comprehensive Plan;
   (f)   To regulate the location of buildings and intensity of uses in
relation to streets so as to minimize interference by traffic movements and
thereby reduce street congestion and improve public safety;
   (g)   To establish zoning patterns that insure economical extension for
sewers, water supply, waste disposal and other public utilities, as well as
developments for recreation, schools and other public facilities;
   (h)   To guide the future development of the city to bring about the gradual
conformity of land and building uses in accordance with objectives of the
Comprehensive Plan; and
   (i)   To accomplish the specific intents and goals set forth in the
introductions to the respective chapters.
(Ord. 11-O-1, passed 2-23-2011)
§ 1260.02  RELATION TO OTHER LAWS.
   This Zoning Code shall govern wherever this Code imposes greater
restrictions upon the use of buildings or land, the height or bulk of
buildings, or requires larger land or building areas, yards or other open space
than are otherwise required or imposed by other deed restrictions, codes, laws,
ordinances, rules or regulations. Conversely, other city and state codes, laws,
ordinances, rules or regulations shall govern where they impose greater
restrictions than this Zoning Code.
(Ord. 11-O-1, passed 2-23-2011)
§ 1260.03  INTERPRETATION.
   In interpreting and applying the provisions of the Zoning Code, such
provisions shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of
public health, safety, convenience, comfort, prosperity and general welfare and
the objectives set forth throughout the Zoning Code. Except as specifically
provided herein, it is not intended by the Zoning Code to repeal, abrogate or
annul any existing provision of any law or ordinance or any rule or regulation
previously adopted or issued pursuant to law relating to the use of structures
and land and the design, erection, alteration or maintenance of structures
thereon.
(Ord. 11-O-1, passed 2-23-2011)
§ 1260.04  SEPARABILITY.
   If any provision, or the application of any provision, of this Zoning Code
or amendments thereto is declared to be invalid by a judicial decision of a
court of competent jurisdiction, the effect of such determination shall be
limited to that provision or provisions expressly stated to be invalid, and
such determination shall not affect, impair or nullify this Zoning Code as
amended as a whole or any other part thereof.
(Ord. 11-O-1, passed 2-23-2011)
CHAPTER 1261:  DEFINITIONS
Section
1261.01   Interpretation and intent.
1261.02   General terms.
1261.03   Automotive.
1261.04   Buildings and structures.
1261.05   Dwellings.
1261.06   Grades and drainage.
1261.07   Lots.
1261.08   Streets and rights-of-way.
1261.09   Uses.
1261.10   Yards.
§ 1261.01  INTERPRETATION AND INTENT.
   For the purpose of this Zoning Code, the following terms and words used
herein shall be interpreted as follows:
   (a)   The word "person" includes a firm, association, organization,
partnership, trust, company or corporation, as well as an individual.
   (b)   The present tense includes the future tense, the singular number
includes the plural and the plural number includes the singular.
   (c)   The word "shall" is a mandatory requirement, the word "may" is a
permissive requirement and the word "should" is a preferred requirement.
   (d)   The words "used" and "occupied" include the words "intended, designed
or arranged to be used" and "intended, designed or arranged to be occupied",
respectively.
   (e)   The word "lot" includes the words "sublot", "plot", "piece" and
"parcel".
   (f)   The word "he" includes "she"; "him" includes "her"; and "his" includes
"hers".
   (g)   The term "such as" shall be construed as introducing a typical or
illustrative enumeration of uses.  A colon used to introduce an enumeration
shall be construed as being the complete enumeration of uses and not
illustrative.
(Ord. 11-O-1, passed 2-23-2011)
§ 1261.02  GENERAL TERMS.
   As used in this Zoning Code:
   (a)   Association.  "Association" means a legal entity operating under
recorded land agreements or contracts through which each unit owner in a
conservation development is a member and each dwelling unit is subject to
charges for a proportionate share of the expenses of the organization's
activities such as maintaining common open space and other common areas and
providing services needed for the development. An association can take the form
of a homeowners' association, community association, condominium association or
other similar entity.
   (b)   Board.  "Board" means the Board of Zoning Appeals of the City of
Kirtland.
   (c)   Capacity in persons.  "Capacity in persons" means the maximum number
of persons who can avail themselves of the services or goods of an
establishment, at any one time, with reasonable comfort, or according to
applicable codes.
   (d)   City Engineer.  "City Engineer" means the Engineer of the City of
Kirtland.
   (e)   Comprehensive Plan.  "Comprehensive Plan" means a plan adopted by the
Planning and Zoning Commission and Council, establishing the goals, objectives
and policies of the community. This Plan shall include the general location and
extent of present and proposed facilities, including housing, industrial and
commercial uses, major streets, parks, schools and other community facilities.
   (f)   Conditional use.  "Conditional use" means a certain type of main use,
so classified because of its uncommon characteristics, infrequent occurrence,
large land requirement or other features and shall not be permitted in certain
locations by right. Such use requires consideration and approval by the
Planning and Zoning Commission according to procedures and standards as
provided in
Chapter 1285.
   (g)   Conditional use permit.  "Conditional use permit" means a permit
issued by the Zoning Inspector upon approval by the Planning and Zoning
Commission to allow a use, other than a principally permitted use, to be
established within a district.
   (h)   Council.  "Council" means Council of the City of Kirtland.
   (i)   Density.  "Density" means the number of dwelling units per acre of
land.
      (1)   Gross density.  "Gross density" means the number of dwelling units
per acre of the total land to be developed.
      (2)   Net density.  "Net density" means the number of dwelling units per
acre of land when the acreage involved includes only land devoted to
residential uses.
   (j)   Development plan.  "Development plan" means the site plan, drawings
and information required as provided in Chapter 1263.
   (k)   District.  "District" means a portion of the territory of the city
within which certain uniform zoning regulations and requirements, or various
combinations thereof, apply under the provisions of this Zoning Code.
   (l)   Employees, number of.  "Employees, number of" means the maximum number
of persons on the two largest successive shifts.
   (m)   Engineer.  "Engineer" means any person registered to practice
professional engineering by the State Board of Registration, as specified in
Ohio R.C. 4733.14.
   (n)   Essential services.  "Essential services" means the erection,
construction, alteration or maintenance, by public utilities or municipal or
other governmental agencies, of underground gas, electrical, steam or water
transmission or distribution systems or collection, communication, supply or
disposal systems or sites, including poles, wires, mains, drains, sewers,
pipes, traffic signals, hydrants or other similar equipment and accessories in
connection therewith, which are reasonably necessary for the furnishing of
adequate service by such public utilities or municipal or other governmental
agencies, or for the public health, safety or general welfare, but not
including buildings.
   (o)   Family.  "Family" means one or more persons related to each other by
blood or adoption, together with such blood relatives' respective spouses, who
are living together in a single dwelling and maintaining a common household. A
family includes domestic servants and not more than one gratuitous guest
residing with such family.
   (p)   Mayor.  "Mayor" means the Mayor of the City of Kirtland.
   (q)   Nonconformity.  "Nonconformity" means a building, structure, sign or
use of land existing at the time of enactment of this Zoning Code which does
not conform to the regulations of the district or zone in which it is situated.
   (r)   Open space.  "Open space" means an area open to the sky, which may be
on the same lot with a building. The area may include, along with natural
environmental features, swimming pools, tennis courts and any other
recreational facilities that the Planning and Zoning Commission deems
permissible. Streets, structures for habitation and the like shall not be
included.
   (s)   Planning and Zoning Commission.  "Planning and Zoning Commission"
means the Planning and Zoning Commission of the City of Kirtland.
   (t)   Seat.  "Seat" means the number of seating units installed or
indicated, on each 24 inches of benches, pews, or space for loose chairs or
similar seating facilities. Spacing of rows shall be assumed at 33 inches on
center.
   (u)   Subdivision.  “Subdivision” means:
      (1)   The division of any parcel of land shown as a unit or as contiguous
units on the last preceding tax roll into two or more parcels, sites or lots,
any one of which is less than five acres, for the purpose of transfer of
ownership. However, the division or partition of land into parcels of more than
five acres not involving any new streets or easements of access and the sale or
exchange of parcels between adjoining lot owners, where such sale or exchange
does not create additional building sites, shall be exempted (may be considered
a minor subdivision).
      (2)   The improvement of one or more parcels of land for residential,
commercial or industrial structures or groups of structures, involving the
division of allocation of land for the opening, widening or extension of any
street; or the division or allocation of land as open spaces for common use by
owners, occupants, or lease holders, or as easements for the extension and
maintenance of public sewer, water, storm drainage or other public facilities.
(Am. Ord. 13-O-60, passed 12-16-2013)
   (v)   Variance.  "Variance" means a modification of the strict terms of
relevant regulations where such modification will not be contrary to the public
interest and where, owing to conditions peculiar to the property and not the
result of the action of the applicant, a literal enforcement of the regulations
would result in unnecessary and undue hardship.
   (w)   Zoning Code.  "Zoning Code" means Ordinance No. 75-0-53 passed June 2,
1975 as amended.
   (x)   Zoning permit.  "Zoning permit" means a permit issued by the Zoning
Inspector indicating a proposed project conforms to the zoning regulations of
the city.
(Ord. 11-O-1, passed 2-23-2011)
§ 1261.03  AUTOMOTIVE.
   (a)   Automotive repair garage.  "Automotive repair garage" means the
repair, rebuilding or reconditioning of motor vehicles or parts thereof,
including collision service, painting and steam cleaning of vehicles. It
includes major mechanical and body work, and storage of vehicles not in
operating condition.
   (b)   Automotive service station.  "Automotive service station" means
buildings and premises where gasoline, oil, grease, batteries, tires and motor
vehicle accessories may be supplied and dispensed at retail and where, in
addition, the following services may be rendered and sales made:
      (1)   Sales and service of spark plugs, batteries and distributor parts;
      (2)   Tire servicing and repair, but not recapping or regrooving;
      (3)   Replacement of muffler and tailpipes, water hoses, fan belts, brake
fluid, light bulbs, fuses, floor mats, seat covers, windshield wipers and
blades, grease retainers, wheel bearings, mirrors and the like;
      (4)   Radiator cleaning and flushing;
      (5)   Washing, polishing and sale of washing and polishing materials;
      (6)   Greasing and lubrication;
      (7)   Providing and repairing fuel pumps and oil pumps and lines;
      (8)   Minor servicing and repair of carburetors or fuel injection
systems;
      (9)   Adjusting and repairing brakes;
      (10)   Minor motor adjustment not involving removal of the head or
crankcase or racing the motor.
   (c)   Car wash.  "Car wash" means a building or portion thereof containing
facilities for washing automobiles, using either production line methods, with
a chain conveyor, blower and steam cleaning device, or other methods or
mechanical devices.
   (d)   Floor area, loading requirements.  "Floor area, loading requirements"
means the total floor area used for the main and accessory activities and
storage areas of the building served.
   (e)   Floor area, parking requirements.  "Floor area, parking requirements"
means the total area of all the floors of the building used by the principal
activity as enumerated in the schedule, §
1288.05, measured from the exterior faces of the building. Basement areas of
other floors or parts thereof, designed, arranged or used exclusively for
accessory storage or similar uses, may be excluded from the floor area.
   (f)   Garage, private.  "Garage, private" means a detached accessory
building or portion of a principal building for the parking or temporary
storage of automobiles, travel trailers, boats and/or other vehicles or
equipment of the occupants of the premises.
   (g)   Garage, public or storage.  "Garage, public or storage" means a
building or part thereof, other than a private garage, for the storage of motor
vehicles or other equipment in which repair of vehicles or equipment may be
carried on.
   (h)   Motor vehicle.  "Motor vehicle" means any passenger vehicle, truck,
truck-trailer, trailer or semitrailer propelled or drawn by mechanical power.
   (i)   Off-street loading space.  "Off-street loading space" means space
logically and conveniently located for bulk pick-ups and deliveries, scaled to
delivery vehicles expected to be used and accessible to such vehicles when
required off-street parking spaces are filled. Required off-street loading
space shall not be included as off-street parking space. All off-street loading
spaces shall be located totally outside of any street or alley right-of-way.
   (j)   Off-street parking space.  "Off-street parking space" means an area
not less than nine feet by 20 feet, together with properly related access to a
public street and maneuvering room, but located totally outside of any street
right-of-way.
   (k)   Recreational equipment.  "Recreational equipment" means travel
trailer, recreational vehicle (RV), camper, trailer, boat and boat trailer,
all-terrain vehicle, motor home and tent trailer.
   (l)   Seating capacity.  "Seating capacity" means the number of seating
units installed or indicated on plans for places of assembly; where not
indicated on plans, it shall be assumed that a seating unit will occupy six
square feet of floor area exclusive of all aisles or areas used for assembly.
(Ord. 11-O-1, passed 2-23-2011)
§ 1261.04  BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES.
   (a)   Alteration.  "Alteration" means a change in the size, shape,
character, occupancy or use of a building or structure.
   (b)   Awning.  "Awning" means a rooflike cover, temporary in nature, which
projects from the wall of a building.
   (c)   Basement.  "Basement" means a story all or partly underground but
having at least one-half of its height below the average level of the adjoining
ground.
   (d)   Buildable land.  "Buildable land" means the area of the conservation
development excluding the areas of wetland, submerge areas, slopes of 25
percent or steeper and the 100-year floodplain.
   (e)   Building.  "Building" means any structure designed or intended for the
support, enclosure, shelter or protection of persons, animals, chattels or
property.
   (f)   Building, accessory.  "Building, accessory" means a subordinate
building detached from but located on the same lot as the principal building,
the use of which is incidental and accessory to that of the main building or
use.
   (g)   Building envelope.  "Building envelope" means an area within a
conservation development that is designated as a location within which a
dwelling unit is to be placed in compliance with the building setback and
spacing requirements established by the conservation zoning regulations. A
building envelope may or may not be located within a sublot and may or may not
have frontage on a public street.
   (h)   Building height.  "Building height" means the vertical distance
measured from the average elevation of the proposed finished grade at that side
of the building which has the greatest vertical distance to the highest point
of the roof for a flat roof; to the deck line of a mansard roof; and to the
mean height between the eaves and the ridge for a gable, hip or gambrel roof.
   (i)   Building, principal.  "Building, principal" means a building in which
is conducted the main or principal use of the lot on which such building is
situated.
   (j)   Canopy.  "Canopy" means a rooflike structure of a permanent nature
extending beyond exterior walls.  A canopy is also referred to as a "marquee".
   (k)   Carport.  "Carport" means an open-sided roofed automobile shelter.
   (l)   Erect.  "Erect" means to build, construct, attach, hang, place,
suspend or fix and also includes the painting of wall signs.
   (m)   Signs.  "Signs" means any visual communication display, object,
device, graphic, structure or part, situated indoors or outdoors, or attached
to, painted on or displayed from a building or structure, in order to direct or
attract attention, or to announce or promote, an object, product, place,
activity, person, institution, organization or business or the like, by means
of letters, words, model, banner, flag, pennant, insignia, device, designs,
colors, symbols, fixtures, images, illuminations or representation used as, or
which is in the nature of an announcement, direction or advertisement. For the
purpose of this Code, the word "sign" does not include flag, pennant, badge or
insignia of any government or governmental agency.
   (n)   Structure.  "Structure" means anything constructed or erected, the use
of which requires a fixed location on the ground, and including, but not
limited to, buildings, barriers, bridges, decks, fences, gazebos, outdoor
seating facilities, platforms, poles, backstops for tennis courts, pergolas,
pools, patios, paved areas, sidewalks, tanks, tents, towers, sheds, signs and
walls, but not including any vehicles, buses or former commercial vehicles,
trailers and/or other vehicles, whether with or without wheels or other
supports.
(Ord. 11-O-1, passed 2-23-2011)
§ 1261.05  DWELLINGS.
   (a)   Building, residential.  "Building, residential" means a building which
is arranged, designed, used or intended to be used for residential occupancy by
one or more families or lodgers and which includes, but is not limited to, the
following types:
      (1)   Single-family detached dwellings;
      (2)   Two-family dwellings;
      (3)   Multifamily dwellings; and
      (4)   A row of single- or two-family attached dwellings, developed
initially under single ownership or control.
   (b)   Dwelling.  "Dwelling" means any building or structure, except a house
trailer or mobile home as defined by Ohio R.C. 4501.01, which is wholly or
partly used or intended to be used for living or sleeping by one or more human
occupants.
   (c)   Dwelling unit.  "Dwelling unit" means one or more rooms intended to be
occupied by and providing facilities for one family, including rooms and/or
facilities for cooking, bathing and toilet facilities.
   (d)   Multifamily dwelling.  "Multifamily dwelling" means a dwelling
consisting of three or more dwelling units, with cooking and toilet facilities
for each dwelling unit.
   (e)   Single-family dwelling.  "Single-family dwelling" means a dwelling
consisting of a single dwelling unit only, separated from other dwelling units
by open space.
   (f)   Two-family dwelling.  "Two-family dwelling" means a dwelling
consisting of two dwelling units which may be either attached side by side or
one above the other, with each unit having a separate or combined entrance or
entrances.
(Ord. 11-O-1, passed 2-23-2011)
§ 1261.06  GRADES AND DRAINAGE.
   (a)   Borrow pit.  "Borrow pit" means any place or premises where dirt,
soil, sand, gravel or other material is removed, by excavation or otherwise,
below the grade of surrounding land, for any purpose other than that necessary
and incidental to grading or to building construction or operation on the
premises.
   (b)   Channel.  "Channel" means a natural or artificial watercourse of
perceptible extent, with a bed and banks to confine and conduct flowing water
continuously or periodically.
   (c)   Flood plain.  "Flood plain" means that land, including the floodway
fringe and the floodway, subject to inundation by the regional flood.
   (d)   Flood protection elevation.  "Flood protection elevation" means the
elevation to which uses regulated by this Zoning Code are required to be
elevated or floodproofed.
   (e)   Flood, regional.  "Flood, regional" means a large flood which has
previously occurred or which may be expected to occur on a particular stream
because of its physical characteristics. The regional flood generally has an
average frequency of the 100-year recurrence interval flood.
   (f)   Floodway.  "Floodway" means that portion of the flood plain, including
the channel, which is required to convey the regional flood waters. Floods of
more frequent recurrence are usually contained completely within the floodway.
   (g)   Floodway fringe.  "Floodway fringe" means that portion of the flood
plain, excluding the floodway, where development may be allowed under certain
restrictions. The floodway fringe is delineated by floods having an average
frequency of the 500-year recurrence interval flood.
   (h)   Grade.  "Grade" means the average level of the finished surface of the
ground adjacent to the exterior walls of a building or structure.
   (i)   Natural feature.  "Natural feature" means an existing component of the
landscape maintained as a part of the natural environment and having ecological
value in contributing beneficially to air quality, erosion control, groundwater
recharge, noise abatement, visual amenities, the natural diversity of plant and
animal species, human recreation, reduction of climatic stress and energy
costs.
   (j)   Nature preserve.  "Nature preserve" means an area designated for the
preservation of natural, ecological or scenic resources.
   (k)   Reach.  "Reach" is a hydraulic engineering term to describe
longitudinal segments of a stream or river. A reach will generally include the
segment of the flood hazard area where flood heights are influenced by a human-
made or natural obstruction. In an urban area, the segment of a stream or river
between two consecutive bridge crossings would typically constitute a reach.
   (l)   Wetland.  "Wetland" means an area that is inundated or saturated by
surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and
that under normal circumstances does support, a prevalence of vegetation
typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally
include swamps, marshes, bogs and similar areas. The three criteria that must
exist on a site for an area to be designated a wetland are hydric soils,
hydrophytic vegetation and wetland hydrology.
(Ord. 11-O-1, passed 2-23-2011)
§ 1261.07  LOTS.
   (a)   Lot. “Lot” means a parcel of land of sufficient size to meet minimum
zoning requirements for use, coverage and area and to provide such yards and
other open spaces as are required in this Zoning Code. A lot shall have
frontage on an improved public street and may consist of:
      (1)   A single lot of record;
      (2)   A portion of a lot of record; or
      (3)   A combination of complete lots of record, of complete lots of
record and portions of lots of record, or of portions of lots of record.
   (b)   Lot area. “Lot area” means the area of a horizontal plane bounded by
the front, side, and rear lot lines.
   (c)   Lot frontage.
      (1)   “Lot frontage” means the portion of a lot nearest the street. For
the purpose of determining yard requirements on corner lots and through lots,
all sides of a lot adjacent to a street shall be considered frontage and yards
shall be provided as indicated in §
1261.10(b). On comer lots, the rear yard shall be interpreted to be opposite
the frontage having the least dimension. On square or approximately square
corner lots, the rear yard shall be considered that which is opposite the
frontage bearing the official post office address. Through lots shall be
interpreted to have two front yards and two side yards.
      (2)   Minimum lot frontage requirements shall be determined by a
continuous measurement on one frontage. The totaling of discontinuous
measurements on one frontage or on more than one frontage to meet minimum
frontage requirements is not permitted.
   (d)   Lot line, front. “Lot line, front” means that boundary of a lot which
is along the side line of an existing or dedicated public street or other
public way. Where such public way is not a dedicated street, the right-of-way
of such public way shall be deemed to be 60 feet, unless otherwise provided.
   (e)   Lot line, rear. “Lot line, rear” means that boundary of a lot which is
most distant from and is, or is most nearly, parallel to the front lot line.
   (f)   Lot line, side. “Lot line, side” means any boundary of a lot which is
not a front lot line or a rear lot line.
   (g)   Lot measurements. A lot shall be measured as follows:
      (1)   The depth of a lot shall be considered to be the distance between
the mid-points of straight lines connecting the foremost points of the side lot
lines in the front and the rearmost points of the side lot lines in the rear;
and
      (2)   The width of a lot shall be considered to be the distance between
straight lines connecting front and rear lot lines at each side of the lot,
measured at the building set-back line.
   (h)   Lot, minimum area of. “Lot, minimum area of” means the lot area
computed exclusive of the following:
      (1)   Any portion of the right-of-way of any public street or easement
for a street;
      (2)   Of the total area of all other easements, the portion that exceeds
20 percent of the total area of the lot; and
      (3)   The areas of ponds, lakes, rivers, streams, and federally
designated flood plains, on lots that do not meet the requirements of §
1246.02(b).
   (i)   Lot of record. “Lot of record” means a lot which is part of a
subdivision recorded in the office of the County Recorder or a lot or parcel
described by metes and bounds, the description of which has been so recorded.
   (j)   Lot types. Terminology used in this Zoning Code with reference to
corner lots, interior lots, and through lots is as follows:
      (1)   Corner lot. “Corner lot” means a lot located at an intersection of
two or more streets. A lot abutting on a curved street shall be considered a
corner lot if straight lines drawn from the foremost points of the side lot
lines to the foremost point of the lot meet at an interior angle of less than
135 degrees.
      (2)   Interior lot. “Interior lot” means a lot other than a corner lot
with only one frontage on a street.
      (3)   Through lot. “Through lot” means a lot other than a corner lot with
frontage on more than one street. Through lots abutting two streets may be
referred to as double frontage lots.
   (k)   Premises. “Premises” means any lot, including buildings or
improvements thereon.
   (l)   Roadway frontage. “Roadway frontage” means the distance any zoning lot
has on any publicly dedicated roadway as defined in §
1240.07(gg).
(Ord. 11-O-1, passed 2-23-2011; Am. Ord. 13-O-60, passed 12-16-2013)
§ 1261.08  STREETS AND RIGHTS-OF-WAY.
   (a)   Easement.  "Easement" means authorization by a property owner for the
use of any designated part of his or her property by someone else for a
specified purpose.
   (b)   Public way.  "Public way" means any alley, avenue, bikeway, boulevard,
bridge, channel, ditch, easement, expressway, freeway, highway land, parkway,
right-of-way, road, sidewalk, street, subway, tunnel, viaduct, wall or other
way in which the general public or a public entity has a right or which is
dedicated, whether improved or not.
   (c)   Right-of-way.  "Right-of-way" means a strip of land taken or dedicated
for use as a public way. In addition to the roadway, it normally incorporates
the curbs, lawn strips, sidewalks and lighting and drainage facilities and may
include special features (required by the topography or treatment) such as
grade separation, landscaped areas, viaducts and bridges.
   (d)   Sidewalk.  "Sidewalk" means that portion of a road right-of-way
outside the roadway, which is improved for the use of pedestrian traffic. (See
"walkway.")
   (e)   Thoroughfare, street or road; approved private drive.
      (1)   Approved private drive.  “Approved private drive” means the full
width of an easement with a part thereof being paved as a private drive and not
dedicated to the city for public use, providing access to residential or other
abutting property in those subdivisions which were authorized to construct
approved private drives in lieu of dedicated streets prior to the adoption of
Ordinance No. 10-O-35, passed on 7-12-2010.
(Am. Ord. 13-O-60, passed 12-16-2013)
      (2)   Street or road thoroughfare.  "Street or road thoroughfare" means
the full width between property lines, bounding a public way or the full width
of the right-of-way dedicated to the city with a part thereof to be used for
vehicular traffic. Street or road thoroughfares may be designated as follows:
         A.   Arterial street.  "Arterial street" means a highway primarily for
through traffic, carrying heavy loads and a large volume of traffic, usually on
a continuous route.
         B.   Collector street.  "Collector street" means a thoroughfare in a
residential, industrial, commercial or other type of development, which
primarily carries traffic from local streets to arterial streets, including the
principal entrance and circulation routes in residential subdivisions.
         C.   Cul-de-sac.  "Cul-de-sac" means a local street with one end open
to traffic and the other end terminating in a vehicular turn-around.
         D.   Dead-end street.  "Dead-end street" means a street temporarily
having only one outlet for vehicular traffic and intended to be extended or
continued in the future.
         E.   Half street.  "Half street" means a street for which only a
portion of the required right-of-way width has been dedicated.
         F.   Local street.  "Local street" means a street primarily for
providing access to residential, commercial or other abutting property.
         G.   Marginal access street.  "Marginal access street" means a local
or collector street, parallel and adjacent to an arterial or collector street,
providing access to abutting properties and protection from arterial or
collector streets.
   (f)   Walkway.  "Walkway" means a dedicated public way, four feet or more in
width, for pedestrian use only, whether or not along the side of a road.
(Ord. 11-O-1, passed 2-23-2011)
§ 1261.09  USES.
   (a)   Accessory use or accessory structure.  "Accessory use" or "accessory
structure" means on the same lot with, and of a nature customarily incidental
and subordinate to, the principal use or structure.
   (b)   Active recreation.  "Active recreation" means leisure time activities
characterized by repeated and concentrated use of land, often requiring
equipment and taking place at prescribed places, sites or fields. Examples of
active recreation facilities include golf courses, tennis courts, swimming
pools, and softball, baseball and soccer fields. For the purpose of these
regulations, active recreation facilities do not include paths for bike riding,
hiking, horseback riding and walking and picnic areas.
   (c)   Agricultural building or structure.  "Agricultural building or
structure" means any building or structure existing or erected on land used
principally for agricultural purposes, with the exception of dwelling units.
   (d)   Agriculture.  "Agriculture" means the use of land for agricultural
purposes, including farming, dairying, pasturage, apiculture, horticulture,
floriculture, viticulture and animal and poultry husbandry, and the necessary
accessory uses for packing, treating or storing the produce. However, the
operation of any such accessory use shall be secondary to that of the normal
agricultural activities.
   (e)   Airport.  "Airport" means an area of land or water which is used or
intended for use for the landing and taking off of either public or private
aircraft and any appurtenant areas which are used or intended for use for
airport buildings or other airport facilities or rights-of-way, including all
necessary taxi-ways, aircraft storage and tie-down areas, hangars and other
necessary buildings and open spaces.
   (f)   Apartment hotel.  "Apartment hotel" means a hotel in which at least 90
percent of the hotel accommodations are occupied by permanent guests.
   (g)   Arboretum.  "Arboretum" means a botanical garden exhibiting trees for
their scientific interest and educational value.
   (h)   Assisted living facility.  "Assisted living facility" means a facility
that provides supervision or assistance with activities of daily living,
coordination of services by outside health care providers and monitors
residents' activities to help to ensure their health, safety and well-being.
   (i)   Bed and breakfast.  "Bed and breakfast" means a dwelling or part
thereof, other than a hotel, motel or restaurant occupied by the owner, where
meals and/or sleeping facilities are provided for not more than four guests for
compensation and where no cooking or dining facilities are provided in
individual rooms.
   (j)   Business.  "Business" means the conduct of any occupation, trade,
profession or calling, within the specific limitations set forth in Zoning
Districts.
   (k)   Business, local.  "Business, local" means commercial uses and business
and professional services which generally require locations on or near
thoroughfares and/or their intersections, and which, in addition to serving day
to day needs of the community, also supply the more durable and permanent needs
of the whole community. General business uses include, but are not limited to,
such activities as supermarkets; stores that sell hardware, apparel and
footwear; and physicians', dentists', professional and business offices.
   (l)   Cemetery.  "Cemetery" means land used or intended to be used for the
burial of human remains and dedicated for cemetery purposes.
   (m)   Church.  "Church" means a house of worship or a building housing an
organization conducting religious ceremonies for public worship.
   (n)   Clinic.  "Clinic" means a place used for the care, diagnosis and
treatment of sick, ailing, infirm or injured persons and those who are in need
of medical and surgical attention, but who are not provided with board or room
or kept overnight on the premises.
   (o)   Club, private (nonprofit).  "Club, private (nonprofit)" means a
nonprofit association of persons, who are bona fide members paying annual dues,
which owns, hires or leases a building, or portion thereof, the use of such
premises being restricted to members and their guests and the affairs and
management of such private club being conducted by a board of directors,
executive committee or similar body chosen by the members.
   (p)   Common area.  "Common area" means any land area, and associated
facilities, within a conservation development that is held in common ownership
by the residents of the development through a homeowners' association,
community association or other legal entity or which is held by the individual
members of a condominium association as tenants-in-common.
   (q)   Community center, mobile home park.  "Community center, mobile home
park" means a building in a mobile home park which contains recreational
facilities for the exclusive use of occupants and employees of the mobile home
park.
   (r)   Condominium development.  "Condominium development" means a
condominium property, as defined in Ohio R.C. 5311.01, in which two or more
individual dwelling units, together with undivided interests in the common
areas and facilities of the property, are offered for sale pursuant to a common
promotional plan.
   (s)   Conservation development.  "Conservation development" means a
contiguous area of land to be planned and developed as a single entity, in
which housing units are accommodated under more flexible standards, such as
building arrangements and setbacks, than those that would normally apply under
single-family district regulations, allowing for the flexible grouping of
houses in order to conserve common open space and existing natural resources.
   (t)   Conservation easement.  "Conservation easement" means an incorporeal
right or interest in land that is held for the public purpose of retaining
land, water or wetland areas predominantly in their natural, scenic, open or
wooded condition, in agricultural, horticultural, silvicultural or other
farming or forest use; that imposes any limitations on the use or development
of the areas that are appropriate at the time of creation of the conservation
easement to achieve one or more of such purposes; and that includes appropriate
provisions for the holder to enter the property subject to the easement at
reasonable times to ensure compliance with its provisions.
   (u)   Day care center.  "Day care center" means a facility providing
supervision of adults and children and operating only during the normal workday
hours.
   (v)   Dormitory.  "Dormitory" means a dwelling providing sleeping and living
accommodations for students attending a post high school educational
institution, where meals may be provided or where centralized kitchen and
dining facilities may be provided for use by students in preparing their own
meals. Under no circumstances are cooking facilities to be provided in
individual living units.
   (w)   Drive-in or drive-thru.  "Drive-in or drive-thru" restaurant or
service means any establishment that sells food or services and permits placing
an order or conducts business outside of the building and within a motor
vehicle or as a pedestrian, using a drive-in or walk-up window, counter or
remote speaker.
   (x)   Home occupation.  "Home occupation" means an occupation or profession
carried on by a member of the immediate family residing on the premises.
   (y)   Hospital.  "Hospital" means an institution that provides medical,
surgical or psychiatric treatment and nursing care for the ill or injured
temporarily lodged there.
   (z)   Hotel.  "Hotel" means an establishment which offers lodging for
compensation to more than four transient guests.
   (aa)   Industrial, limited.  "Industrial, limited" means manufacturing or
other industrial uses which are usually controlled operations; relatively
clean, quiet and free of objectionable or hazardous elements such as smoke,
noise, odor or dust; operating and storing within enclosed structures; and
generating little industrial traffic and no nuisances.
   (bb)   Institutional use.  "Institutional use" means a center for study and
research in a specialized field, usually connected with a college or
university.
   (cc)   Junk.  "Junk" means worn out and discarded materials that have
outlived their usefulness in their original form, but in general may be turned
to some other use, including, but not limited to, old rope; chain; copper;
parts of machinery; wood; glass; bottles; brass; rags; trash; plastic; waste;
batteries; paper; rubber; junk, dismantled or wrecked automobiles or parts
thereof; iron; steel; old or scrap ferrous or nonferrous materials; and rubbish
of any kind. "Junk building", "junk shop" and "junk yard" means an
establishment or place of business which is maintained or operated for the
purpose of storing, keeping, buying or selling junk, or for the maintenance or
operation of an automobile graveyard, including garbage dumps and sanitary
landfills. The term also encompasses the definition included in Ohio R.C.
4737.05, which states that the definition includes "any site, location or
premises on which are kept two or more junk motor vehicles as defined in §
311.301 of the Revised Code, whether or not for a commercial purpose".
   (dd)   Laundromat.  "Laundromat" means an establishment with machines for
hire or use by the public for washing, drying, dry cleaning or ironing of
fabrics.
   (ee)   Lodge.  "Lodge" means a hall or meeting place of a local branch, or
the members composing such a branch, of a fraternal order or society, such as
the Masons, Knights of Columbus, Moose, American Legion and other similar
organizations.
   (ff)   Mobile home.  "Mobile home" means any self-propelled vehicle so
designed, constructed, re-constructed or added to by means of accessories as
will permit the use and occupancy thereof for human habitation, when connected
to utilities, whether resting on wheels, jacks, blocks or other foundation,
used or so constructed as to permit its being used as a conveyance upon the
public streets and highways, exceeding a gross weight of 4,500 pounds and
having an overall length of at least 30 feet.
   (gg)   Mobile home park.  "Mobile home park" means any site or tract of land
under single ownership upon which three or more mobile homes used for
habitation are parked, either free of charge or for revenue purposes, including
any roadway, building, structure, vehicle or enclosure used or intended for use
as part of the facilities of such park.
   (hh)   Motel.  "Motel" means an establishment which offers lodging for
compensation to transient guests and which consists of a group of attached or
detached living or sleeping accommodations with a bathroom and close space
designed for use by automobile tourists.
   (ii)   Nursing home.  "Nursing home" means a long-term health care facility
that provides full-time care and medical treatment for people who are unable to
take care of themselves.
   (jj)   Permitted use.  "Permitted use" means a use which may be lawfully
established in a particular district, provided that it conforms with all
requirements, regulations and performance standards, if any, of such district.
   (kk)   Place of worship.  "Place of worship" means a church, temple, mosque
or any structure used for religious activities.
   (ll)   Public building.  "Public building" means only those buildings which
are publicly owned or leased, i.e. buildings owned or leased by the U.S.
government, the state or any political subdivision thereof.
   (mm)   Public park.  "Public park" means the use of land for recreational
purposes, which is publicly owned and open to public admission.
   (nn)   Public recreational center.  "Public recreational center" means a
building which is open to public admission and public use for recreational
activities.
   (oo)   Public utility.  "Public utility" means any person fully authorized
to furnish and furnishing, under municipal regulation, to the public,
electricity, gas, steam, telephone, telegraph, transportation, water or other
similar public utility service.
   (pp)   Research uses.  "Research uses" means research, development and
testing related to such fields as chemicals, pharmaceuticals, medicine,
electricity, transportation and engineering. All research testing and
development shall be carried on within entirely enclosed buildings and no
noise, smoke, glare, vibration or odor shall be detected outside of such
buildings.
   (qq)   Roadside stand.  "Roadside stand" means a structure for the display
and sale of agricultural products, with no space for customers within the
structure itself.
   (rr)   School.  "School" means a place or institution where general
education, learning and mental training are imparted, whether or not such
institution is publicly or privately owned.
   (ss)   Shopping center.  "Shopping center" means a group of four or more
separately operated commercial establishments, planned, developed, owned and
managed as a unit, with common off-street parking provided on the property and
designed to serve multipurpose shoppers.
   (tt)   Stable.  "Stable" means a building for lodging and feeding horses.
   (uu)   Swimming pool.  "Swimming pool" means a fabricated structure
constituting a pool or open tank underground or an above-ground rigid
structure, not including ponds or lakes, designed or intended to be used for
swimming purposes, and having a capability of holding water at any point to a
depth of at least 18 inches.
   (vv)   Tourist home.  "Tourist home" means a building designed for or used
as a single-family or a two-family dwelling in which sleeping rooms are
provided or offered to transient guests for compensation.
   (ww)   Use.  "Use" means the purpose or activity for which land or a
building thereon is designed, arranged or intended or for which it is occupied
or maintained and includes any manner of performance of such activity.
   (xx)   Veterinary animal hospital or clinic.  "Veterinary animal hospital or
clinic" means a place used for the care, grooming, diagnosis and treatment of
sick, ailing, infirm or injured animals and animals who are in need of medical
or surgical attention. A veterinary animal hospital or clinic may include
overnight accommodations on the premises for treatment, observation and/or
recuperation and it may also include boarding that is incidental to the primary
activity.
(Ord. 11-O-1, passed 2-23-2011)
§ 1261.10  YARDS.
   (a)   Set-back line.  "Set-back line" means a line, established by this
Zoning Code, generally parallel with and measured from a lot line, defining the
limits of a yard in which no building or structure or portion thereof may be
located above ground, except as may be provided in this Zoning Code.
   (b)   Yard.  "Yard" means a required open space unoccupied and unobstructed
by any structure or portion of a structure from the general ground level of the
graded lot upward, provided that accessories, ornaments, fences, hedges and
furniture may be permitted in any yard, subject to height limitations and
requirements limiting obstruction of visibility. Types of yards are as follows:
      (1)   Front yard.  "Front yard" means a yard extending between side lot
lines across the front of a lot and from the front lot line to the front of the
principal building or accessory building.
      (2)   Rear yard.  "Rear yard" means a yard extending between side lot
lines across the rear of a lot and from the rear lot line to the rear of the
principal building or accessory building.
      (3)   Side yard.  "Side yard" means a yard extending from the principal
building to the side lot line on both sides of the principal building between
the lines establishing the front and rear yards.
(Ord. 11-O-1, passed 2-23-2011)
CHAPTER 1262:  ADMINISTRATION, ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTY
Section
1262.01   Zoning Inspector.
1262.02   Completion of municipal income tax form required prior to issuance of
zoning permits and return of deposited monies or bonds.
1262.03   Application for zoning permits; fees; conditions.
1262.04   Applications requiring Planning and Zoning Commission and Zoning
Inspector approval.
1262.05   Effect of breach of condition or requirement.
1262.06   Inspections.
1262.07   Effective life of zoning certificate.
1262.08   Cash bonds; inspections.
1262.99   Penalty; equitable remedies.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Administrative board; powers and duties - see Ohio R.C. 713.11
   Board of Zoning Appeals - see CHTR.
Art. III, § 3; P. & Z.
Ch. 1264
   Mandatory zoning referendum - see CHTR.
Art. V, § 5
   Municipal Planning and Zoning Commission - see CHTR.
Art. III, § 2; P. & Z.
Ch. 1220
   Notice and hearing on municipal zoning regulations - see Ohio R.C. 713.12
   Procedures for zoning permit approval in Environmental Quality Overlay
Districts - see P. & Z.
1222.09
   Violation of zoning ordinances may be enjoined - see Ohio R.C. 713.13
§ 1262.01  ZONING INSPECTOR.
   (a)   The position of Zoning Inspector is hereby established. The Zoning
Inspector shall be appointed by the Mayor and/or Council for an indefinite
period of time and shall continue until the person so appointed resigns or
otherwise removes himself or herself from such office or is removed as provided
in subsection (c) of this section.
   (b)   No appointment of the Zoning Inspector by the Mayor and/or Council
shall be effective without the concurrence of two-thirds of the members of
Council.
   (c)   The Mayor is hereby authorized to remove the Zoning Inspector for just
cause, provided, however, that such removal shall not take effect without the
concurrence of two-thirds of the members of Council.
   (d)   The Zoning Inspector shall perform the following duties:
      (1)   Provide information pertaining to zoning to anyone desiring such
information;
      (2)   A.   Issue all zoning permits after inspection of all necessary
plans and layouts; and
         B.   Make on-site inspection to determine that the structure conforms
with the Zoning Code.
      (3)   Keep and be responsible for all records pertaining to applications
for zoning permits and the action taken thereon;
      (4)   A.   Conduct investigations and inspect premises to ascertain
conformity with the Zoning Code and, if a violation is ound, pursue the matter
until it is resolved in accordance with the Zoning Code, including the taking
of legal action and the issuing of citations;
         B.   Investigate complaints promptly; and
         C.   Prepare written reports and take pictures of violations for
possible legal action;
      (5)   Enforce all zoning laws of the city;
      (6)   Attend Council and Planning and Zoning Commission meetings as
required; and
      (7)   Perform all other duties required of him or her by the Mayor.
   (e)   Compensation for the Zoning Inspector shall be established at the time
of appointment and may be adjusted from time to time. The method of
establishment shall be by a recommendation from the Mayor with the concurrence
of a majority of Council.
   (f)   In addition to his or her regular compensation authorized herein, the
Zoning Inspector may be entitled to additional employee benefits as Council may
from time to time establish by ordinance.
(Ord. 11-O-1, passed 2-23-2011)
§ 1262.02  COMPLETION OF MUNICIPAL INCOME TAX FORM REQUIRED PRIOR TO ISSUANCE
OF ZONING PERMITS AND RETURN OF DEPOSITED MONIES OR BONDS.
   (a)   The Zoning Inspector shall require applicants for zoning permits to
complete the city's municipal income tax form. Upon receipt of such form, the
Zoning Inspector shall forward it to the Tax Administrator and/or the Director
of Finance for use in the collection of the municipal income tax.
   (b)   Notwithstanding any other provision of these codified ordinances, an
applicant for a zoning permit who has deposited monies or a bond with the city,
pursuant to §§
236.07,
1262.04 or
1442.12 of these codified ordinances, shall not have any portion of such monies
or bond returned until, in addition to all other requirements of these codified
ordinances, the municipal income tax form has been completed in full and
returned to the city.
(Ord. 11-O-1, passed 2-23-2011)
§ 1262.03  APPLICATION FOR ZONING PERMITS; FEES; CONDITIONS.
   (a)   Zoning permit required.  No person shall construct, alter or change
the use of any land, structure or building, including accessory buildings,
without first obtaining a permit therefor from the Zoning Inspector. Certain
uses as provided in §
1262.04 shall require approval of the Planning and Zoning Commission before the
Zoning Inspector may issue a zoning permit.
   (b)   Applications requiring only Zoning Inspector approval.  The
application for a zoning permit shall contain the following information:
      (1)   The name, address and telephone number of the applicant;
      (2)   Proof of ownership or authorization to represent the property
owner;
      (3)   The location of the property, including street address and
permanent parcel number;
      (4)   The current zoning of the property;
      (5)   A description of the project for which approval is sought; and
      (6)   A plot plan showing the proposed location and dimensions of the
proposed construction, alteration or change of use.
   (c)   Drainage plan.  With the filing of the application for a zoning permit
dealing with construction and grading, a drainage plan shall be filed. Such
plan shall show grade elevations and the proposed drainage of the parcel
involved. Such plan must meet with the approval of the Zoning Inspector prior
to the issuance of any zoning permit.
   (d)   Sewers and water supply; location of building. In addition to the
other requirements of this section, no zoning permit shall be issued for any
new dwelling unit, commercial building, industrial building, or other building
to be inhabited by persons until the following conditions are met:
      (1)   An applicant for such a zoning permit shall, prior to the issuance
of such permit, present satisfactory proof that he or she has obtained the
following:
         A.   For residential property, an on-site sewage disposal system
permit from the Lake County Department of Health or proof that the applicant
will be connecting into a public or private sewer system; and
         B.   For all other properties, an on-site sewage disposal system
permit from the Lake County Department of Health and/or the Ohio EPA approval
for the sewage disposal facility or proof that the applicant will be connected
into a public or private sewer system.
      (2)   An applicant shall further be required to present satisfactory
proof that the premises on which the structure is to be constructed are served
by the public water supply or, in the alternative, the applicant for the permit
shall present to the Zoning Inspector a certification by a registered engineer
or a licensed well driller that there is sufficient water from natural sources
to supply the water needs of the use for which the structure is intended
through the drilling of a well specifically located on the premises for which
the building permit is sought, and a certification from the Lake County
Department of Health that the water source indicated is suitable for the use
for which it is intended.
      (3)   An applicant shall further be required to present satisfactory
proof that the structure will be built upon a duly dedicated and accepted
public right-of-way or that the applicant has received the variance provided in
§
1450.01(a) of these codified ordinances.
(Am. Ord. 15-O-21, passed 5-18-2015)
   (e)   Fees.  Each application for a zoning permit shall be accompanied by
the required fee, as established by City Council.
   (f)   Approval of permit.
      (1)   Except as provided in subsection (f)(2) below, within ten working
days after completing his or her review and investigation of the completed
application, the Zoning Inspector shall issue a zoning permit, provided that
the application is accompanied by the proper fee and the Zoning Inspector has
determined that the application complies with all the appropriate requirements
of the zoning code.
      (2)   The Zoning Inspector, after investigating the application, shall
refer the application related to any multi-family or non-residential use to the
Planning and Zoning Commission, to be processed in accordance with §
1262.04, if the Zoning Inspector determines that the change involves a change
in use or, in the event that there is no change in the use, that the proposed
change of occupancy will result in any of the following to wit:
         A.   Any construction, alteration, change or modifications to the
exterior of the premises or structures thereon including parking, landscaping,
or ingress or egress;
         B.   The intensification of the use by reason of the new occupancy
including but not limited to hours of operation, number of employees, increase
in pedestrian or vehicular traffic;
         C.   Modification or need for modification of the drainage or sewage
disposal upon the premises; and
         D.   Erection of new or modification of existing signs or lighting on
the premises.
   (g)   Construction and use shall be as approved.  Zoning permits as issued
by the County Building Department and Zoning Inspector on the basis of approved
plans and applications authorize only the use and arrangement set forth in such
approved plans and applications or any amendments thereto. Use, arrangement or
construction contrary to that which has been authorized shall be deemed a
punishable violation of this code.
      (1)   Violations a nuisance.  Buildings erected, altered, moved, razed or
converted or any use of land or premises carried on in violation of any
provision of this Planning and Zoning Code are declared to be a nuisance per
se. Any building or land use activities considered possible violations of the
provisions of this Planning and Zoning Code which are observed by any city
official shall be reported to the Planning and Zoning Inspector.
      (2)   Complaints. Any citizen may file a written complaint with the
Building and Zoning Inspector to report an alleged violation of this Planning
and Zoning Code. Such written complaint shall fully state the causes and basis
of such complaint.
(Ord. 11-O-1, passed 2-23-2011; Am. Ord. 11-O-38, passed 7-11-2011)
§ 1262.04  APPLICATIONS REQUIRING PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION AND ZONING
INSPECTOR APPROVAL.
   (a)   Uses requiring Commission approval.  Planning and Zoning Commission
approval shall be required prior to issuance of a zoning permit for the
following uses:
      (1)   All permitted main and accessory uses in Business and Industrial
Districts;
      (2)   All permitted multifamily uses;
      (3)   Religious buildings and uses, public and private parks, schools,
recreation centers and public buildings and uses;
      (4)   Privately owned nonprofit golf courses;
      (5)   All uses in Environmental Overlay Districts;
      (6)   Off-street parking in all zoning districts except R-1, R-2 and R-
3 Districts;
      (7)   Fences in Business and Industrial Districts;
      (8)   All signs;
      (9)   All conditional uses;
      (10)   Landscaping as required in Business and Industrial Districts;
      (11)   Auxiliary buildings of more than 1,000 square feet in Residential
Districts; and
      (12)   Any main building or auxiliary building or structure exceeding the
height limitation of the district in which it is located.
(Am. Ord. 14-O-58, passed 11-17-2014)
   (b)   Application submittal. An application for a zoning permit requiring
review and approval of the Planning and Zoning Commission shall be submitted to
the Zoning Inspector by the property owner or his or her authorized agent no
less than 14 days prior to the regularly scheduled meeting of the Planning and
Zoning Commission in order to be placed on the agenda for that meeting. Upon
determining that the application is complete and upon receipt of the required
fee, the Zoning Inspector shall forward the application to the Planning and
Zoning Commission for review and action.
   (c)   Contents of application.
      (1)   Application for a zoning permit requiring Planning and Zoning
Commission approval shall include the following information:
         A.   The name, address and telephone number of the applicant;
         B.   Proof of ownership or authorization to represent the property
owner;
         C.   The location of the property, including the street address and
permanent parcel number;
         D.   The current zoning of the property;
         E.   A description of the project for which approval is sought;
         F.   Names and addresses of each property owner within 500 feet as
shown in the current records of the Lake County Auditor, to be typed on gummed
labels.
      (2)   In addition to the information required in §
1262.03, an application for a zoning permit requiring approval of the Planning
and Zoning Commission shall include preliminary and final development plans as
provided in subsections (d) and (e) of this section. The application fee shall
be as provided in §
1262.03(e).
   (d)   Preliminary development plans. A preliminary development plan shall be
drawn at a scale of not more than 50 feet to one inch and shall include the
following:
      (1)   Survey. A survey of the property by a registered surveyor, as
required by the Zoning Inspector, showing topography at two foot intervals;
land owned and proposed for development; adjoining lots, location of oil and
gas wells; easements; and zoning on subject property and on adjoining
properties;
      (2)   Buildings. The location, area, height and use of all existing and
proposed main and accessory buildings; distances of building to property lines;
nearest buildings on adjoining properties;
      (3)   Traffic. The proposed system of on-site vehicular circulation and
locations of access drives;
      (4)   Parking areas. The layout and estimate of the number of spaces;
distances from parking areas; areas and drives to property lines;
      (5)   Signs. The location, size and height of all signs to be placed on
the property;
      (6)   Landscaping. The location and sizes of areas to be landscaped;
      (7)   Stormwater. The proposed method for managing stormwater;
      (8)   Utilities. The type and location of water supply; the method of
treating sanitary sewage; and
      (9)   Environmental Overlay Districts. The location of any of the
environmental elements on the
property.
   (e)   Contents of final development plans. A final development plan shall
incorporate agreed upon revisions of the preliminary development plan and shall
include all the information contained in the preliminary plan and, in addition,
shall include the following:
      (1)   Buildings. The general design, materials and colors of the existing
and/or proposed main and accessory buildings;
      (2)   Traffic. Methods for control of traffic; width and location of
access drives; type of pavement and curbing;
      (3)   Parking areas. The number of spaces and the type of pavement;
      (4)   Stormwater management. A plan for the proper control of stormwater
as recommended by the City Engineer;
      (5)   Utilities. The location, size and grade for all utility
installations; approval of the County Board of Health for treatment of sanitary
sewage as provided in §
1262.03(d);
      (6)   Signs. The type of illumination, materials, colors and content of
all signs to be placed on the property;
      (7)   Site development. Grading plan; erosion control; landscaping plan
showing location, number and size of plant materials and their scientific and
common names; exterior lighting plan;
      (8)   Agreements.  Preliminary drafts of all agreements, contracts,
dedications, deed restrictions, easements, sureties and other instruments as
may be required; and
      (9)   Floor plans.  Floor plan(s) at a scale of one-quarter inch to the
foot, showing existing and/or proposed uses.
   (f)   Notification of property owners. The Zoning Inspector shall notify
owners of properties within 500 feet of the perimeter of the property proposed
for development not less than ten days prior to the meeting at which the
preliminary development plan will be considered by the Planning and Zoning
Commission.
   (g)   Review by Commission. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall review
the complete application package as transmitted by the Zoning Inspector in
terms of the standards established in this Zoning Code. If deemed necessary,
the Commission, with the consent of the applicant, may refer an application to
qualified consultants for review. The cost of such review shall be at the
expense of the applicant. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall be guided by
the following standards in reviewing each application for a zoning permit:
      (1)   Materials shall be appropriate for the use of the building, for
weathering and for their relationship to other materials, including those used
on adjacent buildings;
      (2)   Colors and textures shall be appropriate for the size and scale of
the building, for weathering, and for their relationship to the site and
adjacent buildings;
      (3)   Architectural details and ornaments shall be meaningful to the
overall design and appropriate for the size and scale of the buildings and for
weathering;
      (4)   Mechanical equipment shall be considered as it affects rooftop
appearance, sidewall openings, sound levels, smoke and other nuisance aspects
and as it relates to overhead wires, gas and electric meter stations and any
other visible appurtenances;
      (5)   Approaches, drives and parking areas shall be considered as they
affect the appearance from the street and from the site as well. The
relationship of paving to the building shall be appropriate considering factors
such as safety, drainage and landscaping;
      (6)   Landscaping shall be appropriate for the size and use of the area
and for its relationship to the building, street, parking area, walks and
adjacent buildings;
      (7)   Lighting shall be considered for the appropriateness of night-time
illumination of the grounds, drives, walks, parking areas and building and its
effect upon surrounding areas; and
      (8)   Signs shall be considered for appropriateness of size, scale,
shape, color and illumination in relation to the building and site.
   (h)   Modifications permitted. Where application of the provision would
result in a development that would not be satisfactory for the zoning district,
the Commission may require adjustment in the development plan, such as
improvement to the design and arrangement of buildings, yards, on-site
circulation, access drives and such other features to further improve the
proposed development and to protect the surrounding developments.
      The Commission may approve adjustments to certain yard requirements if it
finds that openness and other amenities will be attained and that the intent
and purpose of the provisions of the Zoning Code are fulfilled because of
skillful design in the arrangement of buildings, location of drives, on-site
circulation and parking areas, proposed landscaping and other site features
with the following limitations:
      (1)   Front yards of buildings may be reduced by 20 percent of the
required distance;
      (2)   Side or rear yards of a one- or two-story building may be reduced
by 50 percent of the required distance only when adjacent to non-residential
districts;
      (3)   Front yards of parking areas may be reduced to 50 percent of the
required distance; and
      (4)   The total yard area of the lot, the percent of the lot occupied by
buildings and the percent of the lot to be landscaped shall meet or exceed the
regulations for the zoning district.
   (i)   Preliminary approval. If the application and the preliminary
development plan, and any modification thereof proposed by the developer, are
found by the Planning and Zoning Commission to be in compliance with the
requirements of the applicable district and any other applicable parts of this
Zoning Code and the Subdivision Regulations of the city, it shall approve or
deny such preliminary development plan within 45 days from the date of the
meeting when all required plans and data had been received. If the application
is not found to be in compliance therewith, the Commission may recommend
revisions to be made by the developer or reject the entire application.
Approval of the preliminary and final development plans may be given
concurrently.
   (j)   Review of final development plans. Upon approval of a preliminary
development plan, the developer shall prepare and submit a final development
plan(s) to the Commission. Upon receipt of a final development plan, the Zoning
Inspector shall transmit a copy of the final specifications to the City
Engineer for his or her review, report and recommendation. The City Engineer
shall, within 45 days from receiving the final development plan, provide and
furnish to the Commission a report upon the development plan's compliance with
those regulations within the jurisdiction of the City Engineer.
   (k)   Final approval.  If, after evaluation of the City Engineer's report,
the Commission finds that a proposed final development plan is in accordance
with, and represents a detailed expansion of, the preliminary plan heretofore
approved, that it is in conformance with the provisions of this Zoning Code and
the Subdivision Regulations of the city, and that it complies with all of the
conditions which may have been imposed in the approval of the preliminary plan
or in the review of the final plan by the City Engineer, the Commission shall
approve the application for a zoning permit. The decision shall be made within
45 days from the date of the meeting when the City Engineer's report is
received.
(Ord. 11-O-1, passed 2-23-2011)
§ 1262.05  EFFECT OF BREACH OF CONDITION OR REQUIREMENT.
   The breach of any condition or requirement shall automatically invalidate
the zoning permit granted and shall constitute a violation of this Zoning Code.
Such violation shall be punishable in accordance with §
1262.99.
(Ord. 11-O-1, passed 2-23-2011)
§ 1262.06  INSPECTIONS.
   The Zoning Inspector shall make one or more inspections to see if the
construction, alteration or use for which a zoning permit has been issued is in
compliance with such permit.
(Ord. 11-O-1, passed 2-23-2011)
§ 1262.07  EFFECTIVE LIFE OF ZONING CERTIFICATE.
   A zoning certificate issued pursuant to this chapter shall become void if
the proposed construction, alteration or change of use for which the
certificate has been issued is not commenced within one year after the
certificate is issued. If the proposed construction, alteration or change of
use for which the certificate has been issued is commenced within one year
after the certificate is issued, the certificate shall continue to be in force
and effect, except that if such construction, alteration or change of use is
voluntarily discontinued for two years or more, the construction, alteration or
change of use shall then be deemed abandoned and the zoning certificate shall
become void, and any further or continued construction, alteration or change of
use of the property shall require a new zoning certificate in conformity with
the then current zoning laws.
(Ord. 11-O-1, passed 2-23-2011)
§ 1262.08  CASH BONDS; INSPECTIONS.
   (a)   In addition to all other fees, expenses and deposits that may be
required by these codified ordinances, including, but not limited to, those
required by §§
236.07,
1262.03 and
1442.12 of these codified ordinances, when an applicant makes an application
for a zoning permit for the construction of a building or other structure in
excess of 1,000 square feet in area, such applicant shall deposit a cash bond
with the city in the sum as stated in the Fee Schedule in §
236.07 of the City of Kirtland Codified Ordinances.
   (b)   Such cash bond shall be deposited in a special account with the
Director of Finance and shall be retained by the city until the building or
structure for which the permit is issued has been completed and the premises
and adjoining roadways have been inspected by the appropriate individual
appointed by the city to make such inspections to determine that all roads,
streets or highways, curbs, sidewalks, culverts, water lines, storm sewers,
sanitary sewers, drains, swales and ditches have not been damaged and have been
constructed pursuant to the approved plans or have been restored to the same or
equivalent condition as existed prior to the issuance of such permit.
   (c)   Such inspection shall be made by the city upon the request of the
permit applicant. If, upon inspection, the city determines that the premises,
adjoining roadways or highways, curbs, sidewalks, culverts, water lines, storm
sewers, sanitary sewers, drains, swales or ditches have been damaged, have not
been constructed pursuant to the approved plans or have not been restored to
the same or equivalent condition that existed prior to the issuance of such
permit, the applicant shall be notified, in writing, of all conditions that
must be corrected by the applicant.
   (d)   If the conditions to be corrected, as set forth by the city, are not
corrected within 30 days from the date of the notification by the city, the
city may cause such conditions to be corrected and the cost of such correction
shall be paid out of the applicant's bond being held by the city and the
balance, if any, shall be refunded to the applicant.
(Ord. 11-O-1, passed 2-23-2011; Am. Ord. 17-O-20, passed 7-3-2017)
§ 1262.99  PENALTY; EQUITABLE REMEDIES.
   (a)   Whoever violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of this
Zoning Code is guilty of a minor misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than
one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) for each offense. A separate offense shall
be deemed committed each day during or on which a violation or noncompliance
occurs or continues.
   (b)   If a building is, or is proposed to be, located, erected, constructed,
reconstructed, enlarged, changed, maintained or used, or any land is, or is
proposed to be, used, in violation of any of the provisions of this Zoning
Code, the Mayor and/or Council, the County Prosecuting Attorney, the Zoning
Inspector or any adjacent or neighboring property owner who would be especially
damaged by such violation, in addition to other remedies provided by law, may
institute injunction, mandamus, abatement or any other appropriate action or
proceeding to prevent, enjoin, abate or remove such unlawful location,
erection, construction, reconstruction, enlargement, change, maintenance or
use.
(Ord. 11-O-1, passed 2-23-2011)
CHAPTER 1263:  ESTABLISHMENT OF CODE AND MAP
Section
1263.01   Districts.
1263.02   Regulations.
1263.03   Zoning map.
1263.04   District boundary lines.
1263.05   Annexed territory.
§ 1263.01  DISTRICTS.
   (a)   For purposes of this Zoning Code, the following classification of
zoning districts is hereby established in the city.
 
TITLE OF DISTRICT           TEXT ABBREVIATION
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
   One Family            R-3A, R-3B, R-3C, R-3D
   One and Two Family    R-2A, R-2B, R-2C
   One and Two Family    R-1
   Multifamily           R-5
BUSINESS DISTRICTS
   Institutional and OffiIO
   Historic Town Center  HTC
   Retail Business       RB
INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS
   Limited Industrial    LI
 
   (b)   Whenever the abbreviated terms, R-1, R-2A, IO, RB, etc. are used in
this Zoning Code, the abbreviated term shall be construed as referring to the
corresponding district titles as set forth above.
(Ord. 10-O-35, passed 7-12-2010)
§ 1263.02  REGULATIONS.
   (a)   The use, area and yard regulations, the building area, bulk, coverage
and height regulations, the off-street parking and loading requirements, sign
regulations, provisions for performance standards, nonconforming uses, similar
uses, and conditional uses and all the other regulations set forth or referred
to in this Zoning Code are hereby established. Buildings and land shall be
used, the use of buildings and land shall be changed or extended, buildings
shall be designed and erected, and existing buildings or uses shall be altered,
converted, enlarged, reconstructed or moved only in conformance with these
regulations.
   (b)   The classification of districts set forth in §
1263.01 shall not be construed as an enumeration of most restrictive to least
restrictive districts except for those purposes specifically set forth in this
Zoning Code; neither shall it be construed that a use permitted in a certain
district shall be permitted by right in a district which is enumerated
subsequently, unless such use is specifically permitted in such subsequent
district.
   (c)   The main building and use set forth as permitted in the various
districts shall be the only principal building and use permitted therein by
right. The buildings and uses set forth in the various districts as accessory
buildings or uses shall be permitted therein by right as a subordinate building
or use provided such use is specifically permitted and incidental to and
located on the same zoning lot as the main building or use.
   (d)   Uses not specifically permitted, unless determined to be similar to
uses specifically permitted, shall be considered as prohibited.
(Ord. 10-O-35, passed 7-12-2010)
§ 1263.03  ZONING MAP.
   The aforesaid districts are designated by symbols and the locations and
boundaries of such districts are established on the map entitled "Zoning Map of
the City of Kirtland." The notations, schedules and other information shown
thereon and all amendments thereto are hereby made a part of this Zoning Code.
The Map shall indicate the approval of the Planning and Zoning Commission
adoption by Council. The Map, or a print thereof, shall be on file with the
Clerk of Council and the Clerk of the Planning and Zoning Commission.
(Ord. 10-O-35, passed 7-12-2010)
§ 1263.04  DISTRICT BOUNDARY LINES.
   The district boundary lines of the Zone Map enclose an area of a designated
district and generally follow the center lines of streets, lot lines or their
extensions, provided, however:
   (a)   Where a district boundary line is shown by dimension or relationship
as being located a specific distance from and parallel to a street or property
line, such distance shall control;
   (b)   Where a district boundary line divides a parcel of land, the location
of such boundary, unless related to fixed points on the property boundary,
shall be determined by scale, and the parts of the lot shall comply with the
regulations of the district in which each part is located;
   (c)   Where a district boundary line does not coincide with any of the
aforesaid lines, and where it is not located by dimensions or fixed points
shown on the Map, it shall be determined by the scale appearing thereon;
   (d)   In locations where the Zoning Inspector cannot determine the district
line in accordance with the above rules, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall
determine the exact location.
(Ord. 10-O-35, passed 7-12-2010)
§ 1263.05  ANNEXED TERRITORY.
   All territory which may hereafter be annexed to the city if already zoned
shall be continued in its existing zone classification until amended in
conformance with the procedure outlined in the City Charter.
(Ord. 10-O-35, passed 7-12-2010)
CHAPTER 1264:  BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS
Section
1264.01   Powers and duties.
1264.02   Meetings; hearings; records.
1264.03   Appeals and public hearings.
1264.04   Variances; application and hearing.
1264.05   Required findings for variance.
1264.06   Conditions and safeguards.
1264.07   Action by the Board.
1264.08   Findings and conclusions of fact.
1264.09   Term; modification;  and renewal of variance.
1264.10   Appeals to Court.
1264.11   Fees.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Appeals from zoning decisions - see Ohio R.C. 713.11
   Board of Zoning Appeals - see CHTR.
Art. III, § 3
   Nonconforming uses - see P. & Z.
Ch. 1282
§ 1264.01  POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (a)   The Board of Zoning Appeals is authorized to act as provided in Ohio
R.C. 713.11 and shall have all the powers and duties prescribed by law, the
Charter of the City of Kirtland, and the Planning and Zoning Code.
   (b)   For the purpose of this Planning and Zoning Code, the Board of Zoning
Appeals shall have the following powers and duties:
      (1)   To hear and decide appeals. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall hear
and determine all appeals from any decision or action made by the Zoning
Inspector, or by any administrative officer, except determinations of the
Planning and Zoning Commission, on matters relating to this Planning and Zoning
Code, for relief from any order, requirement, decision or determination,
including the refusal, granting or revocation of permits, and then to decide
appeals by either reversing, affirming wholly or in part or modifying such
order, requirement, decision or determination.
      (2)   To authorize variances from the terms of this Planning and Zoning
Code. When practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships, depending on the
type of variance sought, result through the strict and literal interpretation
and enforcement of the provisions hereof, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall
have authority, subject to Article III, Section 3 of the Charter, to grant upon
such conditions as it may determine, such variances from the provisions of the
Planning and Zoning Code as may be in harmony with its general purpose and
intent, so that the spirit of the Planning and Zoning Code shall be observed,
public safety and welfare secured and substantial justice done.
      (3)   To authorize a variance for nonconforming uses according to the
criteria set forth in
Chapter 1282.
      (4)   To retain the services of technical experts and such other persons
as may be required to perform its duties.
      (5)   To hear and decide all matters specifically referred to it for
decision such as district boundary lines and other sections of this Planning
and Zoning Code.
      (6)   To adopt rules and regulations, provided they are not in conflict
with this Planning and Zoning Code or the Charter of the City of Kirtland, for
the holding of regular and special meetings, for the transaction and
disposition of its business and the exercise of its powers.
      (7)   To compel and require the attendance of witnesses by power of
subpoena, to administer oaths, to compel testimony, to produce reports,
findings and other evidence pertinent to any issue referred to it for decision.
(Ord. 08-O-37, passed 12-1-2008)
§ 1264.02  MEETINGS; HEARINGS; RECORDS.
   (a)   Meetings and hearings. The Board may schedule regular monthly meetings
or as called by the Chairman. Special hearings can be arranged at the call of
the Chairman.
   (b)   Record of decisions.
      (1)   The Board is authorized to engage the services of a clerk, and
shall provide a report of all its proceedings, setting forth its decision, the
vote of each member participating therein and the absence of a member or his or
her failure to vote.
      (2)   Any permit authorized or issued pursuant to any decision of the
Board shall have incorporated therein any special conditions prescribed by the
Board and a statement that the permit is subject to revocation for failure to
comply with any of the conditions so prescribed.
(Ord. 08-O-37, passed 12-1-2008)
§ 1264.03  APPEALS; PUBLIC HEARINGS.
   (a)   Appeals to the Board of Zoning Appeals may be taken by any person,
firm, or corporation, or by any officer, board, or department of the city,
deeming himself or herself or itself to be adversely affected by any decision
or action of the Zoning Inspector or by any administrative officer deciding
matters relating to this Planning and Zoning Code.
      (1)   Initiation of appeal. A notice of appeal shall be filed with the
Clerk of the Board of Zoning Appeals within 20 calendar days after the date of
any adverse order, requirement, decision, or determination and shall be
accompanied by payment of the required fee as set forth in §
1264.11. The written notice of appeal shall specify therein the grounds and
reasons for the appeal. Upon the filing of any such appeal, the Clerk shall
forthwith notify the Zoning Inspector of the action so appealed. Within three
working days, the Zoning Inspector shall transmit to the clerk all data
pertaining to the subject matter upon which the action so appealed was taken.
Nothing herein contained shall extend the time for the filing of an appeal of
any adverse order, requirement, decision, or determination to the Board of
Zoning Appeals.
      (2)   Public hearing by the Board. When a notice of appeal has been filed
in proper form with the Board of Zoning Appeals, the Clerk shall place the
request upon the calendar for hearing, and shall cause notices stating the
time, place, and object of the hearing to be served personally or by mail,
addressed to the parties making the request for appeal, variances, or exception
at least ten days prior to the date of the scheduled hearing. All notices shall
be sent to addresses given in the application; otherwise to the addresses given
in the last assessment roll. Not less than ten days prior to the date set for
such hearing or appeal, written notice of the hearing shall be caused by the
Board to be given by first class mail to any person, firm, or corporation
owning premises located within 300 feet of the property line of the property to
which the appeal or application relates. Failure of delivery of the notice
shall not invalidate action taken on the application. Further notice shall be
given in one or more newspapers of general circulation in the city at least ten
days before the date of the public hearing. The Board may recess the hearings
from time to time, and, if the time and place of the continued hearing is
publicly announced at the time of adjournment, no further notice shall be
required. Any person in interest may appear at the public hearing in person or
by attorney. The appellant, except the municipality, shall, in addition to the
standard filing fees, post security in an amount determined by the Zoning
Inspector, subject to approval by the Board of Zoning Appeals, for the cost of
all action required for the hearing of the appeal.
      (3)   Stay of proceedings. An appeal shall stay all proceedings in
furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the Zoning Inspector shall
certify to the Board of Zoning Appeals after the notice of the appeal has been
filed, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would cause
imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be
stayed by other than a restraining order granted by a court having lawful
jurisdiction.
      (4)   Decision of the Board. Within its powers, the Board of Zoning
Appeals may, by a favorable vote of three or more members, reverse or affirm,
wholly or in part, or otherwise modify the decision or order appealed from and
incorporate or attach such conditions as it may reasonably determine
appropriate thereto. To that end, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall have all
the powers of the officers from whom the appeal is taken, and it may direct the
issuance of a certificate. The Board shall render a decision on the appeal
without unreasonable delay.
      (5)   Notification of Board's decision. The Clerk of the Board shall
notify the appellant in writing of the decision of the Board. The Board shall
keep minutes of all proceedings upon appeal, showing the vote of each member
thereon, and shall keep records of its official actions. The Board of Zoning
Appeals shall advise City Council and the City Planning and Zoning Commission,
in writing, via the meeting minutes or, if directed by the Chairman, special
notification, of actions taken pursuant to
Article III, § 3 of the Charter.
(Ord. 08-O-37, passed 12-1-2008)
§ 1264.04  VARIANCES; APPLICATION AND HEARING.
   The Board of Zoning Appeals may authorize upon appeal in specific cases such
variance from the terms of this code as will not be contrary to the public
interest according to the following procedures:
   (a)   Application requirements.
      (1)   An application for a variance shall be filed with the Zoning
Inspector for review by the Board of Zoning Appeals upon the forms promulgated
and provided by the Board, and shall be accompanied by the following
requirements necessary to convey the reason(s) for the requested variance:
         A.   Name, address and phone number of applicant(s);
         B.   Proof of ownership, legal interest or written authority;
         C.   Description of property or portion thereof;
         D.   Description or nature of variance requested;
         E.   Narrative statements establishing and substantiating the
justification for the variance pursuant to §
1264.05(b);
         F.   Site plans, floor plans, elevations and other drawings at a
reasonable scale to convey the need for the variance;
         G.   Payment of the application fee as set forth by §
1264.11;
         H.   Any other documents deemed necessary by the Zoning Inspector.
      (2)   The Board of Zoning Appeals may request that the applicant supply
additional information that the Board deems necessary to adequately review and
evaluate the request for a variance.
   (b)   Review by the Board. According to the procedures established for
appeals in §
1264.03(a)(2), the Board shall hold a public hearing and give notice of the
same. The Board shall review each application for a variance to determine if it
complies with the purpose and intent of this code and evidence demonstrates
that the literal enforcement of this code will result in practical difficulty
or unnecessary hardship, depending upon the type of variance sought.
(Ord. 08-O-37, passed 12-1-2008)
§ 1264.05  REQUIRED FINDINGS FOR VARIANCE.
   (a)   When considering a request for a variance, the Board shall be subject
to powers and limitation of powers set forth in
Article III, § 3 of the Charter of the City of Kirtland and further subject to
the required findings set forth in subsection (b) or subsection (c) depending
on the type of variance sought. The applicant for a variance shall have the
burden of proof in these proceedings.
   (b)   No variance to the provisions or requirements of the Zoning Code,
pertaining to area zoning requirements such as frontage, setback, and height
shall be granted by the Board unless the Board has determined that a practical
difficulty exists or will result from a literal enforcement of the Zoning Code.
The factors to be considered and weighed by the Board in determining whether a
property owner, seeking a dimensional variance such as an area or set back
variance, has proved practical difficulty, include, but are not limited to:
      (1)   Whether special conditions and circumstances exist which are
peculiar to the land or structure involved and which are not applicable
generally to other lands or structures in the same zoning district; examples of
such special conditions or circumstances are: exceptional irregularity,
narrowness, shallowness or steepness of the lot, or adjacency to nonconforming
and inharmonious uses, structures or conditions;
      (2)   Whether the property in question will yield a reasonable return or
whether there can be any beneficial use of the property without the variance;
      (3)   Whether the variance is substantial and is the minimum necessary to
make possible the reasonable use of the land or structures;
      (4)   Whether the essential character of the neighborhood would be
substantially altered or whether adjoining properties would suffer substantial
detriment if the variance is granted;
      (5)   Whether the variance would adversely affect the delivery of
governmental services such as water, sewer, trash pickup or restrict access by
safety vehicles or personnel;
      (6)   Whether special conditions or circumstances exist as a result of
actions of the owner;
      (7)   Whether the property owner's predicament feasibly can be obviated
through some method other than a variance;
      (8)   Whether the spirit and intent behind the zoning requirement would
be observed and substantial justice done by granting a variance; and
      (9)   Whether the granting of the variance requested will confer on the
applicant any special privilege that is denied by this regulation to other
lands, structures, or buildings in the same district.
   (c)   Subject to
Article III, § 3 of the Charter of the City of Kirtland, the Board may
authorize a variance, other than for area zoning requirements such as frontage,
setback and height, in specific cases, from the strict application of the
Zoning Code, provided that it has considered the factors enumerated in
subsections (b)(1) through (9), and further provided that all conditions
enumerated in subsections (c)(1) through (7) have been met:
      (1)   The variance requested stems from a condition which is unique to
the property at issue and not ordinarily found in the same zone or district;
      (2)   The hardship condition is not created by actions of the applicant;
      (3)   The granting of the variance will not adversely affect the rights
of adjacent owners;
      (4)   The granting of the variance will not adversely affect the public
health, safety, or general welfare;
      (5)   The variance will be consistent with the general spirit and intent
of the Zoning Code;
      (6)   The variance sought is the minimum which will afford relief to the
applicant; and
      (7)   There is no other economically viable use which is permitted in the
zoning district.
(Ord. 08-O-37, passed 12-1-2008)
§ 1264.06  CONDITIONS AND SAFEGUARDS.
   The Board may further prescribe any conditions and safeguards that it deems
necessary to ensure that the objectives of the regulations or provisions to
which the variance applies will be met.
(Ord. 08-O-37, passed 12-1-2008)
§ 1264.07  ACTION BY THE BOARD.
   (a)   The Board shall either approve, approve with supplementary conditions
as provided in §
1264.06, or disapprove the request for variance according to the procedures
established for appeals in §
1264.03(a)(4). The Board shall further make a finding in writing that the
reasons set forth in the application justify the granting of the variance that
will make possible a reasonable use of the land, building or structure.
   (b)   If a variance has been denied by the Board, the Board need not
reconsider the same or substantially similar request for a variance if
resubmitted within one year after the date of the decision, unless the
underlying conditions have substantially changed.
(Ord. 08-O-37, passed 12-1-2008)
§ 1264.08  FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS OF FACT.
   Any interested party to an appeal or an application for a variance may make
written request that the Board issue findings and conclusions of fact in
support of any final decision entered by the Board. Any request for findings
and conclusions of fact must be made in writing within ten calendar days of the
Board's decision. Upon receipt of a request for findings and conclusions of
fact, the Board shall issue such findings and conclusions within 15 calendar
days of such receipt. Nothing herein shall extend the time for the filing of an
appeal pursuant to Ohio R.C. Chapter 2506. Nothing herein shall extend the time
for making a request for findings and conclusion of fact.
(Ord. 08-O-37, passed 12-1-2008)
§ 1264.09  TERM; MODIFICATION; AND RENEWAL OF VARIANCE.
   Variances shall expire one year from the date of their enactment, unless
prior thereto, the applicant commences actual construction in accordance with
the granted variance. There shall be no modification of variances except by
further consideration of the Board of Zoning Appeals. Requests for renewal of
expired variances shall be considered to be the same as an application for a
variance and shall meet all requirements for application and review pursuant to
this section and the Board shall not be bound by its prior decision. Depending
upon the conditions attached to the variance by the Board of Zoning Appeals,
variances may not be assignable without the prior approval of the Board of
Zoning Appeals.
(Ord. 08-O-37, passed 12-1-2008)
§ 1264.10  APPEALS TO COURT.
   Decisions by the Board of Zoning Appeals granting or denying variances shall
be final within the city, except that an appeal therefrom may be taken to the
Court of Common Pleas of Lake County, Ohio pursuant to Ohio R.C. Chapter 2506
by any interested party, including the city and its officials.
(Ord. 08-O-37, passed 12-1-2008)
§ 1264.11  FEES.
   The fee required to file an appeal or an application for variance to the
Board is as stated in the Fee Schedule in §
236.07 of the City of Kirtland Codified Ordinances for each appeal or
application for variance filed with regard to a residential use and as stated
in the Fee Schedule in §
236.07 of the City of Kirtland Codified Ordinances for each appeal or
application for variance filed with regard to a commercial use.
(Ord. 08-O-37, passed 12-1-2008; Am. Ord. 17-O-20, passed 7-3-2017)
CHAPTER 1266:  DISTRICTS GENERALLY (REPEALED)
   Editor’s note:
      Chapter 1266 was repealed by Ord. 10-O-35, passed July 12, 2010.
CHAPTER 1268:  R-1, R-2 AND R-3 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
Section
1268.01   Purpose.
1268.02   Use regulations.
1268.03   Schedule of permitted buildings and uses.
1268.04   Accessory uses.
1268.05   Buildings permitted on zoning lot.
1268.06   Area, yard and height regulations.
1268.07   Schedule of area, yard and height regulations.
1268.08   Supplementary area and width regulations.
1268.09   Required lot area to be maintained.
1268.10   Lots of record of insufficient area or width.
1268.11   Supplementary yard regulations.
1268.12   Required yards to be maintained.
1268.13   Front yards of partially built-up blocks.
1268.14   Yards of corner lots.
1268.15   Yard and height regulations for accessory uses in R-1, R-2 and R-
3 Districts.
1268.16   Dwelling unit area regulations.
1268.17   Single family conservation developments.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Administration, enforcement and penalty - see P. & Z.
Ch. 1262
   Basis of districting or zoning; classification of buildings and structures -
see Ohio R.C. 713.10
   Division of municipal corporations into zones - see Ohio R.C. 713.06
   Fences - see P. & Z.
Ch. 1290
   General provisions and definitions - see P. & Z.
Ch. 1260
   Restrictions on location, height and bulk of buildings - see Ohio R.C.
713.07 et seq.
   Variances - see P. & Z.
1264.02
§ 1268.01  PURPOSE.
   Residential districts and their regulations are established in order to
achieve, among others, the following purposes:
   (a)   To regulate bulk and location of buildings in relation to the land in
order to obtain proper light, air, privacy and usable open spaces on each
zoning lot appropriate for the district;
   (b)   To provide lots with adequate width to accommodate the development of
houses of contemporary standards of design;
   (c)   To regulate density and distribution of population in accordance with
a plan to avoid congestion and to maintain adequate services;
   (d)   To assure that the capacity of the sewage treatment plant and trunk
lines, planned and scheduled for construction and predicated upon these
standards of development will not be exceeded;
   (e)   To protect against the added cost, delay and uncoordinated patterns of
public school service areas which would accrue from changes in the planning and
programming of the public school building program which has been predicated
upon these standards of development;
   (f)   To provide protection from noxious fumes, odors, dust, excessive
noises, invasion of abnormal vehicular traffic and other objectionable
influences;
   (g)   To protect the desirable characteristics of both existing and planned
residential development; to maintain stability; and
   (h)   To promote the most desirable and beneficial use of the land based
upon the Comprehensive Plan.
(Ord. 10-O-35, passed 7-12-2010)
§ 1268.02  USE REGULATIONS.
   Buildings and land shall be used, and buildings shall be designed, erected,
altered, moved or maintained in residential districts only for the uses set
forth in the schedules and use regulations of this Zoning Code.
   (a)   The main buildings and uses set forth in the schedule, §
1268.03, shall be permitted by right as the principal building or use of a
zoning lot only in a district in which it is specifically permitted.
   (b)   Conditional uses are certain types of main uses, so classified because
of their uncommon characteristics, infrequency of occurrence, large land area
requirements or other features, and shall not be permitted in certain locations
by right. Such uses require consideration and approval by the Planning
Commission according to procedures and standards set forth in
Chapter 1285. Only those uses so enumerated in the schedule, §
1268.03, may be approved in the specific districts.
   (c)   The accessory buildings and uses set forth in the schedule, §
1268.03, shall be permitted as a subordinate building or use, which is clearly
incident to and located on the same zoning lot as the main building or use, and
shall be located only in a district in which it is specifically permitted.
(Ord. 10-O-35, passed 7-12-2010)
§ 1268.03  SCHEDULE OF PERMITTED BUILDINGS AND USES.
 
DISTRICT MAIN BUILDINGS OR USES CONDITIONAL USES ACCESSORY USES
   (a)   One-family dwellings                  (a)   Library, museum                                                      (a)   Home occupations
   (b)   Public parks                          (b)   Golf course                                                          (b)   Accessory buildings
   (c)   Public recreation facilities          (c)   Public or quasi-public non-profit recreational or community center   (c)   Swimming pools
   (d)   Fire and police station               (d)   Preschool and day- care center only when the main use is a religious (d)   Off-street parking
                                                  facility, or public or parochial school
   (e)   City and public school administrative (e)   Public and parochial primary or secondary school                     (e)   Signs
R- offices
3                                                 (f)   Religious facility                                                   (f)   Private garden structures, fences, walls and
                                                                                                                                hedges
                                                  (g)   Public or private cemetery                                           (g)   Recreational equipment
                                                  (h)   Public utility                                                       (h)   Raising of domestic animals
                                                  (i)   Agriculture for commercial purposes                                  (i)   Sale of vehicles
                                                                                                                                (j)   Gardens
                                                                                                                                (k)   Child care in a residential dwelling
R- (a)   Main uses permitted in R-3 Districts  (a)   Conditional uses as permitted in R-3 Districts                       (a)   Accessory uses as permitted in R-3 Districts
2  (b)   Two-family dwellings
 
 
DISTRICT MAIN BUILDINGS OR USES             CONDITIONAL USES                             ACCESSORY USES
R-1      (a)   Main uses permitted in R- (a)   Conditional uses as permitted in R- (a)   Accessory uses as permitted in R-
         2 Districts                        2 Districts                                  2 Districts
 
(Ord. 10-O-35, passed 7-12-2010; Am. Ord. 12-O-45, passed 9-17-2012)
§ 1268.04  ACCESSORY USES.
   (a)   Home occupations.  A person may maintain an office or customary home
occupation in the dwelling occupied by him or her provided the use:
      (1)   Does not involve any construction, extension or modification of
structures or premises which alter their outward appearance;
      (2)   Does not occupy an area more than 25 percent of the area of the
dwelling;
      (3)   Is not injurious, dangerous, offensive or detrimental to health,
safety or comfort of neighboring residents by reason of odor, dust, smoke, gas,
noise, fumes, flames, vibrations or other outward manifestations;
      (4)   No persons other than the residents of such property are employed
thereon; and
      (5)   Does not attract a greater number of vehicles than can be parked in
the driveway.
   (b)   Accessory buildings.  For residential lots of two acres or less, the
total ground floor area of all accessory buildings shall not exceed 600 square
feet or two percent of the area of the lot, whichever is greater.
   (c)   Swimming pools.  A private swimming pool shall be located behind the
building line of the principal structure and shall conform to the appropriate
side line setback required in the district where such pool is located. The area
of the pool shall not exceed five percent of the area of the lot.
      (1)   Each owner or lessee of an outdoor swimming pool below ground, or
above ground and less than three feet high, shall completely fence such pool
with a fence not less than four feet high and designed so as to deter access
over, under or through such fence. All above-ground pools three or more feet
high shall either be attended or the access thereto secured by removing the
ladders or otherwise. All gates or entrances, except those leading from a
building, shall be securely locked when not attended by the owner or some other
responsible person.
      (2)   Provisions shall be made for the drainage of a swimming pool into a
public storm sewer where possible, unless there is a ditch or natural
watercourse of sufficient size and gradient adjacent to the pool location to
carry off the water satisfactorily, in which case drainage may be into such
ditch or watercourse. Except as provided in this subsection, no person shall
drain or allow a pool to be drained directly or indirectly onto adjoining
property.
   (d)   Off-street parking in residential districts.  The parking of
commercial vehicles on private property in residential districts shall be
subject to the following regulations:
      (1)   "Commercial vehicle" as used in this section means:
         A.   Any vehicle that has license plates attached thereto with the
designation of "truck" or "commercial" thereon.
         B.   Any vehicle that is not a passenger car vehicle as defined by
R.C. § 4501.01(E).
      (2)   The parking of commercial vehicles on private property zoned for
residential use only for the purpose of performing the associated commercial
activities thereon shall be limited to the minimum time period required in the
usual course of business for making of such delivery or completion of such
services contracted for by the residence owner.
      (3)   Only two commercial vehicles, as defined in this section, may be
parked outside overnight per residence and shall not be parked for more than 72
consecutive hours unmoved. Such vehicles must be parked on an improved surface
pursuant to §
1288.10, and in compliance with division (d)(5)A. and B. below, but any such
vehicle must not be parked within the right-of-way.
      (4)   In addition to the above restrictions, there shall be no parking,
except as permitted in division (d)(2) above, of the following vehicle types:
         A.   Tractor or semi-tractor trailer trucks;
         B.   Busses with a dual set of rear wheels;
         C.   Any vehicle transporting hazardous or flammable materials beyond
what would be normally required to propel that type of vehicle.
      (5)   Contractor's equipment, including but not limited to, tractors,
front end-loaders, backhoes, and other self-propelled or towed equipment which
is associated with commercial, construction or contractor type activities;
shall not be parked or stored for more than 72 consecutive hours on the said
residential premises unless the following occurs:
         A.   Vehicles, referred to in division (d)(3) above and equipment
referred to in division (d)(5) above may be temporarily parked or stored only
behind the front most edge of the home, and the parking area in a residential
district, shall be screened from view from other residential properties in the
immediate neighborhood whether adjoining or contiguous thereto, by the means of
landscaping or ornamental walls or fences to promote harmony with the
neighboring residential property development. The type of a screening shall
consist of one or any combination of those means that are described
specifically in §
1288.11(b)(1) through (b)(6).
         B.   No access driveways shall be permitted in or through any
residential area to gain ingress or egress to land or buildings in a
nonresidential district.
   (e)   Signs.  Signs are permitted as regulated in
Chapter 1286.
   (f)   Private garden structures, fences, walls and hedges. As provided in
Chapter 1290.
   (g)   Recreational equipment.  For purposes of this section, recreational
equipment includes travel trailer, recreational vehicle (RV), camper, trailer,
boat and boat trailer, all-terrain vehicle, motor home and tent trailer.
      Any owner of recreational equipment may park or store such equipment not
in excess of 36 feet overall length, eight feet in width and 11 feet in height,
such height being measured from ground level, only on property where he or she
is living in accordance with the following conditions:
      (1)   Under no circumstances shall any recreational equipment have fixed
connections to electricity, water, gas or sanitary sewer facilities, nor shall
such equipment be used at any time, while parked or stored on any residential
lot within the city, for living, overnight sleeping, storage or housekeeping
purpose.
      (2)   All recreational equipment shall be stored or parked as far from
side and rear lot lines as practicable, and in no case less than is required in
§
1268.15, nor in front of the extension of the side foundation line on a corner
lot of the side closest to the side street or in accordance with the
requirement of §
1268.15, whichever is greater.
      (3)   All recreational equipment shall be kept in good repair and carry a
current year's license plate and registration where required by law.
      (4)   No person shall make or cause to be made major repairs, alterations
or conversions of recreational equipment unless such repair, alteration or
conversion is done in a completely enclosed garage. Repairs of a major type are
herein defined to include, but are not limited to, spray painting, body,
plumbing, heating, spring and frame repairs, radiator repair, major overhauling
of engines requiring the removing of engine cylinder head or crankcase pan or
removing the motor and conversion of any other type of motor. The conversion of
any vehicle is expressly prohibited.
      (5)   No materials of any nature may be stored beneath such recreational
vehicle.
      (6)   When such vehicle is parked or stored outside of a garage in such
approved or permitted location, the wheels shall be left on such vehicle or
vehicle conveyance so that it may be moved in case of an emergency.
      (7)   No recreational vehicle shall be parked or stored unless it is
titled to, leased or used exclusively by the owner or one of the permanent
occupants of the residence where the recreational vehicle is located.
      (8)   Temporary outside parking of such recreational equipment shall be
permitted in the front yard and/or side yard for a period not to exceed a total
of 72 hours in any consecutive 21 day period.
   (h)   Raising of domestic animals. The raising and keeping of domestic
animals is permitted in Residential Districts as regulated by other ordinances
of the city.
   (i)   The selling of used or previously owned motor vehicles is permitted
but subject to the following restrictions:
      (1)   No more than two vehicles may be displayed for sale, on any
residential premises, within any 12-month period of time. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, no more than one vehicle at a time may be displayed for sale on the
premises.
      (2)   A single vehicle for sale may be displayed for a maximum of 21 days
per calendar year.
      (3)   Any vehicle for sale shall be properly licensed and operable. Any
display of a vehicle for sale shall be located outside of the legal right-of-
way and may be located on an improved parking surface or on a portion of the
front yard.
      (4)   No person shall display for sale any vehicle without first
obtaining a permit therefor from the Mayor or his designee. The application for
a "sale of vehicle permit" shall contain the following information:
         A.   The name, address and telephone number of the applicant and the
owner of the vehicle if the applicant is not the owner;
         B.   Address where vehicle is to be displayed for sale;
         C.   The vehicle identification number, make, model and year of the
vehicle;
         D.   Estimated value of the vehicle; and
         E.   A non-refundable fee as stated in the Fee Schedule in §
236.07 of the City of Kirtland Codified Ordinances shall be submitted with each
application.
   (j)   Gardens. Fruits, vegetables, flowers and nursery plants raised on the
premises for private use or for sale are permitted, provided that no permanent
structure is erected for the sale or display of such produce or plants.
   (k)   Child care. Day care may be provided for up to six children between
the hours of 6:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. only if such service is provided solely by
the resident of the premises.
   (l)   Lighting, sound systems. Flood lights, loudspeakers or similar
structures that will cause hazards or annoyance to the public generally or to
the occupants of adjacent properties shall not be erected or used in
Residential Districts. Exterior lighting shall be designed as provided in
Chapter 1296.
(Ord. 10-O-35, passed 7-12-2010; Am. Ord. 11-O-38, passed 7-11-2011; Am. Ord.
17-O-20, passed 7-3-2017; Am. Ord. 17-O-36, passed 7-9-2018)
§ 1268.05  BUILDINGS PERMITTED ON ZONING LOT.
   (a)   There shall be no more than one one-family dwelling or not more than
one two-family dwelling located on a zoning lot and both dwelling units of a
two-family dwelling shall be within the same building.
   (b)   No dwelling shall be located to the rear of another dwelling on the
same lot.
   (c)   Each one-family dwelling and each two-family dwelling shall have
frontage on a dedicated public street, provided that a one-family dwelling or a
two-family dwelling may have frontage on an approved private drive that was
approved prior to the adoption of this chapter.
(Ord. 10-O-35, passed 7-12-2010)
§ 1268.06  AREA, YARD AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS.
   Land and buildings shall be used in accordance with the lot area
regulations, and buildings shall be designed, erected, altered, moved or
maintained in accordance with the yard and building height regulations set
forth in the following section.
   (a)   R-3 Residential Districts have four area designations: R-3A, R-3B, R-
3C and R-3D.
   (b)   R-2 Residential Districts have three area designations: R-2A, R-2B and
R-2C.
(Ord. 10-O-35, passed 7-12-2010)
§ 1268.07  SCHEDULE OF AREA, YARD AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS.
   (a)   Area and width.
 
Residential District
                                    R-3                 R-2            R-1
                                    A    B    C    D    A    B    C
1.   Minimum lot area            1 ac 2 ac 3 ac 5 ac 1 ac 2 ac 5 ac 12,000
                                                                       SF
2.   Minimum lot width (ft.)     130  150  175  225  100  150  225  60
3.   Minimum frontage (ft.)      130  150  175  225  100  150  225  60
4.   Minimum frontage on cul-de-s80   80   90   120  60   80   120  45
 
   (b)   Yards.
 
Residential District
 R-3     R-2   R-1
 A B C D A B C
1.   Front
      Right-of-Way50 80  90  100 50 80  100 30
      Centerline  80 110 120 130 80 110 130 60
2.   Side            20 25  25  30  15 20  30  5
3.   Side (corner lot30 40  50  70  30 40  70  20
4.   Rear            50 80  90  100 50 80  100 5
*   From right-of-way; for corner lots on existing approved private drives the
side yard setback shall be measured from the edge of the easement.
(Am. Ord. 13-O-60, passed 12-16-2013)
   (c)   Height. The height of a one-family dwelling or two-family dwelling
shall not exceed two and one-half stories nor more than 35 feet. The height of
nonresidential main buildings, non-residential auxiliary buildings or non-
residential accessory structures, may exceed two and one-half stories or 35
feet only if granted a variance by the Board of Zoning Appeals pursuant to §
1264.01 through and including §
1264.11. In the event that a variance is granted by the Board of Zoning
Appeals, the applicant requesting a permit shall, thereafter, apply for the
approval of the Planning and Zoning Commission pursuant to §
1262.04(a)(12).
(Ord. 10-O-35, passed 7-12-2010; Am. Ord. 14-O-59, passed 11-17-2014)
§ 1268.08  SUPPLEMENTARY AREA AND WIDTH REGULATIONS.
   Land and buildings shall be used in accordance with the supplementary area
and width regulations and buildings shall be designed, erected, altered, moved
or maintained in accordance with the supplementary area and width regulations
set forth in the following sections.
(Ord. 10-O-35, passed 7-12-2010)
§ 1268.09  REQUIRED LOT AREA TO BE MAINTAINED.
   (a)   A parcel of land may be divided into two or more zoning lots, if all
lots resulting from such division conform to all lot area and width regulations
of the district in which it is located. A lot of record, whether vacant or
occupied by a building, which has an area or width equal to or less than
required by these regulations and which was owned separately from adjoining
lots on the effective date of this Zoning Code or an amendment thereto which
shall make the lot nonconforming, shall not be further reduced in any manner.
   (b)   The required lot area which is provided for a dwelling or other use
shall not be considered as providing any part of the required lot area for
another dwelling or use.
(Ord. 10-O-35, passed 7-12-2010)
§ 1268.10  LOTS OF RECORD OF INSUFFICIENT AREA OR WIDTH.
   A lot of record which does not comply with the area and/or width of lot
regulations of the district in which it is located on the effective date of
this Zoning Code, or any amendment thereto which shall make the lot
nonconforming, may be used as follows:
   (a)   If occupied by a dwelling, such dwelling may be maintained, repaired
or altered, provided however, that the building may be enlarged in floor area
only if the enlarged sections comply with all other regulations of this Zoning
Code except lot area and lot width regulations.
   (b)   If vacant, the lot may be used as a site for a one-family dwelling
only, provided that all other regulations of this Zoning Code shall be met
except lot area and lot width regulations.
(Ord. 10-O-35, passed 7-12-2010)
§ 1268.11  SUPPLEMENTARY YARD REGULATIONS.
   Land and buildings shall be used in accordance with the supplementary yard
regulations and buildings shall be designed, erected, altered, moved or
maintained in accordance with the supplementary yard regulations set forth in
the following sections.
(Ord. 10-O-35, passed 7-12-2010)
§ 1268.12  REQUIRED YARDS TO BE MAINTAINED.
   The required yards surrounding an existing main building shall not be
separated in ownership from that part of the lot upon which the building is
located and no part of a required yard shall be considered as providing a yard
for any other existing main building. A yard shall not be reduced to less than
the required dimensions for the district in which it is located and a yard of
less than the required width shall not be further reduced. Every required yard
shall be open and unobstructed from the ground upward.
(Ord. 10-O-35, passed 7-12-2010)
§ 1268.13  FRONT YARDS OF PARTIALLY BUILT-UP BLOCKS.
   Where 60 percent or more of the aggregate street frontage between two
successive intersecting streets is occupied by buildings of the type and use
permitted in the district before the effective date of this Zoning Code or an
amendment thereto, the average setback of conforming buildings located within
300 feet on either side of a lot proposed for development shall be the minimum
front yard setback required for that lot.
(Ord. 10-O-35, passed 7-12-2010)
§ 1268.14  YARDS OF CORNER LOTS.
   The depth of the front yard of a corner lot shall be not less than the
required setback as provided in § 1268.07.
(Ord. 10-O-35, passed 7-12-2010)
§ 1268.15  YARD AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS FOR ACCESSORY USES IN R-1, R-2 AND R-
3 DISTRICTS.
 
          Yard in   Minimum Distance From (ft.)                       Height
Accessory Which Use Rear Lot Line Side Lot Line Main     Side Street  (ft.)
Use       Permitted                             Building (corner lot)
                    R-1 R-2;R-3   R-1 R-2;R-3   All      R-1 R-2;R-3  All
Detached Garage        Rear, Side    5  20(d) 5  20(d) 10  20 30 15/25(a)
Vehicular Recreational Rear, Side(b) 5  25    5  20    0   20 30 11
Equipment
Utility Building       Rear, Side    5  20(d) 5  20(d) 10  20 30 15/25(a)
Swimming Pool          Rear, Side    10 20    10 20    0   30 30 N.A.
Stable                 Rear, Side    50 50    50 50    100 30 30 35
                       Front(c)
 
(a)   Height shall not exceed 15 feet on lots less than 12,000 square feet in
area and shall not exceed 25 feet on lots more than 12,000 square feet in area.
(b)   Recreational equipment may be stored in a required front, side or rear
yard provided equipment is screened from a public right-of-way, existing
approved private drive easement or adjacent property by a fence or live
plantings and further provided such equipment is not less than 20 feet from a
front lot line.
(c)   A stable or barn may be located in a required front yard but shall be not
less than 50 feet from public right-of-way or existing approved private drive
easement.
(d)   Side and rear yard setbacks shall be 5 feet for lots of 12,000 square
feet or less, and 10 feet for lots more than 12,000 square feet and less than
two acres in area.
(Ord. 10-O-35, passed 7-12-2010; Am. Ord. 13-O-60, passed 12-16-2013)
§ 1268.16  DWELLING UNIT AREA REGULATIONS.
   The minimum floor area or floor space per family of buildings or structures
used as dwellings in all Residential Districts, exclusive of garages, porches,
furnace rooms, basements, breezeways or extensions of the main portion of such
structures, is as follows:
   (a)   R-1 and R-2 Districts.
      (1)   One and one and one-half story dwellings: 1,020 square feet on the
ground floor; and
      (2)   Two story dwellings: 1,440 square feet per dwelling unit, all of
which minimum floor area shall also have a minimum ceiling height of seven and
one-half feet.
   (b)   R-3 Districts.
      (1)   One and one and one-half story dwellings: 1,400 square feet on the
ground floor; and
      (2)   Two story dwellings: 2,000 square feet, all of which minimum floor
area shall also have a minimum ceiling height of seven and one-half feet.
(Ord. 10-O-35, passed 7-12-2010)
§ 1268.17  SINGLE FAMILY CONSERVATION DEVELOPMENTS.
   (a)   Purpose.  In order to encourage flexibility in design of single family
residential developments that promote efficient use of land and preserve any
natural, scenic and historic qualities, the Planning and Zoning Commission may
permit a single family conservation development in an R-2 or R-3 District
provided there shall be no increase in the number of dwelling units than are
permitted in conventional developments and further provided the proposed
development meets the minimum standards for conservation developments in this
Zoning Code. These regulations are intended:
      (1)   To maximize protection of the city's natural resources by:
         •   Avoiding development on and destruction of sensitive natural
resource areas
         •   Reducing the quantity and improving the quality of storm water
runoff
         •   Maintaining natural characteristics (such as woods, hedgerows,
natural vegetation, meadows, slopes and streams)
         •   Reducing the amount of disturbed land, the conversion of natural
areas to landscaped areas for lawns, and the use of invasive vegetation
         •   Conserving areas of prime agricultural soils, to the extent
possible
      (2)   To conserve the quality of ruralness in a community which is
characterized by:
         •   Large, aggregated, undeveloped land areas
         •   Natural features such as woodlands, steep slopes, floodplains,
wetland, stream and river corridors, hedgerows and rock outcroppings
         •   Scenic vistas and rural views
         •   Significant historic features such as old barns, heritage trees,
etc.
         •   Traditional rural settlement patterns characterized by clusters of
compact groupings of development in otherwise wide open spaces
      (3)   To encourage more efficient use of land and public services through
unified development.
      (4)   To ensure the proposed conservation development is in compliance
with the goals and objectives of the city's Comprehensive Plan.
   (b)   Permitted uses. The following uses shall be permitted in a
conservation development:
      (1)   Single and two-family dwellings in R-2 Districts.
      (2)   Single-family dwellings in R-3 Districts.
      (3)   Single-family cluster dwellings.
      (4)   Recreation facilities.
      (5)   Common open space.
   (c)   Minimum project area. The area of the proposed conservation
development shall be not less than 25 contiguous acres and shall not include
the area within any public right-of-way.
      The area proposed shall be in one ownership, however multiple ownership
of two or more contiguous property owners may be permitted provided the
development is undertaken jointly.
   (d)   Lot area and width regulations. The minimum lot area and lot width
required for single-family dwellings in a conservation development shall be as
follows:
 
Area        Minimum  Minimum   Minimum Street
Designation Lot Area Lot Width Frontage on a Cul-de-sac
R-2A; R-3A  ½ acre  75 feet   50
R-2B; R-3B  1 acre   100 feet  75
R-3C        1-½ acre125 feet  90
R-2C; R-3D  2 acres  150 feet  100
 
      Provided that the overall density as described or the number of dwelling
units per acre of buildable land within the area of the conservation
development shall not exceed the following:
 
Area        Maximum Number of
Designation Dwelling Units per Acre
R-2A; R-3A  0.8
R-2B; R-3B  0.45
R-3C        0.3
R-2C; R-3D  0.2
 
   (e)   Yard regulations.  The minimum front, side and rear yards in
conservation developments in R-2 and R-3 Districts shall be not less than as
follows:
 
                 Minimum Yard
Area Designation Front Side Rear
R-2A; R-3A       35    15   30
R-2B; R-3B       35    20   50
R-3C             40    20   50
R-2C; R-3D       50    25   60
 
      In a condominium single-family development, dwellings shall be separated
by a space equal to two times the side or rear yard required for the area
designation in which dwellings are located.
(Ord. 10-O-35, passed 7-12-2010)
CHAPTER 1270:  R-5 MULTIFAMILY DWELLING DISTRICTS
Section
1270.01   Purpose.
1270.02   Use regulations.
1270.03   Schedule of permitted buildings and uses.
1270.04   Accessory uses.
1270.05   Area, yard and height regulations.
1270.06   Schedule of area, yard and height regulations.
1270.07   Yards for accessory buildings and uses.
1270.08   Dwelling unit area requirements.
1270.09   Site design standards.
1270.10   Development plans required.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Administration, enforcement and penalty - see P. & Z.
Ch. 1262
   Basis of districting or zoning; classification of buildings and structures -
see Ohio R.C. 713.10
   Division of municipal corporations into zones - see Ohio R.C. 713.06
   General provisions and definitions - see P. & Z.
Ch. 1260
   Restrictions on location, height and bulk of buildings - see Ohio R.C.
713.07 et seq.
   Variances - see P. & Z.
1264.02
§ 1270.01  PURPOSE.
   Multifamily Dwelling Districts are established in order to achieve among
others the following purposes:
   (a)   To provide for residential development at higher densities than for
one and two family dwellings;
   (b)   To locate the development of multifamily dwellings close to community
facilities and services;
   (c)   To protect the desirable characteristics of existing and planned
residential development;
   (d)   To be accessible to existing and planned public water supply and
sanitary sewers;
   (e)   To regulate density and distribution of population in accordance with
a plan to avoid congestion;
   (f)   To provide protection from noxious fumes, odors, dust, excessive
noises, invasion of abnormal vehicular traffic and other objectionable
influences;
   (g)   To regulate multifamily development that will restrict overcrowding of
the land and provide for proper light, air, privacy and usable open space; and
   (h)   To promote the most desirable and beneficial use of the land based
upon the Comprehensive Plan.
(Ord. 10-O-35, passed 7-12-2010)
§ 1270.02  USE REGULATIONS.
   Buildings and land shall be used, and buildings shall be designed, erected,
altered, moved or maintained in residential districts only for the uses set
forth in the schedules and use regulations of this Zoning Code.
   (a)   The main buildings and uses set forth in the schedule, §
1270.03, shall be permitted by right as the principal building or use of a
zoning lot only in a district in which it is specifically permitted.
   (b)   Conditional uses are certain types of main uses, so classified because
of their uncommon characteristics, infrequency of occurrence, large land area
requirements or other features, and shall not be permitted in certain locations
by right. Such uses require consideration and approval by the Planning
Commission and Council according to procedures and standards set forth in
Chapter 1285. Only those uses so enumerated in the schedule, §
1270.03, may be approved in the specific districts.
   (c)   The accessory buildings and uses set forth in the schedule, §
1270.03, shall be permitted as a subordinate building or use, which is clearly
incident to and located on the same zoning lot as the main building or use, and
shall be located only in a district in which it is specifically permitted.
(Ord. 10-O-35, passed 7-12-2010)
§ 1270.03  SCHEDULE OF PERMITTED BUILDINGS AND USES.
 
Main Buildings or Uses             Conditional Uses                          Accessory Uses
(a)   Main uses permitted in R- (a)   Conditional uses permitted in R- (a)   Home occupations
l Districts                        l Districts
(b)   Multifamily dwellings     (b)   Nursing home                     (b)   Accessory buildings
                                   (c)   Assisted living facility         (c)   Swimming pools
                                   (d)   Independent living facility      (d)   Off-street parking
                                   (e)   Public utility                   (e)   Signs
                                                                             (f)   Private garden structures, fences, walls and
                                                                             hedges.
 
(Ord. 10-O-35, passed 7-12-2010)
§ 1270.04  ACCESSORY USES.
   Accessory uses shall be limited to the following:
   (a)   Home occupations as regulated in §
1268.04(a).
   (b)   Accessory buildings for townhouse or apartment developments for the
storage of recreational equipment, garden tools and other maintenance
equipment.
   (c)   Swimming pools for the use of residents in the multifamily
development.  Pools shall be located and maintained as provided in §
1268.04(c).
   (d)   Off-street parking as permitted and as regulated in
Chapter 1288.
   (e)   Signs as permitted and as regulated in
Chapter 1285.
   (f)   Private gardens, structures, fences, walls and hedges as permitted and
as regulated in
Chapter 1290.
(Ord. 10-O-35, passed 7-12-2010)
§ 1270.05  AREA, YARD AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS.
   Land and buildings shall be used in accordance with the lot area regulations
and buildings shall be designed, erected, altered or maintained in accordance
with the yard and building height regulations set forth in the following
section.
(Ord. 10-O-35, passed 7-12-2010)
§ 1270.06  SCHEDULE OF AREA, YARD AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS.
 
          Minimum            Minimum Lot     Maximum   Minimum Yard Requirement
                             Width           Percent
          Lot                At       At     Lot       Front  Side
Dwelling  Area/  Development Building Street Coverage  (a)    (feet)     Rear   Height
Type      Unit   Area        Line     (feet) Main &    (feet) Min. Total (feet) (stories)
          (s.f.)             (feet)          Accessory
One
Family    As permitted and as regulated in R-1 Districts
and Two
Family
One
Family    8,000  1 acre      100      80     30        25     5    15    40     2
Detached
(cluster)
Townhouse
One       6,000  2 acres     150      100    30        25     5    15    40     2
Family
Attached
Apartment 4,000  2 acres     150      100    30        20     10   30    40     2
 
(a)   Corner lots shall have a setback from the second street not less than
required for the front yard.
(Ord. 10-O-35, passed 7-12-2010; Am. Ord. 12-O-44, passed 9-17-2012)
§ 1270.07  YARDS FOR ACCESSORY BUILDINGS AND USES.
 
                Minimum Required Yard (feet
                      Side                         Rear
Building or Use Front Adjacent to                  Adjacent to
                      R-3, R-2, R- Other Districts R-3, R-2, R- Other Districts
                      1 Districts                  1 Districts
(a)   Accessory buildiNot permitted 20 10 20 10
(b)   Swimming pool   Not permitted 30 15 30 15
(c)   Off-street parking
   (1)   parking gaNot permitted 20 10 20 10
   (2)   parking sp10e**         20 10 20 10
   (3)   aisle, dri10**          20 10 20 10
 
*   Parking garage may be attached to building or shall be not less than 25
feet from a residential building.
**   Parking spaces, aisles and drives shall be not less than 20 feet from a
building wall.
(Ord. 10-O-35, passed 7-12-2010)
§ 1270.08  DWELLING UNIT AREA REQUIREMENTS.
   Multifamily dwelling units shall contain minimum gross floor area of living
space per dwelling unit, exclusive of porches, balconies, basements, utility
and general storage rooms, common halls, stairways and garages, measured from
the interior face of exterior walls and partition walls between units, as
follows:
 
Type of Dwelling Unit                      Area (sq. ft.)
Efficiency apartment (no separate bedroom) 500
One bedroom                                700
Two bedroom                                850
Each additional bedroom                    200
 
   The following percentage of dwelling units shall not be exceeded:
 
Type of Dwelling Unit             Percentage of Total Dwelling Units
Efficiency apartment (no bedroom) 50
One bedroom                       75
Two bedroom                       50
Three or more bedroom             25
 
(Ord. 10-O-35, passed 7-12-2010)
§ 1270.09  SITE DESIGN STANDARDS.
   Each site shall be developed according to the design standards provided in
Chapter 1284, Site Design Standards.
(Ord. 10-O-35, passed 7-12-2010)
§ 1270.10  DEVELOPMENT PLANS REQUIRED.
   Each zoning application for a new multifamily dwelling shall include a
development plan as provided in
Chapter 1262, Administration, Enforcement and Penalty.
(Ord. 10-O-35, passed 7-12-2010)
CHAPTER 1271:  HISTORIC TOWN CENTER DISTRICT (HTC) (REPEALED)
Editor’s note:
   Chapter 1271 was repealed by Ord. 10-O-35, passed July 12, 2010.
CHAPTER 1272:  B-1 AND B-2 BUSINESS DISTRICTS (REPEALED)
Editor’s note:
   Chapter 1272 was repealed by Ord. 10-O-35, passed July 12, 2010.
CHAPTER 1273:  INSTITUTIONAL AND OFFICE DISTRICTS
Section
1273.01   Purpose.
1273.02   Use regulations.
1273.03   Permitted uses.
1273.04   Conditional uses.
1273.05   Accessory uses.
1273.06   Minimum lot area and width regulations.
1273.07   Yard regulations.
1273.08   Maximum lot coverage.
1273.09   Landscape regulations.
1273.10   Height regulations.
1273.11   Site design standards.
1273.12   Development plan required.
§ 1273.01  PURPOSE.
   Institutional and Office Districts are established in order to achieve,
among others, the following purposes:
   (a)   To provide convenient and adequate areas for private local and
regional offices;
   (b)   To accommodate the needs of public educational and other services;
   (c)   To provide such areas to promote the economic development of the city;
and
   (d)   To designate areas in the city for these uses based upon the
Comprehensive Plan.
(Ord. 10-O-35, passed 7-12-2010)
§ 1273.02  USE REGULATIONS.
   Buildings and land shall be used, and buildings shall be designed, erected,
altered, moved or maintained in Institutional and Office Districts only for the
uses set forth in the schedules and use regulations of this Zoning Code.
   (a)   The main buildings and uses set forth in §
1273.03 shall be permitted by right as the principal building or use of a lot.
   (b)   Conditional uses are certain types of main uses, so classified because
of their uncommon characteristics, infrequency of occurrence, large land area
requirements or other features, and shall not be permitted in certain locations
by right. Such uses require consideration and approval by the Planning
Commission according to procedures and standards set forth in
Chapter 1285. Only those uses so enumerated in §
1273.04 may be approved in the district.
   (c)   The accessory buildings and uses set forth in §
1273.05 shall be permitted as a subordinate building or use, which is clearly
incident to and located on the same lot as the main building or use.
(Ord. 10-O-35, passed 7-12-2010)
§ 1273.03  PERMITTED USES.
   The following uses shall be permitted in Institutional and Office Districts:
   (a)   Administrative, executive, financial, professional, accounting,
clerical, drafting and similar uses;
   (b)   Public or private schools, colleges and universities, including
classrooms, laboratories and administrative offices;
   (c)   Hospital;
   (d)   Public buildings;
   (e)   Place of worship; and
   (f)   Public or privately owned buildings of registered historical or
architectural significance operated as a tourist attraction not for profit.
(Ord. 10-O-35, passed 7-12-2010)
§ 1273.04  CONDITIONAL USES.
   The following uses may be permitted provided that each use meets the
requirements and standards set forth in Chapter 1285, Conditional Uses:
   (a)   Retail sale of goods and services, entirely within enclosed buildings,
including but not limited to the following:
      •   Sale, serving and consumption of food and beverages
      •   Video rental and sales
      •   Beauty/barber shop
      •   Convenience store
      •   Computer sales and service
      •   Office supplies
      •   Television, radio, appliance repair
      •   Photographic supplies
      •   Hobbies, crafts, gifts
      •   Hardware, wallpaper, paint
      •   Wearing apparel, shoes, hats
      •   Groceries, meats, fruits, vegetables
      •   Jewelry
      •   Flowers
      •   Furniture, appliances, floor coverings
      •   Pharmaceuticals
      •   Sporting goods
      •   Fitness center
      •   Bookstores
      •   Antiques
      •   Laundry and/or dry cleaning agency, provided no work shall be done on
the premises for other outlets
      •   Other uses deemed as similar by the Planning and Zoning Commission
pursuant to
Chapter 1285, Conditional Uses
   (b)   Motel or hotel;
   (c)   Instructional or training facility;
   (d)   Experimental testing and research and development facilities, provided
that testing or experimentation creates no hazard or nuisance beyond the
confines of the building; and
   (e)   Public utility.
(Ord. 10-O-35, passed 7-12-2010)
§ 1273.05  ACCESSORY USES.
   The following accessory uses shall be permitted in Institutional and Office
Districts:
   (a)   Signs as permitted and as regulated in
Chapter 1286;
   (b)   Off-street parking and loading as permitted and as regulated in
Chapter 1288;
   (c)   Trash and material storage enclosed in a building or an approved
structure or enclosure;
   (d)   Restaurant or snack bar within an office building or public building;
   (e)   Any other use customarily incident to the operation of a permitted
use; and
   (f)   Swimming pool at a hotel or motel subject to the provisions of §
1268.04(c).
(Ord. 10-O-35, passed 7-12-2010)
§ 1273.06  MINIMUM LOT AREA AND WIDTH REGULATIONS.
   (a)   Minimum lot area.  The minimum lot area shall be not less than two
acres.
   (b)   Minimum lot width.  The minimum lot width, measured at the required
setback line, shall be 200 feet.
(Ord. 10-O-35, passed 7-12-2010)
§ 1273.07  YARD REGULATIONS.
   Front, side and rear yards shall be provided on each lot occupied by a
permitted use, conditional use or accessory use according to the following
schedule:
 
              Minimum Yard Dimensions (feet)
Building or   Front Yard      Side Yard                     Rear Yard
Use           From   From Lot Adjoins  Adjoins  Abuts       Adjoins  Adjoins
              Center Line     Res.     Non-res. Street      Res.     Non-res.
              Line            District District (corner)(b) District District
Permitted or
Conditionally 80     50       30       15       50          40       40
Permitted
Building
Parking area  80     50       30       15       25          30       20
Loading area  N/A(a) N/A(a)   30       15       30          30       20
 
(a)   Not permitted in front yard.
(b)   From right-of-way.
(Ord. 10-O-35, passed 7-12-2010)
§ 1273.08  MAXIMUM LOT COVERAGE.
   The maximum area of the lot covered by main and accessory buildings shall
not exceed 25 percent.
(Ord. 10-O-35, passed 7-12-2010)
§ 1273.09  LANDSCAPE REGULATIONS.
   Each lot occupied by a permitted or conditionally permitted use shall have
not less than 35 percent of the lot landscaped.
(Ord. 10-O-35, passed 7-12-2010)
§ 1273.10  HEIGHT REGULATIONS.
   (a)   Permitted buildings shall not exceed three stories and shall not
exceed 35 feet in height.
   (b)   Chimneys, domes, elevator penthouses, skylights, ventilators or other
necessary appurtenances may be erected to a height above the height limitation,
but in no case shall such features exceed 20 feet above the maximum permitted
height.
(Ord. 10-O-35, passed 7-12-2010)
§ 1273.11  SITE DESIGN STANDARDS.
   Each site shall be developed according to the design standards provided in
Chapter 1284, Site Design Standards.
(Ord. 10-O-35, passed 7-12-2010)
§ 1273.12  DEVELOPMENT PLAN REQUIRED.
   Each zoning application for a new building or use, additions thereto, or a
change in use shall include a development plan as provided in
Chapter 1262, Administration, Enforcement and Penalty.
(Ord. 10-O-35, passed 7-12-2010)
CHAPTER 1274:  B-3 PUBLIC AND COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS (REPEALED)
Editor’s note:
   Chapter 1274 was repealed by Ord. 10-O-35, passed July 12, 2010.
CHAPTER 1275:  HISTORIC TOWN CENTER DISTRICT (HTC)
Section
1275.01   Purpose.
1275.02   Use regulations.
1275.03   Permitted uses.
1275.04   Conditional uses.
1275.05   Accessory uses.
1275.06   Minimum lot area and width regulations.
1275.07   Yard regulations.
1275.08   Maximum lot coverage.
1275.09   Landscape regulations.
1275.10   Dwelling unit area regulations.
1275.11   Height regulations.
1275.12   Maximum ground floor area.
1275.13   Site design standards.
1275.14   Building design standards.
1275.15   Development plan required.
§ 1275.01  PURPOSE.
   The Historic Town Center District (HTC) is established to preserve, protect
and enhance the historic center of the city along State Route 306. The historic
character and architectural integrity of existing buildings is to be preserved
and guidelines for new development are set forth. The regulations in this
District are intended to encourage compact, neighborhood and pedestrian scale
retail, service and office uses in the city's center. This District is
established to provide for the sale of convenience retail goods and personal
services as well as to provide for the needs of visitors to the many tourist
attractions in the area.
(Ord. 10-O-35, passed 7-21-2010)
§ 1275.02  USE REGULATIONS.
   Buildings and land shall be used, and buildings shall be designed, erected,
altered, moved or maintained in the Historic Town Center District only for the
uses set forth in the schedules and use regulations of this Zoning Code.
   (a)   The main buildings and uses set forth in §
1275.03 shall be permitted by right as the principal building or use of a lot.
   (b)   Conditional uses are certain types of main uses, so classified because
of their uncommon characteristics, infrequency of occurrence, large land area
requirements or other features, and shall not be permitted in certain locations
by right. Such uses require consideration and approval by the Planning
Commission according to procedures and standards set forth in
Chapter 1285. Only those uses so enumerated in §
1275.04 may be approved in the district.
   (c)   The accessory buildings and uses set forth in §
1275.05 shall be permitted as a subordinate building or use, which is clearly
incident to and located on the same lot as the main building or use.
(Ord. 10-O-35, passed 7-21-2010)
§ 1275.03  PERMITTED USES.
   The following uses shall be permitted in the Historic Town Center District:
   (a)   Retail goods and services entirely within enclosed buildings,
including, but not limited to the following:
      •   Sale, serving and consumption of food and beverages
      •   Video rental and sales
      •   Beauty/barber shop
      •   Convenience store
      •   Computer sales and service
      •   Office supplies
      •   T.V., radio, appliance repair
      •   Photographic supplies
      •   Hobbies, crafts, gifts
      •   Hardware, wallpaper, paint
      •   Wearing apparel, shoes, hats
      •   Groceries, meats, fruits, vegetables
      •   Jewelry
      •   Flowers
      •   Furniture, appliances, floor coverings
      •   Pharmaceuticals
      •   Sporting goods
      •   Fitness center
      •   Bookstores
      •   Antiques
      •   Laundry and/or dry cleaning agency, provided no work shall be done on
the premises for other outlets
      •   Self-service laundry
   (b)   Offices:
      •   Banks, financial, loans
      •   Professional, including doctor, dentist, attorney, accountant,
architect, engineer
      •   Governmental public utility
      •   Sales
   (c)   Public or privately owned buildings of historical or architectural
significance operated as an historic attraction.
   (d)   Place of worship.
   (e)   Public school.
   (f)   All uses permitted in Institutional and Office Districts.
   (g)   Any other use determined by the Planning and Zoning Commission to be
similar to the above uses if such use is more appropriate in these districts,
pursuant to
Chapter 1285.
(Ord. 10-O-35, passed 7-21-2010)
§ 1275.04  CONDITIONAL USES.
   The following uses may be permitted provided that each use meets the
requirements and standards set forth in
Chapter 1285, Conditional Uses.
   (a)   Single-family dwellings, cluster detached dwellings, townhouses,
attached single-family dwellings and multi-family dwellings, provided lot
sizes, lot widths, setbacks and yards as shown on a development plan are
approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council.
   (b)   Mixed-use buildings, which include retail shops, service
establishments and offices, and residential dwelling units in the same
building.
   (c)   Outdoor serving and consumption and carry-out sales of food and
beverages in connection with an established eating facility.
   (d)   Day-care center.
   (e)   Instructional or training facility.
   (f)   Hotel, motel, tourist home, bed and breakfast establishment.
   (g)   Public utility.
   (h)   Other uses deemed similar by the Planning and Zoning Commission
pursuant to
Chapter 1285, Conditional Uses.
(Ord. 10-O-35, passed 7-21-2010)
§ 1275.05  ACCESSORY USES.
   The following accessory uses shall be permitted in the Historic Town Center
District:
   (a)   Signs as permitted and as regulated in
Chapter 1286.
   (b)   Off-street parking and loading as permitted and as regulated in
Chapter 1288.
   (c)   Trash and material storage enclosed in a building or in an approved
structure or enclosure.
   (d)   Restaurant or snack bar within an office building, public building or
motel or hotel.
   (e)   Any other use customarily incident to the operation of a permitted
residential, retail use or service.
   (f)   Conference center in connection with a motel or hotel.
   (g)   Swimming pool at a hotel or motel subject to the provisions of §
1268.04(c).
(Ord. 10-O-35, passed 7-21-2010)
§ 1275.06  MINIMUM LOT AREA AND WIDTH REGULATIONS.
   (a)   Minimum lot area.  A minimum lot area for the following permitted or
conditional uses shall be:
      •   Motels, hotels - two acres. The minimum lot area per bedroom unit
shall be not less than 2,000 square feet.
      •   The minimum development area for single-family dwellings, cluster
detached dwellings, townhouses, attached single-family dwellings and multi-
family dwellings shall be not less than two acres. The minimum lot area per
unit shall be not less than 5,000 square feet.
      •   The minimum lot area per unit in a mixed-use building shall be not
less than 2,000 square feet.
      •   All other permitted and conditional uses - within the Historic Town
Center District there shall be no minimum lot area, provided the use shall meet
all yard requirements.
      •   Minimum dwelling unit densities for multi-family dwellings shall be
as provided in the R-5 District.
   (b)   Lot width regulations.  The minimum lot width, measured at the
required setback, for the following permitted or conditional uses shall be:
      •   Motels, hotels - 200 feet.
      •   All other permitted and conditional uses - within the Historic Town
Center District no minimum lot width is required if the use meets all required
yards.
      •   Minimum required frontage for a multi-family dwelling development
shall be not less than 200 feet.
(Ord. 10-O-35, passed 7-21-2010)
§ 1275.07  YARD REGULATIONS.
   Front, side and rear yards shall be provided on each lot occupied by a main,
conditional or accessory building or use according to the following schedule:
 
Minimum Yard Dimensions (feet)
              Front Yard        Side Yard                   Rear Yard
Building or   From                       Adjoins  Abuts              Adjoins
Use           Center   From Lot Adjoins  Non-Res. Street    Adjoins  Non-Res.
              Line (a) Line (a) Res. Use Use      (corner)  Res. Use Use
                                                  (d)
Any permitted 50       20       10       20       50/20     25       30
dwelling
Any other
permitted or
conditionally
permitted     50       20       20       (b) 10   60/30     30       15
building or
use;
accessory
building
Parking Area  50       20       10       (c) 0/5  40/10     10       (c) 0/5
Loading Area  60       30       40       10       30/10     40       10
 
(a)   On lots within the Historic Town Center District, the Planning and Zoning
Commission may modify the front yard setback requirement by reducing the
distance for up to 50 percent if the Commission determines that the overall
design of the site will contribute to and enhance the town center concept.
(b)   Where an office or business building is planned adjacent to another
office or business building, the buildings shall be attached or shall be
located not less than the required distance from the lot line.
(c)   Required side and rear yards for parking areas shall be landscaped and
not used for driveways except as permitted by the Planning and Zoning
Commission to connect adjacent parking areas.
(d)   First figure is distance from center line; second figure is distance from
right-of-way.
(Ord. 10-O-35, passed 7-21-2010)
§ 1275.08  MAXIMUM LOT COVERAGE.
   The maximum area of the lot which may be covered by main and accessory
buildings shall not exceed 30 percent.
(Ord. 10-O-35, passed 7-21-2010)
§ 1275.09  LANDSCAPE REGULATIONS.
   (a)   Each lot occupied by a permitted or conditionally permitted use shall
have not less than 25 percent of the lot landscaped.
   (b)   The Planning and Zoning Commission may require fencing and/or
additional landscaping of side and rear yards where adjacent to residentially
used or residentially zoned parcels.
(Ord. 10-O-35, passed 7-21-2010)
§ 1275.10  DWELLING UNIT AREA REGULATIONS.
   (a)   For single-family dwellings, cluster detached dwellings, townhouses
and attached single-family dwellings, the minimum dwelling unit area shall be
as provided in the R-l and R-2 Districts.
   (b)   For all other dwelling units, including those in mixed-use structures,
the minimum dwelling unit area shall be as provided in the R-5 District.
(Ord. 10-O-35, passed 7-21-2010)
§ 1275.11  HEIGHT REGULATIONS.
   (a)   Permitted buildings shall not exceed three stories and shall not
exceed 35 feet in height.
   (b)   Chimneys, domes, elevator penthouses, skylights, ventilators or other
necessary appurtenant features usually located on roofs may be erected to a
height above the height limitation but in no case shall such features exceed 20
feet above the maximum permitted height.
(Ord. 10-O-35, passed 7-21-2010)
§ 1275.12  MAXIMUM GROUND FLOOR AREA.
   Within the District, the ground floor area of any building use except for
governmentally owned buildings, churches and other religious buildings, hotels
or motels shall not exceed 10,000 square feet.
(Ord. 10-O-35, passed 7-21-2010)
§ 1275.13  SITE DESIGN STANDARDS.
   Each site shall be developed according to the standards provided in
Chapter 1284, Site Design Standards.
(Ord. 10-O-35, passed 7-21-2010)
§ 1275.14  BUILDING DESIGN STANDARDS.
   (a)   Location, orientation, size and shape of buildings.
      (1)   The linear continuity of buildings shall be preserved by placing
primary facades parallel to the street.
      (2)   New and remodeled buildings shall be compatible with their
surroundings. Architectural style, bulk, shape, massing, height, scale and form
of new and remodeled buildings and the shape between and around buildings shall
be consistent with the character of the area and be in harmony with neighboring
buildings. Building design and materials shall also be compatible with the
historic residential and institutional structures in the city and include gable
roofs and residential-type windows and doors.
      (3)   Buildings with a facade in excess of 50 feet shall be divided into
modules not exceeding 50 feet in width. Each module may have a separate entry,
display windows and/or other architectural features to distinguish it from
adjacent modules.
   (b)   Exterior renovation or alteration of existing historic structures.
      (1)   The distinguishing original qualities of an historic building or
structure shall not be destroyed. The removal or alteration of any historic
materials or distinctive architectural features shall not occur whenever
possible.
      (2)   Existing houses which are converted to commercial uses shall retain
the residential character and general construction design of the period of the
structure.
      (3)   Architectural elements shall be sensitively designed to reflect
detailing associated with the particular style of the building.
      (4)   The design elements of a building addition shall match the design
elements of the principal structure, in particular, building materials and
color, roof lines and shapes, and window proportions and alignment.
      (5)   The scale of an addition shall be compatible with the principal
structure and surrounding structures and context.
      (6)   The original pattern of window and door openings and their shape
and configuration shall not be altered unless approved by the Planning and
Zoning Commission. Window and door openings should not be reduced, enlarged or
filled-in on street facade. Replacement windows and doors should match the
original size, shape and design as closely as possible.
      (7)   Original materials shall be repaired, restored and reused whenever
possible. Original materials shall not be removed or covered whenever possible.
Where necessary missing or deteriorated materials shall be replaced with
appropriate recycled or new materials which match the original as closely as
possible.
   (c)   Building materials and appurtenances.
      (1)   The architectural character and exterior building materials of new
and remodeled buildings shall be harmonious with nearby historic buildings in
color and texture, materials, proportion, scale, patterns and opening sizes and
shapes.
      (2)   Construction materials and colors for walls and fences that are
visible from the street shall be uniform and compatible with the architectural
style, color and building material of the building and its surroundings.
      (3)   Accessory buildings shall be compatible in design and material with
the main structure.
   (d)   Building and lot aesthetics.  The specific guidelines for building and
lot aesthetics in this subsection have been formatted to provide an
illustration of the acceptable and not acceptable methods of building design as
it relates to height, scale, massing, setback and other issues. For each
specific guideline that follows a description of the recommended approach that
the applicant/property owner should "consider" is provided, with an
illustration of the result of the design. Similarly, a description is provided
of the design approach that the applicant/property owner should "avoid" when
designing or remodeling structures in this District.
      (1)   Height:
         A.   Acceptable.  Relating the overall height of new construction or
renovation of existing structures to that of adjacent structures.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ec7ad15d617dbba9e0ee3d1ed637d1d7d3b2411d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3428.jpg]
 
         B.   Not acceptable.  New construction that greatly varies in height
(too high or too low) from older buildings in the vicinity.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ec7ad15d617dbba9e0ee3d1ed637d1d7d3b2411d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3430.jpg]
 
      (2)   Scale:
         A.   Acceptable.  Relating the size and proportions of new structures
to the scale of adjacent buildings. Although much larger than its neighbors in
terms of square footage, the building shown maintains the same scale and rhythm
as the existing buildings.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ec7ad15d617dbba9e0ee3d1ed637d1d7d3b2411d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3432.jpg]
 
         B.   Not acceptable.  Buildings that in height, width or massing
violate the existing scale of the area. The new building shown here disrupts
the scale and rhythm of the streetscape.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ec7ad15d617dbba9e0ee3d1ed637d1d7d3b2411d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3434.jpg]
 
      (3)   Massing:
         A.   Acceptable.  Breaking up uninteresting boxlike forms into small,
varied masses such as are common on most older buildings. Variety of form and
massing are elements essential to the character of the streetscape.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ec7ad15d617dbba9e0ee3d1ed637d1d7d3b2411d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3436.jpg]
 
         B.   Not acceptable.  Single, monolithic forms that are not relieved
by variations in massing. Boxlike facades and forms are intrusive when placed
in a streetscape of older buildings that have varied massing and facade
articulation.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ec7ad15d617dbba9e0ee3d1ed637d1d7d3b2411d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3438.jpg]
 
      (4)   Directional expression:
         A.   Acceptable.- Relating the vertical, or nondirectional facade
character of new buildings to the predominant directional expression of nearby
buildings. Horizontal buildings can be made to relate to the more vertical
adjacent structures by breaking the facade into smaller masses that conform to
the primary expression of the streetscape.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ec7ad15d617dbba9e0ee3d1ed637d1d7d3b2411d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3440.jpg]
 
         B.   Not acceptable.  Strongly horizontal or vertical facade
expressions unless compatible with the character of structures in the immediate
area. The new building shown does not relate well to either its neighbors or to
the rhythm of the streetscape because of its unbroken horizontal facade.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ec7ad15d617dbba9e0ee3d1ed637d1d7d3b2411d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3442.jpg]
 
      (5)   Setback:
         A.   Acceptable.  Maintaining the architectural facade lines of
streetscape by locating front walls of new building in the same plane as the
facades of adjacent buildings. If existing setbacks vary, new building should
conform to historic sitting patterns.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ec7ad15d617dbba9e0ee3d1ed637d1d7d3b2411d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3444.jpg]
 
         B.   Not acceptable.  Violating the existing setback pattern by
placing new buildings in front of or behind the historic facade line. Avoid
placing buildings at odd angles to the street, unless in an area where diverse
sitting already exists.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ec7ad15d617dbba9e0ee3d1ed637d1d7d3b2411d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3446.jpg]
 
      (6)   Sense of entry:
         A.   Acceptable.  Articulating the main entrances to the building with
covered porches, porticos and other pronounced architectural forms.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ec7ad15d617dbba9e0ee3d1ed637d1d7d3b2411d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3448.jpg]
 
         B.   Not acceptable.  Facades with no strong sense of entry. Side
entries or entries not defined by a porch or similar transitional element
result in an incompatible "flat" first floor facade.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ec7ad15d617dbba9e0ee3d1ed637d1d7d3b2411d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3450.jpg]
 
      (7)   Roof shapes:
         A.   Acceptable.  Relating the roof forms of the new building to those
found in the area. Although not entirely necessary, duplication of the existing
or traditional roof shapes, pitches and materials on new construction is one
way of making new structures more visually compatible.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ec7ad15d617dbba9e0ee3d1ed637d1d7d3b2411d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3452.jpg]
 
         B.   Not acceptable.  Introducing roof shapes, pitches or materials
not traditionally used in the area.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ec7ad15d617dbba9e0ee3d1ed637d1d7d3b2411d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3454.jpg]
 
      (8)   Rhythm of openings:
         A.   Acceptable.  Respecting the recurrent alternation of wall area
with door and window elements in the facade. Also consider the width-to-height
ratio of bays in the facade. The placement of openings with respect to the
facade's overall composition symmetry, or balanced asymmetry, should be
carefully studied.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ec7ad15d617dbba9e0ee3d1ed637d1d7d3b2411d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3456.jpg]
 
         B.   Not acceptable.  Introducing incompatible facade patterns that
upset the rhythm of openings established in surrounding structures. Glass walls
and window and door shapes and their locations shown in the example are
disrespectful to the adjoining buildings.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ec7ad15d617dbba9e0ee3d1ed637d1d7d3b2411d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3458.jpg]
 
(Ord. 10-O-35, passed 7-21-2010)
§ 1275.15  DEVELOPMENT PLAN REQUIRED.
   Site development plans and the review of same are required for all
development in the Historic Town Center District in compliance with
Chapter 1262. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall have the authority to
engage such architectural and other professional consultants as it deems
necessary for the review of the Site Development Plan. The reasonable cost of
the services of such consultants shall be added to the applicant's fee for the
application for Site Development Plan review as an escrow fund to be held by
the city from which to pay such costs.
(Ord. 10-O-35, passed 7-21-2010)
CHAPTER 1276:  B-4 GENERAL AND INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS  (REPEALED)
Editor’s note:
      Chapter 1276 was repealed by Ord. 10-O-35, passed July 12, 2010.
CHAPTER 1277:  RETAIL BUSINESS DISTRICTS
Section
1277.01   Purpose.
1277.02   Use regulations.
1277.03   Permitted uses.
1277.04   Conditional uses.
1277.05   Accessory uses.
1277.06   Minimum lot area and width regulations.
1277.07   Yard regulations.
1277.08   Maximum lot coverage.
1277.09   Landscape regulations.
1277.10   Height regulations.
1277.11   Site design standards.
1277.12   Development plan required.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Administration, enforcement and penalty - see P. & Z.
Ch. 1262
   Basis of districting or zoning; classification of buildings and structures -
see Ohio R.C. 713.10
   Division of municipal corporations into zones - see Ohio R.C. 713.06
   General provisions and definitions - see P. & Z.
Ch. 1260
   Restrictions on location, height and bulk of buildings - see Ohio R.C.
713.07 et seq.
   Variances - see P. & Z.
1264.02
§ 1277.01  PURPOSE.
   Retail Business Districts and their regulations are established to achieve,
among others, the following purposes:
   (a)   To provide in appropriate and convenient locations retail business
uses to serve residents, employees and visitors;
   (b)   To promote the economic development of the city;
   (c)   To protect adjacent residential and business properties by requiring
adequate yards and landscaping of their common boundaries; and
   (d)   To promote the desirable and beneficial use of land based upon the
Comprehensive Plan.
(Ord. 10-O-35, passed 7-12-2010)
§ 1277.02  USE REGULATIONS.
   Buildings and land shall be used, and buildings shall be designed, erected,
altered, moved or maintained in retail business districts only for the uses set
forth in the schedules and use regulations of this Zoning Code.
   (a)   The main buildings and uses set forth in §
1277.03 shall be permitted by right as the principal building or use of a lot.
   (b)   Conditional uses are certain types of main uses, so classified because
of their uncommon characteristics, infrequency of occurrence, large land area
requirements or other features, and shall not be permitted in certain locations
by right. Such uses require consideration and approval by the Planning
Commission according to procedures and standards set forth in
Chapter 1285. Only those uses so enumerated in §
1277.04 may be approved in the district.
   (c)   The accessory buildings and uses set forth in §
1277.05 shall be permitted as a subordinate building or use, which is clearly
incident to and located on the same lot as the main building or use.
(Ord. 10-O-35, passed 7-12-2010)
§ 1277.03  PERMITTED USES.
   The following uses shall be permitted in Retail Business Districts:
   (a)   Retail goods and services entirely within enclosed buildings permitted
in the Historic Town Center District;
   (b)   Offices permitted in the Historic Town Center District;
   (c)   Day care center;
   (d)   All permitted uses in Office and Institutional Districts; and
   (e)   Any other use determined by the Planning and Zoning Commission to be
similar to the above uses if such use is determined to be more appropriate in
this District.
(Ord. 10-O-35, passed 7-12-2010)
§ 1277.04  CONDITIONAL USES.
   The following uses may be permitted provided that each use meets the
requirements and standards set forth in
Chapter 1285, Conditional Uses:
   (a)   Outdoor serving and consumption and carry-out sales of food and
beverages;
   (b)   Instructional or training facility;
   (c)   Outdoor sales of plant and landscape materials;
   (d)   Automotive service station;
   (e)   Sale of automobiles and recreational equipment;
   (f)   Veterinary hospitals;
   (g)   Public utility; and
   (h)   Other uses deemed similar by the Planning and Zoning Commission
pursuant to
Chapter 1285, Conditional Uses.
(Ord. 10-O-35, passed 7-12-2010)
§ 1277.05  ACCESSORY USES.
   The following accessory uses shall be permitted in General Business
Districts:
   (a)   Signs as permitted and as regulated in
Chapter 1286;
   (b)   Off-street parking and loading as permitted and as regulated in
Chapter 1288;
   (c)   Trash and material storage enclosed in a building or an approved
structure or enclosure;
   (d)   Restaurant or snack bar within an office building or public building;
and
   (e)   Any other use customarily incident to the operation of a permitted
retail use or service.
(Ord. 10-O-35, passed 7-12-2010)
§ 1277.06  MINIMUM LOT AREA AND WIDTH REGULATIONS.
   (a)   Minimum lot area.  The minimum lot area shall be not less than one
acre.
   (b)   Minimum lot width.  The minimum lot width, measured at the required
setback, shall be not less than 100 feet.
(Ord. 10-O-35, passed 7-12-2010)
§ 1277.07  YARD REGULATIONS.
   Front, side and rear yards shall be provided on each lot occupied by a
permitted use, conditional use or accessory use according to the following
schedule:
 
Minimum Yard Dimensions (feet)
            Front Yard           Side Yard                   Rear Yard
Building or                      Adjoins  Adjoins  Abuts     Adjoins  Adjoins
Use         From Center From Lot Res.     Non-Res. Street    Res.     Non-Res.
            Line        Line     District District (corner)  District District
                                                   (b)
Any permitted use  80     50     25 15 25 50 30
Conditional use
   Building     80     50     25 15 25 50 30
   Outdoor displ55     25     40 15 25 50 30
Parking Area       40     10     30 10 25 30 10
Loading Area       N/A(a) N/A(a) 30 10 25 30 10
 
(a)   Not permitted in front yard.
(b)   From right-of-way.
(Ord. 10-O-35, passed 7-12-2010)
§ 1277.08  MAXIMUM LOT COVERAGE.
   The maximum area of the lot covered by main and accessory buildings shall
not exceed 30 percent.
(Ord. 10-O-35, passed 7-12-2010)
§ 1277.09  LANDSCAPE REGULATIONS.
   Each lot occupied by a permitted or conditionally permitted use shall have
not less than 30 percent of the lot landscaped.
(Ord. 10-O-35, passed 7-12-2010)
§ 1277.10  HEIGHT REGULATIONS.
   (a)   Permitted buildings shall not exceed three stories and shall not
exceed 35 feet in height.
   (b)   Chimneys, domes, elevator penthouses, skylights, ventilators or other
necessary appurtenances may be erected to a height above the height limitation,
but in no case shall such features exceed 20 feet above the maximum permitted
height.
(Ord. 10-O-35, passed 7-12-2010)
§ 1277.11  SITE DESIGN STANDARDS.
   Each site shall be developed according to the design standards provided in
Chapter 1284, Site Design Standards.
(Ord. 10-O-35, passed 7-12-2010)
§ 1277.12  DEVELOPMENT PLAN REQUIRED.
   Each zoning application for a new building or use, additions thereto, or a
change in use shall include a development plan as provided in
Chapter 1262, Administration, Enforcement and Penalty.
(Ord. 10-O-35, passed 7-12-2010)
CHAPTER 1278:  LOT AREA AND WIDTH REQUIREMENTS (REPEALED)
Editor's note:
      Chapter 1278 was repealed by Ord. 11-O-1, passed February 23, 2011.
CHAPTER 1279:  LIMITED INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS
Section
1279.01   Purpose.
1279.02   Use regulations.
1279.03   Permitted uses.
1279.04   Conditional uses.
1279.05   Accessory uses.
1279.06   Minimum lot area and width regulations.
1279.07   Yard regulations.
1279.08   Maximum lot coverage.
1279.09   Landscape regulations.
1279.10   Height regulations.
1279.11   Site design standards.
1279.12   Development plan required.
§ 1279.01  PURPOSE.
   Limited Industrial Districts and their regulations are established to
achieve, among others, the following purposes:
   (a)   To provide areas for industrially oriented office and research
activities;
   (b)   To provide for uses that produce and distribute goods;
   (c)   To promote economic development in the city;
   (d)   To protect nearby residential developments by restricting the types of
permitted uses; and
   (e)   To promote the most desirable and beneficial industrial uses based
upon the Comprehensive Plan.
(Ord. 10-O-35, passed 7-12-2010)
§ 1279.02  USE REGULATIONS.
   Buildings and land shall be used, and buildings shall be designed, erected,
altered, moved or maintained in limited industrial districts only for the uses
set forth in the schedules and use regulations of this Zoning Code.
   (a)   The main buildings and uses set forth in §
1279.03 shall be permitted by right as the principal building or use of a lot.
   (b)   Conditional uses are certain types of main uses, so classified because
of their uncommon characteristics, infrequency of occurrence, large land area
requirements or other features, and shall not be permitted in certain locations
by right. Such uses require consideration and approval by the Planning
Commission according to procedures and standards set forth in
Chapter 1285. Only those uses so enumerated in §
1279.04 may be approved in the district.
   (c)   The accessory buildings and uses set forth in §
1279.05 shall be permitted as a subordinate building or use, which is clearly
incident to and located on the same lot as the main building or use.
(Ord. 10-O-35, passed 7-12-2010)
§ 1279.03  PERMITTED USES.
   The following uses shall be permitted in Limited Industrial Districts:
   (a)   Research laboratories limited to small scale experimental and pilot
plant operations;
   (b)   Metal production including metal cutting, casting, stamping; electric,
gas and ultrasonic welding; grinding, machining and finishing;
   (c)   Nonmetal production including:
      (1)   Clothing and other textile products;
      (2)   Pharmaceutical products, compounding of cosmetics, drugs and
toiletries;
      (3)   Plastics; extrusion, molding and fabricating of panels, sheets,
tubes and rods;
      (4)   Printing, publishing and engraving; and
      (5)   Woods; fabrication of furniture, cabinets and other products.
   (d)   Services, wholesale sales and storage:
      (1)   Cleaning, dyeing and dry cleaning establishments; carpet cleaning;
      (2)   Repair of household tools and appliances;
      (3)   Food and drink preparation;
      (4)   Shops and offices of contractors;
      (5)   Warehouses, indoor storage, public storage buildings, delivery
establishments and automotive garage; and
      (6)   Automotive service station.
(Ord. 10-O-35, passed 7-12-2010)
§ 1279.04  CONDITIONAL USES.
   The following uses may be permitted provided that each meets the
requirements and standards set forth in
Chapter 1285, Conditional Uses:
   (a)   Outdoor storage and wholesale sales of lumber and other building
materials;
   (b)   Outdoor storage of recreational vehicles;
   (c)   Storage of contractors' equipment;
   (d)   Animal boarding establishment;
   (e)   Public utility; and
   (f)   Other uses deemed similar by the Planning and Zoning Commission
pursuant to
Chapter 1285, Conditional Uses.
(Ord. 10-O-35, passed 7-12-2010)
§ 1279.05  ACCESSORY USES.
   The following accessory uses shall be permitted in Limited Industrial
Districts:
   (a)   Signs as permitted and as regulated in
Chapter 1286;
   (b)   Off-street parking and loading as permitted and as regulated in
Chapter 1288;
   (c)   Maintenance and storage facilities within enclosed buildings;
   (d)   Employee lunch rooms;
   (e)   Day care for children or dependents of employees working on the
premises; and
   (f)   Outdoor storage (screened from public view by plantings and/or
fencing). No storage in front yard setback.
(Ord. 10-O-35, passed 7-12-2010)
§ 1279.06  MINIMUM LOT AREA AND WIDTH REGULATIONS.
   (a)   Minimum lot area.  The minimum lot area shall be not less than one
acre.
   (b)   Minimum lot width.  The minimum lot width, measured at the required
setback line, shall be not less than 100 feet.
(Ord. 10-O-35, passed 7-12-2010)
§ 1279.07  YARD REGULATIONS.
   Front, side and rear yards shall be provided on each lot occupied by a
permitted use, conditional use or accessory use according to the following
schedule:
 
              Minimum Yard Dimensions (feet)
Building or   Front Yard      Side Yard                     Rear Yard
Use           From   From Lot Adjoins  Adjoins  Abuts       Adjoins  Adjoins
              Center Line     Res.     Non-res. Street      Res.     Non-res.
              Line            District District (corner)(b) District District
Permitted or
Conditionally 80     50       50       15       30          50       40
Permitted
Building
Parking area  80     50       30       15       30          30       20
RV and Boat
Outdoor       N/A(a) N/A(a)   30       15       30          30       20
Storage
Loading area  N/A(a) N/A(a)   30       15       30          30       20
 
(a)   Not permitted in front yard.
(b)   From right-of-way.
(Ord. 10-O-35, passed 7-12-2010)
§ 1279.08  MAXIMUM LOT COVERAGE.
   The maximum area of the lot covered by main and accessory buildings shall
not exceed 35 percent.
(Ord. 10-O-35, passed 7-12-2010)
§ 1279.09  LANDSCAPE REGULATIONS.
   Each lot occupied by a permitted or conditionally permitted use shall have
not less than 25 percent of the lot landscaped.
(Ord. 10-O-35, passed 7-12-2010)
§ 1279.10  HEIGHT REGULATIONS.
   (a)   Permitted buildings shall not exceed three stories and shall not
exceed 35 feet in height.
   (b)   Chimneys, domes, elevator penthouses, skylights, ventilators or other
necessary appurtenances may be erected to a height above the height limitation,
but in no case shall such features exceed 20 feet above the maximum permitted
height.
(Ord. 10-O-35, passed 7-12-2010)
§ 1279.11  SITE DESIGN STANDARDS.
   Each site shall be developed according to the design standards provided in
Chapter 1284, Site Design Standards.
(Ord. 10-O-35, passed 7-12-2010)
§ 1279.12  DEVELOPMENT PLAN REQUIRED.
   Each zoning application for a new building or use, additions thereto, or a
change in use shall include a development plan as provided in
Chapter 1262, Administration, Enforcement and Penalty.
(Ord. 10-O-35, passed 7-12-2010)
CHAPTER 1280:  YARD REQUIREMENTS (REPEALED)
Editor’s note:
   Chapter 1280 was repealed by Ord. 11-O-1, passed February 23, 2011.
CHAPTER 1282:  NONCONFORMING USES
Section
1282.01   Purpose.
1282.02   Nonconforming buildings.
1282.03   Nonconforming use of buildings.
1282.04   Nonconforming use of land.
1282.05   Nonconforming lot.
1282.06   Nonconforming due to amendments.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Appeals and variances - see P. & Z.
1264.02,
1264.03
   Nonconforming uses; retroactive measures - see Ohio R.C. 713.15
   Restriction in location of buildings and structures - see Ohio R.C. 713.07
§ 1282.01  PURPOSE.
   Regulations for the continuance, maintenance, repair, restoring, moving and
discontinuance of nonconforming buildings, land and uses are hereby established
in order to achieve among others, the following purposes:
   (a)   To permit the continuance of nonconformity but with control so as to
minimize any adverse effect on the adjoining properties and development;
   (b)   To regulate nonconforming building maintenance, repair and extension;
   (c)   To restrict the reconstruction of a nonconforming building if such
building is substantially destroyed;
   (d)   To require the permanent discontinuance of nonconforming buildings,
land and uses if the same are not operated for certain periods; and
   (e)   To require conformity if nonconforming buildings, land and uses are
discontinued and to bring about eventual conformity in accordance with the
objectives of the Zoning Code of the city.
(Ord. 01-O-42, passed 9-17-2001)
§ 1282.02  NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS.
   "Nonconforming building" means a building or other structure existing
lawfully at the time this Zoning Code (Ord. 75-O-53, passed June 2, 1975) or
any subsequent amendment thereto became effective, but which does not conform
as to dimensions (area and width of lot, width of yards, percent of land
coverage or height of building), or as to design (designed or intended for a
use not permitted or compatible with the type of structure), or other
regulations of the district in which it is located. A nonconforming building
may be continued as follows.
   (a)   Maintenance and repair. A building nonconforming as to dimensions and/
or design may continue to be used and normal repairs may be made. For the
purpose of this Zoning Code, normal repairs include the ordinary maintenance of
a building or structure, the replacement of equipment which is required for
safety of operation and the replacement or substitutions of machinery or
equipment. Normal repairs do not include the replacement of structural parts in
any building nonconforming as to design except when required by law to restore
the structure to a safe condition or to make the building or use conforming.
   (b)   Additions. A building nonconforming as to dimensions may be added to
or enlarged if the additions are made to conform to the area, yard dimensions,
setback, percent of coverage, usable open space and height regulations of the
district in which it is located.
   (c)   Moving. A building nonconforming as to dimension and/or design, may be
moved in whole or in part to any other location on the lot or to another lot if
every portion of such building so moved is made to conform to all current
regulations of the district in which it is to be located.
   (d)   Restoration of damaged building.
      (1)   If a nonconforming building is damaged or destroyed by any means to
the extent of less than its assessed value as shown in the current record of
the County Auditor, those portions so destroyed or damaged may be restored but
to not more than their former size, provided such restoration is completed
within a period of one year from the date of damage or destruction. If such a
building is occupied by a nonconforming use prior to damage, such use may be
reestablished.
      (2)   If a building nonconforming as to dimension only is damaged or
destroyed more than its assessed value, it may only be restored or rebuilt in
conformance with all the yard, percent of coverage and height regulations of
the district in which it is located.
      (3)   If a building nonconforming as to design is damaged or destroyed
more than its assessed value, no repairing or reconstruction shall be made
unless every portion of the building is made to conform to all regulations of
the district in which the building is located and it shall be occupied only by
a conforming use.
      (4)   Determination of the value of the reproduction of that which was
destroyed shall be made by three practicing building construction contractors;
one to be appointed by the owner, one to be appointed by the Zoning Inspector
and the third to be selected by the mutual consent of the two parties.
   (e)   Discontinuance of use. If any nonconforming building or portion
thereof is not occupied by a use for a continuous period of at least one year,
the nonconforming building or nonconforming portion thereof shall be
reconstructed to comply with this Zoning Code and any further use must be in
conformity with the uses permitted in the district in which it is located.
(Ord. 01-O-42, passed 9-17-2001)
§ 1282.03  NONCONFORMING USE OF BUILDINGS.
   "Nonconforming use of a building" means the use of a building existing
lawfully at the time this Zoning Code (Ord. 75-O-53, passed June 2, 1975) or
any amendment thereto became effective, but which does not conform to the use,
advertising sign, parking or loading regulations of the district in which it is
located. Any nonconforming use of a building may be continued only under the
following conditions:
   (a)   Change of use. The nonconforming use of a building may only be changed
to a conforming use. Once a nonconforming use has been changed to a conforming
use or a more restricted use, such use shall not be changed back to a less
restricted use or nonconforming use.
   (b)   Expansion of use. The nonconforming use of part of a building may not
be expanded or extended.
   (c)   Abandonment of use. If any nonconforming use within a building or
portion thereof is discontinued for a continuous period of at least one year,
any future use of such building or portion thereof so discontinued, shall
comply with this Zoning Code.
   (d)   Nonconforming signs. A nonconforming sign shall be regulated as set
forth in
Chapter 1286.
   (e)   Nonconforming parking facilities. A building or use existing lawfully
at the time this Zoning Code or any amendment thereto became effective, but
which does not conform with the off-street parking or off-street loading
regulations, may be occupied by the existing use without such parking and/or
loading facilities being provided. However, any parking spaces that may be
provided thereafter shall comply with the regulations set forth in
Chapter 1288. Furthermore, if the existing building is altered so that there is
an increase of the number of dwelling units, seating capacity or floor area, or
if the use is changed to a use requiring more off-street facilities, then off-
street parking and loading facilities shall be made at least equal to the
number of spaces required for the entire building or use in accordance with all
provisions of
Chapter 1288.
   (f)   Non-conforming use; performance standards. Any use established before
the effective date of this Zoning Code (Ord. 75-O-53, passed June 2, 1975) and
nonconforming as to one or more of the performance standards established for
industrial operations, shall be required to conform thereto within one year.
(Ord. 01-O-42, passed 9-17-2001)
§ 1282.04  NONCONFORMING USE OF LAND.
   "Nonconforming use of land" means any parcel of land nonconforming as to
use, existing lawfully at the time this Zoning Code (Ord. 75-O-53, passed June
2, 1975) or any amendment thereto became effective but which does not conform
with the use and/or dimension regulations of the district in which it is
located. Any nonconforming use of land may be continued under the following
conditions:
   (a)   Change of use. The nonconforming use of land shall not be changed
except to any other use which complies with this Zoning Code;
   (b)   Expansion of use. The use of a lot or part thereof, nonconforming as
to use shall not be expanded or extended; and
   (c)   Discontinuance of use. If any lot or part thereof, nonconforming as to
use is discontinued for a continuous period of at least one year, any future
use of such lot or part thereof, shall comply with the use regulations of this
Zoning Code.
(Ord. 01-O-42, passed 9-17-2001)
§ 1282.05  NONCONFORMING LOT.
   Any parcel of land nonconforming as to lot area and/or lot width
requirements of the zoning district in which it is located, existing lawfully
at the time this Zoning Code (Ord. 75-O-53, passed June 2, 1975) or an
amendment thereto became effective, may be developed according to the
following:
   (a)   If occupied by a building or use, such building or use may be
maintained, repaired or altered;
   (b)   If occupied by a building or use, such building or use may be
expanded, provided such addition complies with all other zoning regulations
except lot area and lot width; and
   (c)   If vacant, the lot may be used for any use permitted in the zoning
district provided such use shall comply with building size and zoning use
requirements except for lot area and lot width.
(Ord. 01-O-42, passed 9-17-2001)
§ 1282.06  NONCONFORMING DUE TO AMENDMENTS.
   The foregoing provisions of this chapter shall also apply to buildings,
structures, land or other uses which hereafter become nonconforming as a result
of reclassification of districts, regulations or of other amendments made to
this Zoning Code.
(Ord. 01-O-42, passed 9-17-2001)
CHAPTER 1284:  SITE DESIGN STANDARDS
Section
1284.01   Purpose.
1284.02   Site development.
1284.03   Parking and access.
1284.04   Landscaping.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Administration, enforcement and penalty - see P. & Z.
Ch. 1262
   Basis of districting or zoning; classification of buildings and structures -
see Ohio R.C. 713.10
   Division of municipal corporations into zones - see Ohio R.C. 713.06
   General provisions and definitions - see P. & Z.
Ch. 1260
   Off-street parking and loading - see P. & Z.
Ch. 1288
   Restrictions on location, height and bulk of buildings - see Ohio R.C.
713.07 et seq.
   Signs - see P. & Z.
Ch. 1286
   Variances - see P. & Z.
1264.02
§ 1284.01  PURPOSE.
   Site design standards are provided for certain land uses because of the
nature of the use, the size, number of structures, traffic generated and
overall impact on the neighboring properties and to enhance the overall
appearance of the development.
(Ord. 11-O-1, passed 2-23-2011)
§ 1284.02  SITE DEVELOPMENT.
   Sites shall be developed following these guidelines:
   (a)   The proposed development shall avoid or minimize land disturbance and
grading and preserve the original contours and other natural topographical
features of the site and existing trees on the site and shall incorporate
measures to minimize soil erosion during all construction phases.
   (b)   Parking areas shall be treated to minimize the visual impact of parked
cars as viewed from the public right-of-way and adjacent properties through the
use of plantings and earth berms.
   (c)   In the Historic Town Center District, utility services on private
property shall be placed underground for all new services.
   (d)   Where a sidewalk/bikeway does not exist in the public right-of-way
abutting the applicant's property, a five-foot wide sidewalk shall be provided
by the applicant. A pedestrian/bikeway connection shall occur from the building
to the sidewalk/bikeway in the public right-of-way.
   (e)   Provision shall be made in the design of the development for
connections with existing or future pedestrian systems on adjoining properties,
including but not limited to connections to existing or planned future
sidewalks, bikeways, or trail systems.
   (f)   Site features such as service entrances and loading zones shall be
screened from adjacent properties and the public right-of-way and located in
the side or rear of the lot.
   (g)   Mechanical equipment shall be located so as not to be visible from any
public ways or adjacent residential areas. Where such limitation is not
possible, the facilities shall be screened from public view with materials
compatible with those used in the building.
   (h)   All trash containers and trash storage areas shall be screened with a
six-foot high masonry enclosure on three sides and a solid gate on the front.
   (i)   All storage of materials and equipment shall be within enclosed
buildings except for outdoor sales of plant and landscape materials in Retail
Business Districts and as conditionally permitted in Limited Industrial
Districts. All business activity shall be within enclosed buildings, except as
permitted by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
   (j)   Decorative fencing such as split rail, wrought iron or wood picket
shall be permitted in the front yard and shall not be higher than four feet.
   (k)   Security fences shall not be permitted in the front building setback,
in front of any building or in the side yard setback on a corner lot. Security
fences must be screened from view with trees and shrubs. Chain link fencing
shall not be permitted in the Historic Town Center District.
(Ord. 11-O-1, passed 2-23-2011)
§ 1284.03  PARKING AND ACCESS.
   Off-street parking and access drives shall be designed as follows:
   (a)   The number of vehicular turning movements should be minimized by
limiting the number of access drives. Continuous access along the frontage is
prohibited.
   (b)   Existing access drives must be considered when planning new access
drives on adjacent property or across the street.
   (c)   Joint use of parking is encouraged. The Planning and Zoning Commission
may permit parking to extend to the side or rear property line in the case of a
joint parking area.
   (d)   Loading and unloading activities should not interfere with automobile
access.
   (e)   Vehicular circulation is encouraged between parcels. Where possible,
provisions should be made to permit circulation among parcels in the Historic
Town Center, Business, and Institutional and Office Districts. (See figures
below.)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ec7ad15d617dbba9e0ee3d1ed637d1d7d3b2411d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3506.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ec7ad15d617dbba9e0ee3d1ed637d1d7d3b2411d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3508.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ec7ad15d617dbba9e0ee3d1ed637d1d7d3b2411d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3510.jpg]
 
   (f)   Priority should be given to safety of pedestrians and drivers.
(Ord. 11-O-1, passed 2-23-2011)
§ 1284.04  LANDSCAPING.
   Landscaping shall be used as a transition between uses, and to screen areas
from public view and to improve the appearance of developed areas. All yard
areas not used for accessory structures and uses shall be landscaped and
maintained with grass, trees and shrubs. Landscaping shall meet the following
requirements:
   (a)   Plant materials should be chosen which are indigenous, moderately fast
growing, and require minimal maintenance. The landscape design should
incorporate the entire site and consist of a palette of plants with year round
appeal which may include: annuals, perennials, shrubs or trees.
   (b)   Landscaping shall be compatible with the city's Streetscape Plan.
   (c)   Each landscape plan shall address the functional aspects of
landscaping such as drainage, erosion prevention, wind barriers, provisions for
shade, energy conservation, sound absorption, dust abatement, reduction of
glare and screening.
   (d)   Where landscaping is used as screening it shall be opaque year round.
   (e)   Landscape screening shall be of a height and density so that it
provides the full desired effect within three years growing time.
   (f)   Landscaping, walls, planters or similar means shall be used to screen
parked cars. Whenever structures such as walls or fences are used to create a
screen, plants shall be located on the sides of the structure which can be seen
from the surrounding streets, walks and other properties which are used by the
public. Landscape plans shall be approved by the Planning and Zoning
Commission.
   (g)   All parking areas shall be landscaped with trees, shrubs and fences to
provide an effective buffer for any adjacent residential property and public
street right-of-ways. Within the interior of the parking areas there should be
landscaping to break up large areas of parking.
   (h)   New and remodeled buildings shall include landscaping in the form of
street trees and/or shrubbery along the public right-of-way, low shrubbery
around the buildings themselves to soften the appearance and landscaping
between and along site boundary lines. All street trees shall be at least two
and one-half inch caliper and shall be spaced a minimum of 25-30 feet apart.
   (i)   Tree species should be hardy city types and approved by the Planning
and Zoning Commission.
(Ord. 11-O-1, passed 2-23-2011)
CHAPTER 1285:  CONDITIONAL USES
Section
1285.01   Conditional use permits.
1285.02   Application and procedures.
1285.03   Basis of determination.
1285.04   Preliminary development plan.
1285.05   Final development plan.
1285.06   Standards for evaluating conditional use permits.
1285.07   Review and approval procedures.
1285.08   Additional conditions.
1285.09   Violation and revocation of certificate; penalty.
1285.10   Reapplication.
1285.11   Termination.
§ 1285.01  CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS.
   (a)   Conditional use permits shall be required for certain types of main
uses enumerated in this Zoning Code which are so classified because of their
uncommon characteristics, infrequency of occurrence, large land area
requirements or other features and which are not permitted in certain locations
by right. Such use may be permitted and desired in certain districts but not
without consideration in each case of the effect of the uses upon neighboring
land and the public need for the particular use at the particular location. The
application of the planning standards for determining the location and extent
of such uses is a planning function and not in the nature of a variance or
appeal.
   (b)   Enumerated throughout this Zoning Code are conditional uses which may
be permitted in residential, business or industrial districts, if the standards
set forth in this chapter are fulfilled.
(Ord. 05-O-26, passed 7-11-2005)
§ 1285.02  APPLICATION AND PROCEDURES.
   (a)   General. Each application for a land use or a structure that is
conditionally permitted shall contain the following.
   (b)   Application. An application form including preliminary development
plans and supporting information shall be submitted to the Zoning Inspector.
Each application shall demonstrate that the general and specific standards
pertinent to the proposed use will be satisfied by the completion and operation
of the proposed conditional use. Each application shall be accompanied by a fee
as established by Council.
   (c)   Application content. An application for a conditional use permit shall
contain the following:
      (1)   Name, address and telephone number of the applicant requesting the
permit;
      (2)   Name, address and telephone number of the property owner(s);
      (3)   Location of the property, including the street address;
      (4)   Brief description of the proposed use;
      (5)   Current zoning classification of the property; and
      (6)   Listing of all property owners within 500 feet of the subject
property.
(Ord. 05-O-26, passed 7-11-2005)
§ 1285.03  BASIS OF DETERMINATION.
   There may be imposed such additional conditions and safeguards as are deemed
necessary for the general welfare, for the protection of individual property
rights and for insuring that the intent and objectives of this zoning will be
observed. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall review the particular facts
and circumstances of each proposed use in terms of the following standards and
shall be convinced that such use on the proposed location:
   (a)   Will be harmonious and in accordance with the general objectives or
with any specific objective of the City of Kirtland Comprehensive Plan;
   (b)   Will be designed, constructed, operated and maintained so as to be
harmonious and appropriate in appearance with the existing or intended
character of the general vicinity and will not change the essential character
of the same area;
   (c)   Will not be hazardous or disturbing to existing or future neighboring
uses;
   (d)   Will not be detrimental to property in the immediate vicinity or to
the community as a whole;
   (e)   Will be served adequately by essential public facilities and services,
such as highways, streets, police and fire protection, drainage structures,
refuse disposal and schools, or that the persons or agencies responsible for
the establishment of the proposed use shall be able to provide adequately any
such serve;
   (f)   Will be in compliance with the city's Subdivision Regulations, the
Board of Health Standards and the Building Code; and
   (g)   Will have vehicular approaches to the property, which shall be so
designed as not to create any interference with traffic on surrounding public
streets or roads.
(Ord. 05-O-26, passed 7-11-2005)
§ 1285.04  PRELIMINARY DEVELOPMENT PLAN.
   A preliminary development plan at a scale of not less than one inch to 50
feet shall be submitted with each application and shall contain information
provided in §
1262.04(d) which includes a survey, buildings, traffic patterns, parking areas,
signs, landscaping, stormwater management, utilities and environmental overlay
districts.
(Ord. 05-O-26, passed 7-11-2005)
§ 1285.05  FINAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN.
   A final development plan may be required by the Planning and Zoning
Commission and shall contain additional information and drawings as provided in
§
1262.04(e).
(Ord. 05-O-26, passed 7-11-2005)
§ 1285.06  STANDARDS FOR EVALUATING CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS.
   An application for a conditional use permit shall not be approved unless the
following conditions and standards are complied with as set forth for the
following districts:
   (a)   Residential Districts.
      (1)   The proposed use shall be properly located in relation to the
adopted City of Kirtland Comprehensive Plan, particularly secondary and local
streets and pedestrian circulation;
      (2)   When located on a local street, the proposed use shall generate the
least possible traffic through a residential neighborhood;
      (3)   The proposed use shall be necessary to serve the surrounding
residential areas which cannot be served satisfactorily if the same use is
located in a nearby less restrictive district where it may be permitted by
right;
      (4)   The location, design and operation of such use shall not discourage
the appropriate development or impair the value of the surrounding residential
district; and
      (5)   For temporary structures, every conditional use permit shall be
reviewed every six months and may be renewed only while the construction
operations are underway.
   (b)   Business and Industrial Districts.
      (1)   The proposed use shall be necessary to serve the community needs
and if existing similar facilities located in a less restrictive district in
which the use may be permitted by right, are inadequate;
      (2)   The proposed use shall be no closer than necessary to schools,
churches and other places of assembly;
      (3)   The location, extent and intensity of the proposed use shall be
such that its operation is not objectionable to nearby dwellings by reason of
noise, smoke, dust, odors, fumes, vibrations or glare greater than is normal or
as permitted by the performance standards of the district;
      (4)   The proposed use shall form a harmonious part of the business,
research, service and industrial district, taking into account, among other
considerations, convenience of access and relationship of one use to another;
      (5)   The proposed use shall be permitted in a less restrictive district
than that in which it is permitted by right only because of its limited extent,
modern equipment and processes; and
      (6)   The hours of operation and concentration of vehicles in connection
with proposed use shall not be more hazardous or dangerous than the normal
traffic of the district.
   (c)   Safeguards and conditions. Safeguards and conditions may also be set
forth in the permit in addition to the general standards set forth in
subsection (a) and (b) herein.
(Ord. 05-O-26, passed 7-11-2005; Am. Ord. 11-O-38, passed 7-11-2011)
§ 1285.07  REVIEW AND APPROVAL PROCEDURES.
   (a)   Review by staff and consultants. The application shall be referred to
city departments and to the City Engineer and other consultants for review and
comment.
   (b)   Review by Commission. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall review
the complete application package as transmitted by the Zoning Inspector in
terms of the standards established in this Zoning Code. If deemed necessary,
the Commission, with the consent of the applicant, may refer an application to
qualified consultants for review. The cost of such review shall be at the
expense of the applicant. The Zoning Inspector shall notify owners of
properties within 500 feet, or a larger area if the Zoning Inspector deems it
appropriate, of the perimeter of the property proposed for development not less
than ten days prior to the meeting at which the preliminary development plan
will be considered by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
   (c)   Preliminary approval. If the application and the preliminary
development plan, and any modification thereof proposed by the developer, are
found by the Planning and Zoning Commission to be in compliance with the
requirements of the applicable district and any other applicable parts of this
Zoning Code, and the Subdivision Regulations of the city, it shall approve or
deny such preliminary development plan within forty days from the date of the
meeting when all required plans and data had been received. If the application
is not found to be in compliance therewith, the Commission may recommend
revisions to be made by the developer or reject the entire application.
   (d)   Modification permitted. Where application of the provision would
result in a development that would be satisfactory for the zoning district, the
Commission may require adjustments in the development plan, such as improvement
to the design and arrangement of buildings, yards, on-site circulation, access
drives and such other feature to further improve the proposed development and
to protect the surrounding development.
   (e)   Action by Commission. The Commission shall take action on the
preliminary development plan within 45 days from the date of the Commission
meeting at which all required plans and data were received. The Commission may
approve the preliminary development plan as submitted, approve the preliminary
development plan as modified and agreed to by the applicant or not approve the
preliminary development plan as submitted. The Commission may give final
approval for a conditional use concurrently if sufficient information has been
submitted.
(Ord. 05-O-26, passed 7-11-2005)
§ 1285.08  ADDITIONAL CONDITIONS.
   The Planning and Zoning Commission shall have the power to impose additional
conditions where it deems it necessary to safeguard the health, safety and
welfare of the city.
(Ord. 05-O-26, passed 7-11-2005)
§ 1285.09  VIOLATION AND REVOCATION OF CERTIFICATE; PENALTY.
   The breach of any condition or requirement shall automatically invalidate
the certificate granted and shall constitute a violation of this Zoning Code.
Such violation shall be punishable in accordance with §
1262.99.
(Ord. 05-O-26, passed 7-11-2005)
§ 1285.10  REAPPLICATION.
   No application for a conditional zoning certificate which has been denied
wholly or in part shall be resubmitted until the expiration of one year or more
from the date of such denial, except on grounds of newly discovered evidence or
proof of changed conditions which would be sufficient to justify
reconsideration. At the expiration of one year from the date of the original
application, each reapplication shall be accompanied by a fee, as set forth in
§
1285.02(b).
(Ord. 05-O-26, passed 7-11-2005)
§ 1285.11  TERMINATION.
   The conditional zoning certificate shall become void at the expiration of
one year after the date of issuance, unless the structure or alteration thereof
is started or an occupancy certificate is obtained.
(Ord. 05-O-26, passed 7-11-2005)
CHAPTER 1286:  SIGNS
Section
1286.01   Purpose.
1286.02   Definitions.
1286.03   Application of sign regulations.
1286.04   Computation and measurements.
1286.05   Determining sign height.
1286.06   Determining building frontage and building unit.
1286.07   Determining window area.
1286.08   Signs for Residential Uses and Signs in Residential Districts.
1286.09   Signs in Business and Industrial Districts.
1286.10   Prohibited signs.
1286.11   Illumination, construction and maintenance standards.
1286.12   Nonconforming signs.
1286.13   Design standards.
1286.14   Administrative provisions.
1286.99   Penalty.
Appendix — Pictorial Examples
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Signs in subdivisions — see P. & Z.
1248.10
   Signs prohibiting peddlers, canvassers and solicitors — see B.R. & T.
822.03
   Traffic control devices — see TRAF.
Ch. 406,
Ch. 414
§ 1286.01  PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to promote the public health, safety and
welfare through the provision of standards for existing and proposed signs of
all types. More specifically, these regulations are intended to:
   (a)   Enhance and protect the physical appearance of the community by
controlling the design of signs so their appearance will be aesthetically
harmonious with their surroundings and overall design for the area;
   (b)   Promote and maintain visually attractive residential, historical,
office, business and commercial and industrial districts;
   (c)   Ensure that signs are located and designed to reduce sign distraction
and confusion that may be contributing factors in traffic congestion and
accidents and maintain safe and orderly pedestrian and vehicular environments;
   (d)   Provide review procedures that enable the city to evaluate the
appropriateness of a sign to the site, building and surroundings; and
   (e)   Abate preexisting nonconforming signs which have collectively become a
public nuisance and constitute "sign blight" adversely impacting the
aesthetics, vitality and value of the city's commercial areas and create a
hazard to vehicular and pedestrian traffic.
(Ord. 04-O-28, passed 8-23-2004)
§ 1286.02  DEFINITIONS.
   (a)   Abandoned sign. "Abandoned sign" means a sign which no longer directs,
exhorts or advertises a bona fide business, service, lessee, lessor, owner,
product or activity conducted or available on the premises where the sign is
located.
   (b)   Animated sign. "Animated Sign" shall mean any sign that uses flashing
lights or movement of the sign or some element thereof, to depict action or
create a special effect or scene.
   (c)   Awning or canopy sign. "Awning" or "Canopy sign" shall mean any sign
that is painted on, printed on or attached to an awning, canopy or other
fabric, plastic or structural protective cover.
   (d)   Back lighted letter. "Back lighted letter" is an illuminated reverse
channel letter with an open or translucent back so that light from the letter
is directed against the surface behind the letter producing a halo lighting
effect around the letter; also referred to as a silhouette or halo-lighted.
   (e)   Banner sign. "Banner sign" shall mean a sign made of lightweight
fabric or similar material with no enclosing framework that is secured to a
building or other structure at one or more edges.
   (f)   Billboard sign. "Billboard sign" (synonymous with off-site
advertising) shall mean a sign that directs attention to a business, commodity,
service or entertainment conducted, sold or offered elsewhere than upon the
same lot.
   (g)   Building sign. "Building Sign"  shall mean any sign attached parallel
to any part of a building and including wall signs, awning or canopy signs and
window signs.
   (h)   Cabinet sign. "Cabinet sign" is a sign structure consisting of the
frame and face(s) not including the internal components, embellishments or
support structure.
   (i)   Changeable copy sign. "Changeable copy sign" shall mean a portion of a
sign with letters, characters or graphics that are not permanently affixed to
the structure, framing or background allowing the letters, characters or
graphics to be modified manually or by electronic or mechanical devices from
time to time as situations change, such as bulletin board or announcement
board.
   (j)   Channel letter. "Channel letter" is a fabricated or formed three-
dimensional letter that may accommodate light source.
   (k)   Electronic message center. "Electronic message center" is a variable
message sign that utilizes computer-generated messages or some other electronic
means of changing copy.
   (l)   Entrance or exit sign. "Entrance or exit sign" shall mean a sign
located at the driveway entrance or exit and intended to provide for safe
ingress and egress.
   (m)   Exterior illuminated sign. "Exterior illuminated sign" is a sign that
is illuminated by a light source that is directed towards and shines on the
face of a sign; also called direct illumination.
   (n)   Flag sign. "Flag sign" shall mean a piece of flexible material having
a distinctive size, color and design, used as a symbol, standard, signal or
emblem.
   (o)   Ground or monument sign. "Ground or monument sign" shall mean a sign
supported from the ground and not attached to any building.
   (p)   Halo lighted. See definition of backlighted letter (d).
   (q)   Ideological sign. "Ideological sign" shall mean any temporary sign
announcing an idea, opinion or position on a social or political issue and
containing no commercial message.
   (r)   Illuminated sign. "Illuminated sign" shall mean a sign with an
artificial light source incorporated internally or externally for the purpose
of illuminating the sign.
   (s)   Instructional sign. "Instructional sign" shall mean a sign that has a
purpose secondary to the use on the lot and that is intended to instruct
employees, customers or users as to matters of public safety or necessity such
as specific parking requirements, the location or regulations pertaining to
specific activities on the site or in the building, and including a sign
erected by a public authority, utility, public service organization or private
industry that is intended to control traffic; direct, identify or inform the
public; or provide needed public service as determined by the rules and
regulations of governmental agencies or through public policy.
   (t)   Internally illuminated sign. "Internally illuminated sign" is sign
illuminated internally through its sign face by a light source contained inside
the sign.
   (u)   Marquee sign. "Marquee sign" shall mean a sign attached to a
structure, other than an awning or canopy sign, projecting from a wall of a
building above an entrance and extending over a street, sidewalk or part
thereof.
   (v)   Mobile sign. "Mobile sign" shall mean a sign that is on wheels,
runners, casters or has a frame to which wheels, runners or casters may be
affixed, parked trailers, parked vehicles or other mobile devices, including
tethered and/or anchored balloons.
   (w)   Pan channel letter. "Pan channel letter" is a dimensional letter that
is constructed with sidewalls, a back and a face making the letter a solid
integral unity with the sidewalls and back having a pan shaped cross section.
   (x)   Permanent sign. "Permanent sign" shall mean a sign that is not
temporary.
   (y)   Pole sign. "Pole sign" means a sign which is supported entirely by a
pole, poles or posts and so designed as to permit pedestrian or vehicular
traffic thereunder.
   (z)   Projecting sign. "Projecting sign" shall mean a sign that is attached
to a building wall and extending 12 inches or more perpendicular to the face of
the wall.
   (aa)   Reverse channel letter. "Reverse channel letter" is a fabricated
dimensional letter with opaque face and sidewalls. (See definition (d)
Backlighted letter.)
   (bb)   Roof sign. "Roof sign" shall mean a sign erected, constructed or
maintained wholly upon or over the roof or parapet wall of any building with
the principal support on the roof structure.
   (cc)   Sign face. "Sign face" shall mean the area or display surface used
for the message.
   (dd)   Sign plate. "Sign plate" shall mean a wall sign not exceeding two
square foot in area.
   (ee)   Signs. "Signs" shall mean any visual communication display, object,
device, graphic, structure or part, situated indoors or outdoors, or attached
to, painted on or displayed from a building or structure, in order to direct or
attract attention, or to announce or promote, an object, product, place,
activity, person, institution, organization or business or the like, by means
of letters, words, model, banner, flag, pennant, insignia, device, designs,
colors, symbols, fixtures, images, illuminations or representation used as, or
which is in the nature of an announcement, direction or advertisement. For the
purpose of this code, the word "sign" does not include flag, pennant, badge or
insignia of any government or governmental agency.
   (ff)   Temporary sign. "Temporary sign" shall mean a sign that is designed
to be used only temporarily and is not intended to be permanently attached to a
building, a structure or permanently installed in the ground.
   (gg)   Wall sign. "Wall sign" shall mean a sign painted on, attached to or
erected against the wall of a building or structure with the exposed face of
the sign in a plane parallel to the plane of the wall and not extending more
than 12 inches therefrom and which does not project above the roofline or
beyond the corner of the building.
   (hh)   Window sign. "Window sign" shall mean a sign that is applied or
attached to a window or door or a sign located near a window within a building
for the purpose of being visible to and read from the outside of the building
except for signs that are not legible from a distance of more than three feet
beyond the building in which such sign is located.
(Ord. 04-O-28, passed 8-23-2004)
Cross-reference:
   Images, see pictorial examples in the
appendix to this chapter
§ 1286.03  APPLICATION OF SIGN REGULATIONS.
   (a)   The regulations contained in this section shall apply to signs outside
of the public right-of-way.
   (b)   A sign may only be erected, established, painted, created or
maintained in conformance with the standards, procedures, exemptions and other
requirements of this chapter.
   (c)   All permanent signs shall comply with the sign design guidelines set
forth in §
1286.13, Design Standards.
   (d)   Architectural features that are either part of the building or part of
a freestanding structure are not considered signs but shall conform to §
1286.09(c). Architectural features include:
      (1)   Any construction attending to, but not an integral part of the
sign, and which may consist of landscape or building or structural forms that
enhance the site in general; and
      (2)   Graphic stripes and other architectural painting techniques applied
to a structure that serves a functional purpose or to a building when the
stripes of other painting technique do not include lettering, logos or
pictures.
(Ord. 04-O-28, passed 8-23-2004)
§ 1286.04  COMPUTATION AND MEASUREMENTS.
   The following regulations shall control the computation and measurement of
sign area, sign height, window area and building frontage.
   (a)   Determining sign area or dimension.
      (1)   Sign area shall include the face of all the display area of the
sign. Sign area shall not include the frame and structural support unless such
structural support is determined by the Zoning Inspector to constitute an
integral part of the sign design.
      (2)   For a sign that is framed, outlined, painted or otherwise prepared
and intended to provide a background for a sign display, the area of the sign
shall be the area of one rectangular shape that encompasses the entire
background or frame. (See
Figure 1.)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ec7ad15d617dbba9e0ee3d1ed637d1d7d3b2411d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3552.jpg]
 
      (3)   For a sign comprised of individual letters, figures or elements on
a wall or similar surface of a building or structure, or an irregular shaped
ground sign, the area of the sign shall be the area of one rectangular shape
that encompasses the perimeter of all the elements in the display.
         A.   When separate elements are organized to form a single sign, but
the elements are separated by open space, the area shall be the area of one
rectangular shape that comprises all the display areas, including the space
between the elements.
         B.   One minor extension may be permitted to extend above or below the
sign area when the area of the extension is less than 25% of the open space
included in the sign area. For the purposes of this section, only the open
space within the sign area that is located above and below the majority of the
letters shall be included in the calculation. See
Figure 2.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ec7ad15d617dbba9e0ee3d1ed637d1d7d3b2411d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3554.jpg]
 
      (4)   For ground signs and projecting signs: The sign area shall be
computed by the measurement of one of the faces when two identical display
faces are joined, are parallel or within 30 degrees of being parallel to each
other.
      (5)   Air under a ground sign between supporting posts, air between a
projecting sign and the wall to which it is attached and lighting fixtures and
associated brackets shall not be included in the calculation of sign area. See
Figure 1.
(Ord. 04-O-28, passed 8-23-2004)
§ 1286.05  DETERMINING SIGN HEIGHT.
   The height of a sign shall be measured from the average grade at the base of
the sign or support structure to the tallest element of the calculated sign
area or support structure. A ground sign on a human-made base, including a
graded earth mound, shall be measured from the average site grade prior to the
addition of the sign and human-made base.
(Ord. 04-O-28, passed 8-23-2004)
§ 1286.06  DETERMINING BUILDING FRONTAGE AND BUILDING UNIT.
   For the purposes of these sign regulations, the length of the building wall
that faces a public street or that contains a public entrance to the uses
therein shall be considered the building frontage.
   (a)   The building frontage shall be measured along such building wall
between the exterior faces of the exterior side walls.
   (b)   In the case of an irregular wall surface, a single straight line
extended along such wall surface shall be used to measure the length.
   (c)   A building shall have only one building frontage except as otherwise
set forth below.
   (d)   A building shall have two frontages whenever the lot fronts on two or
more streets, or the building has a public entrance on a wall other than the
wall that faces the street. The property owner shall determine which wall shall
be the primary building frontage and which wall shall be the secondary building
frontage. Only one outside wall of any business shall be considered its primary
frontage and only one additional wall considered its secondary frontage.
   (e)   For multi-occupant buildings, the portion of a building that is owned
or leased by a single occupant shall be considered a building unit. The
building frontage for a building unit shall be measured from the centerline of
the party walls defining the building unit.
(Ord. 04-O-28, passed 8-23-2004)
§ 1286.07  DETERMINING WINDOW AREA.
   The window area of a building shall be the total glass area of windows on
the building frontage. For the purposes of determining window area for ground
floor occupants, the ground floor shall be considered to be no more than 15
feet in height above grade.
(Ord. 04-O-28, passed 8-23-2004)
§ 1286.08  SIGNS FOR RESIDENTIAL USES AND SIGNS IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.
   (a)   
Table 1, Permitted Signs (sf-sq. ft.; d.u.-dwelling unit; ft-foot).
 
             Uses
Type of Sign Single Family Two-Family Dwelling Multi-Family Non-Residential
             Dwelling
Permanent Signs
   Sign plate – wall, window or ground
      Maximum number                    1/d.u.   1/d.u.   1/d.u.   1/
                                                                         building
      Maximum sign area (sf)            2        2        2        4
   Ground sign for use/development
      Maximum number ***                1/       1/       1/       1
                                              entrance entrance entrance
      Maximum total sign area (sf)      32       32       32       32
      Maximum height (ft)               6        6        6        6
      Minimum setback from right-of-way 25t)     25       25       25
   Wall sign
      Maximum number                    n.a.     n.a.     n.a.     1
      Maximum area (sf)                 n.a.     n.a.     n.a.     40
Temporary Signs
   Window sign or ground sign
      Maximum total sign area (sf)      8/d.u.   8/d.u.   4/d.u.   32
      Maximum height – ground (ft)    5        5        5        5
      Minimum distance from right-of-way0(ft)    0        0        25
   Banner
      Maximum number                    n.a.     n.a.     1        1
      Maximum area (sf)                 n.a.     n.a.     30       30
      Maximum height (ft)               n.a.     n.a.     12       20
      Minimum distance to right-of-way (n.a.     n.a.     25       25
Instructional Signs
   Maximum number/entrance                 n.a.     n.a.     2        2
   Maximum area each sign (sf)             n.a.     n.a.     4        4
   Minimum distance from right-of-way (ft) n.a.     n.a.     0        0
***except as provided in §
1286.08(b)(4)
 
   (b)   Supplementary regulations for ground signs.
      (1)   Ground signs that exceed four square feet in area shall be erected
with a minimum of two supporting posts or on a solid base.
      (2)   Ground signs shall be erected in a landscaped setting.
      (3)   No part of a ground sign, the wall or entry feature on which a sign
is mounted, or the landscaping shall obstruct the view of vehicles entering or
exiting the property.
      (4)   Residential identification monument signs.  A residential
identification monument sign, indicating the name of the subdivision or
residential development, if part of the overall architectural treatment of the
entrance of the development, except as otherwise provided and permitted in §
1248.16, shall be permitted for each entrance to a development pursuant to the
area and height regulations in subsection (a) of this section and in compliance
with the following:
         A.   Such identification (monument) signs shall be placed on corner
parcels at openings to a development at the intersection of a development with
an arterial street (on private property with an easement), on blocks owned by
the homeowner's association or city, or on a cluster or multi-family
development parcel, no closer than ten feet to the right-of-way and five feet
from a side lot line, except as permitted in subsection B. of this section.
         B.   Such identification (monument) signs may be placed in the right-
of-way provided such signs shall be located on a divided entranceway island,
placed no closer than 15 feet to the intersecting street's planned right-of-way
line and set back five feet from the curb of the divided island if an easement
is granted by City Council for such signs.
         C.   A maximum of two sign faces shall be permitted per entrance to an
arterial street: either as a double-sided monument sign or as two single-sided
monument signs either freestanding or mounted on a brick or masonry wall or
wood fence. The sign face height can be no more than six feet above normal
grade and cannot extend beyond the limits of the wall or fence.
         D.   Support structures for the mounting of residential identification
signs shall be no more than six feet above normal grade and 120 square feet in
area for the portions of the structure that face the arterial street. The
Planning and Zoning Commission may permit additional decorative features above
these standards, including railings, pillars, arches, gateways, lamp posts,
etc., if they are part of the overall architectural treatment of the entrance
and do not detract from the surrounding residential areas.
      (5)   For non-residential uses a maximum of 75 percent of the permitted
ground sign area may be devoted to changeable copy.
      (6)   For non-residential uses, ground signs shall contain the street
address in numerals not exceeding seven inches in height.
   (c)   Supplementary regulations for temporary signs.
      (1)   Temporary signs for residential uses and temporary window signs for
non-residential uses may be erected for an unspecified time.
      (2)   For non-residential uses, one temporary ground sign that does not
exceed six square feet may be erected for an unspecified time. All other
temporary ground signs and temporary banner signs shall be permitted for a
maximum of 15 consecutive days, not more than 45 days per calendar year.
      (3)   Vacant parcels in residential districts shall be permitted one
temporary sign. The maximum permitted sign area shall be not more than four
square feet for every 200 feet of lot frontage or fraction thereof; provided,
the sign shall not exceed 16 square feet.
      (4)   Temporary signs that are erected in order to announce or advertise
a specific event shall be erected no earlier than 30 days before the event and
shall be removed within seven days after the close of such event.
   (d)   Illumination. Permanent signs may be illuminated as provided in §
1286.11(a) of this chapter.
   (e)   Instructional signs. Instructional signs that are clearly intended for
instructional purposes shall be permitted as needed on a lot in a residential
district when the lot is devoted to a multi-family or non-residential use.
(Ord. 04-O-28, passed 8-23-2004; Am. Ord. 11-O-13, passed 4-18-2011)
§ 1286.09  SIGNS IN BUSINESS AND INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS.
   Signs in Business and Industrial Districts, except for residential uses
shall comply with the standards in the following sections.
   (a)   Building signs.  The maximum number and area of permanent signs
attached to buildings shall conform to the table below. Building signs include
wall signs, window signs, awning or canopy signs and projecting signs.
 
Table 2 Building Signs
 Zoning District
 IO HTC RB LI
a. Signplate
   Maximum number per address               1    1  1    1
   Maximum area (sf)                        2    2  2    2
b. Building
   Maximum number per occupant              1    1  1    1
   Maximum area permitted sq. ft./ft. fronta1e   1  1    1
   Maximum square foot area per occupant    50   50 50   70
c. Projecting Sign
   Maximum number per building              n.a. 1  n.a. n.a.
   Maximum area permitted (sf)              n.a. 12 n.a. n.a.
 
   (b)   Window signs.
      (1)   Ground floor occupants.  A window sign shall not exceed 40 percent
of the total glass area at the ground floor window and shall comply with the
design standards for signs. (§
1286.13)
      (2)   Upper floor occupants.  For a multi-story building, each occupant
above the ground floor shall be permitted one permanent sign to be placed in a
window of the occupant's space, not to exceed six square feet or 25 percent of
the area of the window in which the sign is placed, whichever is smaller. These
signs shall be in addition to the maximum allowable area for building signs
provided in Table 2.
   (c)   Secondary frontage or access. If a building or occupant has frontage
on a second street or has access from a second public entrance such as a
parking lot an additional sign area may be permitted on the secondary frontage
not to exceed 40 percent of the sign area permitted for the primary frontage,
as determined in §
1286.06.
   (d)   Projecting signs. Projecting signs shall be permitted only in the
Historic District. Projecting signs shall be limited to occupants that have a
minimum of 20 feet of occupant frontage. All projecting signs shall have a
maximum height of 15 feet, but shall not extend above the parapet line, and a
minimum clearance of eight feet from the ground to the bottom of the sign,
except when the projecting sign is located above a landscaped area or other
area that does not permit pedestrian traffic beneath the sign. A projecting
sign shall not be permitted to extend into the street right-of-way.
   (e)   Ground signs. Permanent ground signs permitted in Business and
Industrial Districts shall comply with the following regulations:
 
Table 3 Permanent Ground Signs
 Zoning District
 IO HTC RB LI
Ground signs
Maximum number permitted per building          1       1       1       1
Maximum area (sf)                              35      25/50** 35      35
Maximum height (ft)                            8       10      8       8
Maximum area of sign and supporting structure  55      45/75** 55      55
(sf) ***
Setback from public right-of-way (ft)          25      15      25      25
Entrance/exit signs
Maximum number permitted                       2/drive 2/drive 2/drive 2/drive
Maximum area per sign (sf)                     4       2       4       4
Instructional signs                            As regulated in §
                                               1286.09(e)
**   Maximum area may be permitted by the Planning and Zoning Commission for
Shopping Centers of four or more establishments as defined in §
1261.09(ss).
***   May be modified by the Planning and Zoning Commission if the ground sign
is an integral part of a retaining wall or landscaped area.
 
      (1)   Additional ground signs.  An additional ground sign may be
permitted on lots not less than four acres in Business and Industrial Districts
for a building or development on a corner lot. The additional sign shall not
exceed the area as provided in Table 3.
      (2)   Setback from intersections. On a corner lot, ground signs shall
comply with the minimum setback provided in Table 3.
      (3)   Minimum side yard. Ground signs shall be located not less than 15
feet from a side lot line provided, however, when adjacent to a Residential
District (R-l, R-2, R-3 or R-5) or a lot used for residential purposes, a
ground sign shall be not less than 30 feet from the side lot line.
      (4)   Changeable copy. Ground signs may have up to 75 percent of the
permanent sign area devoted to changeable copy.
      (5)   Multi-occupant facilities. When a ground sign is permitted on a
site that has more than one occupant, it is the property owner's responsibility
to determine if the sign area shall be devoted to identification of the
building(s), the anchor occupant, all occupants or some combination thereof.
      (6)   Street address. Permanent ground signs shall contain the street
address in numerals not exceeding seven inches in height.
      (7)   Landscaping. Ground signs shall be erected in a landscaped setting.
      (8)   Location. The Planning and Zoning Commission may approve the
location of a ground sign less than the required distance from a road right-of-
way if it finds the sign will not interfere with traffic sight lines and that
the required setback is unreasonable because of existing site conditions;
provided, however, that, no ground sign or part thereof shall be permitted in a
road right-of-way.
   (f)   Temporary signs. Temporary signs in Business and Industrial Districts
may be permitted in addition to the permanent signs as regulated in subsections
(a) through (e) of this section; provided:
      (1)   Temporary signs may be ground signs, window signs or banner signs;
      (2)   The area of a temporary window sign shall not exceed 25 percent of
the total transparent glass area of the window in which the sign is placed;
      (3)   Temporary ground and temporary banner signs are permitted provided:
         A.   There shall be no more than two temporary or banner signs each
not more than 32 square feet in area;
         B.   Each sign shall have a maximum height of six feet above grade;
         C.   Each sign shall not be less than 15 feet from a street right-of-
way except the Planning and Zoning Commission may permit signs less than 15
feet from a street right-of-way in the Historic District; and
         D.   Signs shall be permitted for a maximum of 15 consecutive days and
not more than a total of 45 days each calendar year.
      (4)   Temporary signs that are created in order to announce a specific
event shall be removed within seven days after the close of such event.
(Am. Ord. 05-O-10, passed 3-21-2005)
   (g)   Illumination.  Permanent signs may be illuminated as provided in §
1286.11(a).
   (h)   Instructional signs. Instructional signs that are clearly intended for
instructional purposes shall be permitted as needed and as approved by the
Planning and Zoning Commission.
   (i)   Signs for residential uses. Signs for uses permitted or conditionally
permitted in Residential Districts shall conform to the sign regulations
provided in §
1286.08.
(Ord. 04-O-28, passed 8-23-2004; Am. Ord. 11-O-38, passed 7-11-2011)
§ 1286.10  PROHIBITED SIGNS.
   (a)   All signs not expressly permitted shall be prohibited in the city.
   (b)   Such signs include but are not limited to the following:
      (1)   Roof signs;
      (2)   Billboards;
      (3)   Flags intended for advertising or commercial purposes;
      (4)   Marquee signs;
      (5)   Electronic reader boards, except for public institutions;
      (6)   No mobile signs shall be erected, constructed, displayed or
maintained except those on licensed commercial delivery and service vehicles.
Such vehicles shall not be parked in any district closer to the street than the
front line of the principal building, unless the principal building has a rear
parking area; in which case, all such vehicles shall not be parked closer to
the street than the rear line of the building;
      (7)   Flashing, moving, inflatable, blinker, racer type, intermittent,
rotating, moving or revolving signs, whirligig devices, inflatable signs and
tethered balloons, pennants, ribbons, streamers, spinners, exposed light bulbs
and strings of lights not permanently mounted to a rigid background and other
similar types of attention-getting devices;
      (8)   The interior illumination of signs, except as expressly permitted
in §
1286.11(a) and signs with characters, letters, figures, designs or outlines by
electric lights or luminous tubes as part of the sign;
      (9)   Merchandise, equipment, products, vehicles or other items not
themselves for sale and placed for attention getting, identification or
advertising purposes;
      (10)   Permanent sign erected or attached to accessory structures;
      (11)   Outline lighting of the building or roof line;
      (12)   Internal illumination of all or part of the roof; and
      (13)   Pole signs.
(Ord. 04-O-28, passed 8-23-2004)
§ 1286.11  ILLUMINATION, CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE STANDARDS.
   In addition to the design, size, type and location of signs, all signs shall
meet the following standards:
   (a)   Illumination. (See pictorial examples in Appendix.) Permanent and
temporary signs shall be permitted to be illuminated as provided in the
following:
      (1)   External illumination. All signs that are permitted to be
illuminated shall be externally illuminated, except as otherwise permitted in
subsection (a)(2) below. External illumination shall comply with the following:
         A.   Only direct lighting from an external source shall be used to
illuminate the sign; and
         B.   The source of light shall not be visible from the street or
adjacent property.
      (2)   Internal illumination.
         A.   Internal illumination of signs may be permitted by the Planning
and Zoning Commission for uses in Business and Industrial Districts provided
that only reverse pan channel, or halo-lighted letters, characters or graphics
are permitted.
         B.   Internally illuminated cabinets may be permitted by the Planning
and Zoning Commission provided such cabinets shall consist of a solid opaque
background with "knock-out" areas for copy, graphics and embellishments.
      (3)   Rate of illumination. Signs shall not include animated, flashing,
moving or intermittent illumination in which any part of the message changes at
a rate of more than once per day, except for public institutions.
(Am. Ord. 11-O-38, passed 7-11-2011)
   (b)   Location of signs and construction standards.
      (1)   No sign regulated by any of the provisions of this section shall be
erected in the right-of-way, or at the intersection of any streets in such a
manner as to obstruct free and clear vision; or at any location where, by
reason of the position, shape or color, it may interfere with, obstruct the
view of, or be confused with, any authorized traffic sign signal or device as
defined in the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices; or which makes use of
the words "STOP", "LOOK", "DANGER" or any other work phrase, symbol or
character in such a manner as to interfere with or confuse traffic.
      (2)   No sign shall be attached to a utility pole, tree, trash
receptacle, bench or any other structure not intended or approved as a sign
support.
      (3)   No sign shall be erected so as to project over and obstruct any
window, door, fire escape, balcony, platform stairway, ladder, vent or other
means of ingress of any building.
      (4)   The construction, erection, safety and maintenance of signs shall
comply with the Ohio Building Code.
      (5)   Signs shall be structurally sound and located so as to pose no
threat to pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
      (6)   Permanent signs shall be constructed and erected to withstand wind
pressures of at least 30 pounds per square foot of surface and shall be
fastened, suspended or supported so that they will not be a menace to persons
or property.
      (7)   Permanent signs shall be fabricated on and of materials that are of
good quality and good durability.
      (8)   Temporary signs shall be durable and weather-resistant and fastened
or anchored sufficiently, whether attached to the building or positioned in the
ground.
(Am. Ord. 05-O-11, passed 3-21-2005)
   (c)   Maintenance and removal. All signs shall be maintained as follows:
      (1)   The property owner, occupant or other person responsible for the
sign shall maintain the sign in a condition fit for the intended use and he or
she shall have a continuing obligation to comply with all Building Code
requirements;
      (2)   If the Zoning Inspector finds that any sign is unsafe, insecure or
a menace to the public, notice shall be given in writing by the Zoning
Inspector to the owner. The owner of the business shall, within 48 hours of
such notification, correct such unsafe condition or remove the sign;
      (3)   Whenever any sign, is required to be removed for the purpose of
repair, refurbishing or repainting, the same may be done without a permit or
any payment of fees provided that all of the following conditions are met:
         A.   There shall be no alteration or remodeling to the sign face,
lettering (except as otherwise permitted for changeable copy), sign base, sign
support(s) or the mounting of the sign itself;
         B.   There shall be no enlargement or increase in any of the
dimensions of the sign or its structure; and
         C.   The sign shall be accessory to a legally permitted, conditional
or nonconforming use.
      (4)   The Zoning Inspector may order any sign to be painted or
refurbished whenever needed to keep the sign in a neat and safe condition.
      (5)   Any sign which no longer advertises a bona fide business conducted
shall be removed by the owner of the property or the lessee within 30 days of
receipt of written notification from the Zoning Inspector. Failure to remove
the sign within the specified time frame will result in the city removing the
sign and assessing the property owner with the costs thereof. These removal
provisions shall not apply where a succeeding owner or lessee conducts the same
type of business and agrees to maintain the sign as provided in this chapter or
changes copy on the signs to advertise the type of business being conducted and
provided the sign complies with all other provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 04-O-28, passed 8-23-2004)
§ 1286.12  NONCONFORMING SIGNS.
   (a)   Maintenance of nonconforming signs. Nonconforming signs shall be
maintained in good condition and may continue until such sign is required to be
removed as set forth in this section.
   (b)   Alteration, relocation or replacement of nonconforming signs. A
nonconforming sign shall not be structurally altered, relocated or replaced
unless it is brought into compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
   (c)   Reconstruction of damaged sign. If a sign face and/or its support are
damaged to the extent where the repair cost exceeds 50 percent of the
replacement cost of the sign, the sign shall be removed or brought into
compliance. If the repair costs do not exceed 50 percent of the replacement
cost of the sign, the Planning and Zoning Commission may authorize the sign to
be repaired, provided all repair work is completed within 60 days of the date
the damage was incurred.
   (d)   Termination. A nonconforming sign shall immediately lose its legal
nonconforming status and shall be brought into conformance with this chapter or
removed, when any of the following occur:
      (1)   The size or shape of the sign is changed;
      (2)   The sign face (except otherwise permitted for changeable copy) or
sign structure is altered;
      (3)   If the property upon which the sign is located ceases to be used
for a period of six months or more; and
      (4)   All signs within the city shall be in full conformity with the
provisions of this chapter within five years from its effective date.
(Ord. 04-O-28, passed 8-23-2004)
§ 1286.13  DESIGN STANDARDS.
   All permanent signs shall comply with the following design standards:
   (a)   Overall design of signs.
      (1)   Elements of the sign shall create an overall cohesive design,
reflect simplicity, avoid visual clutter and insure legibility.
      (2)   The message shall be easy to read from the intended vantage point,
public street, public sidewalk or public parking lot but not be out of scale
with the building, site or streetscape. The ratio of the message to the
background shall permit easy recognition of the message. Lettering size shall
be the size needed to ensure the sign can be seen from the intended distance.
For awning signs, the sign graphics shall be located on the portion of the
awning fabric that hangs perpendicular to the horizontal plane of the ground,
below the awning's support structures.
   (b)   Relationship to building architecture.
      (1)   Variety in the design of signs among different storefronts shall be
encouraged when the architecture of the building(s) suggests variety.
      (2)   Storefronts with common architectural elements shall have signs
that share continuity of design so that the placement and design of individual
signs contribute to the cohesive appearance created by the common architectural
elements. For example, a series of storefronts that, because of their
architecture and design have the appearance of a single building shall have
occupant signs that share common elements.
      (3)   Owners of multi-tenant buildings shall develop a sign plan for the
building and site as required in §
1262.04 to aid in determining the level of variety or cohesiveness required for
signs.
   (c)   Placement of signs on buildings. All signs shall be reviewed for their
impact on the overall building facade. The sign and associated lighting
fixtures shall compliment the architecture of the building on which it is
placed and shall be placed in an appropriate location on the building facade.
   (d)   Ground signs. Ground signs shall be spaced or combined along the
street frontage in a manner that ensures that one ground sign does not obscure
the view of another ground sign.
(Ord. 04-O-28, passed 8-23-2004)
§ 1286.14  ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS.
   (a)   Compliance with this chapter. No person shall erect, locate, move,
alter or replace any sign or cause a sign to be located or maintained, unless
all provisions of this chapter have been met.
   (b)   Signs requiring zoning certificate/registration. To ensure compliance
with these regulations, a zoning certificate shall be obtained for all signs,
unless specifically exempted below. All temporary ground signs and banner signs
except ideological signs shall be registered with the Zoning Inspector.
   (c)   Application requirements.
      (1)   An application for a zoning certificate shall be made to the Zoning
Inspector on the form provided and in the manner required.
      (2)   When any person other than the owner of the property submits an
application, the owner of the property or a designated agent for the owner
shall also sign such application.
      (3)   The application shall include:
         A.   Scaled drawing showing lot lines and location of the building or
structures on which signs are to be located;
         B.   Location and dimensions of proposed signage on a scaled drawing
of the building elevation;
         C.   Type of lettering, characters or other symbols;
         D.   Color rendering of proposed signage;
         E.   Location of ground and instructional signs;
         F.   Landscape plan for the base of ground signs;
         G.   Construction specifications; and
         H.   Type of illumination.
   (d)   Sign review.
      (1)   The Planning and Zoning Commission shall review and act on
applications for permanent signs according to the standards set forth in this
section and the review procedures for development plan review set forth in §
1262.04.
      (2)   The Zoning Inspector shall review all temporary signs, except as
otherwise specifically exempted below.
      (3)   The erection of the following signs shall not require a zoning
certificate provided that all applicable regulations of this section are
complied with:
         A.   Signplates for residential uses;
         B.   Temporary signs for dwelling units;
         C.   Temporary window signs; and
         D.   Maintenance of existing signs in compliance with §
1286.11(c).
   (e)   Referral of applications to Planning and Zoning Commission. The Zoning
Inspector, upon receiving an application shall examine such plans,
specifications and other data and the premises upon which it is proposed to
erect the sign or other advertising structure.
      (1)   If it appears that the proposed application is complete, the
application shall be referred to the Planning and Zoning Commission where its
approval must be obtained before the zoning certificate is issued.
         A.   When approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission, the
application shall be returned to the Zoning Inspector who shall issue the
zoning certificate.
         B.   If the work authorized under a zoning certificate has not been
completed within six months after the date of approval, the permit shall become
null and void.
   (f)   Procedures for variances and appeals. Any applicant seeking a variance
to the conditions imposed under these regulations or an appeal to an
administrative decision made under these regulations, other than a decision by
the Planning and Zoning Commission, may apply to or appeal to the Board of
Zoning Appeals. The following conditions shall apply.
      (1)   When filing an application for an appeal to an administrative
decision, the applicant shall file a notice of appeal specifying the grounds
therefor with the administrative official within 20 days of the administrative
official's decision. Upon determining that the application is complete and upon
receipt of the required fee, the administrative official shall transmit to the
Board of Zoning Appeals the application and a transcript constituting the
record from which the administrative decision subject to appeal was based. This
transmission shall occur no less than 14 days prior to a regularly scheduled
meeting of the Board of Zoning Appeals in order to be placed on the agenda for
that meeting.
      (2)   When applying for a variance, the applicant shall file a variance
request with the Board of Zoning Appeals.
      (3)   Applications for appeals or variances to these regulations shall
contain the following information:
         A.   The name, address and telephone number of the applicant;
         B.   Proof of ownership or authorization to represent the property
owner;
         C.   The location of the property, including street address and
permanent parcel number;
         D.   The current zoning of the property;
         E.   A description of the project for which the appeal or variance is
sought;
         F.   A description of the administrative decision being appealed or
the regulation from which a variance is sought; and
         G.   Names and addresses of each property owner within 500 feet as
shown in the current records of the Lake County Auditor typed on gummed labels.
      (4)   Applications for variances or appeals of administrative decisions
shall not be resubmitted to the Board of Zoning Appeals within one year of the
date of a final decision by the Board of Zoning Appeals on the original
application, unless the applicant shows the Board of Zoning Appeals either of
the following:
         A.   Newly discovered evidence that could not have been presented with
the original submission; or
         B.   Evidence of a substantial change in circumstances since the time
of the original submission.
      (5)   A decision by the Board of Zoning Appeals in response to an
application for a variance request or an appeal of an administrative decision
filed pursuant to these regulations shall be final.
(Ord. 04-O-28, passed 8-23-2004)
§ 1286.99  PENALTY
   (a)   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter, or fails to comply
with any final order as provided herein shall be, upon conviction of the same
as a first offense, guilty of a minor misdemeanor. Any subsequent offense shall
constitute a misdemeanor of the third degree. A separate offense shall be
deemed committed each day on which a violation occurs or continues.
   (b)   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter, or fails to comply
with a final order as provided herein, on more than one subject matter in any
two-year period separate and distinct from a conviction upon a prior subject
matter or any continued daily violation of such prior subject matter, shall be,
upon conviction of the same, guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. A
separate offense on such subsequent subject matter within two years shall be
deemed committed each day on which a violation or noncompliance occurs or
continues.
   (c)   Any violation of the chapter is hereby declared to be a nuisance per
se.
   (d)   Section
1262.99 of this Zoning Code, as applicable, is hereby incorporated for purposes
of notification, enforcement and penalties for any violations of this chapter.
(Ord. 04-O-28, passed 8-23-2004)
APPENDIX – PICTORIAL EXAMPLES
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ec7ad15d617dbba9e0ee3d1ed637d1d7d3b2411d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3193.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ec7ad15d617dbba9e0ee3d1ed637d1d7d3b2411d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3196.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ec7ad15d617dbba9e0ee3d1ed637d1d7d3b2411d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3199.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ec7ad15d617dbba9e0ee3d1ed637d1d7d3b2411d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3202.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ec7ad15d617dbba9e0ee3d1ed637d1d7d3b2411d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3205.jpg]
 
CHAPTER 1288:  OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING
Section
1288.01   Purpose.
1288.02   Interpretation.
1288.03   Measurement definitions.
1288.04   Required parking and design standards.
1288.05   Schedules of parking requirements.
1288.06   Parking for physically handicapped.
1288.07   Modifications of requirements.
1288.08   Continuation of facilities.
1288.09   Location of facilities.
1288.10   Improvements of parking areas.
1288.11   Landscaping.
1288.12   Illumination of parking areas.
1288.13   Driveways to parking areas.
1288.14   Loading facilities.
1288.15   Access to Business and Industrial Districts.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Parking generally - see TRAF.
Ch. 452
   Parking near emergency and public safety vehicles - see TRAF.
432.25
§ 1288.01  PURPOSE.
   Off-street parking and loading requirements and regulations are established
in order to achieve, among others, the following purposes:
   (a)   To relieve congestion so the streets can be utilized more fully for
movement of vehicular traffic;
   (b)   To promote the safety and convenience of pedestrians and shoppers by
locating parking areas so as to lessen car movements in the vicinity of
intensive pedestrian traffic;
   (c)   To protect adjoining residential neighborhoods from on-street parking;
   (d)   To promote the general convenience, welfare and prosperity of
business, service, research, production and manufacturing developments which
depend upon off-street parking facilities;
   (e)   To protect neighboring residential properties by requiring landscaping
and buffering of adjacent off-street parking and loading areas; and
   (f)   For such purposes to provide regulations and standards for accessory
off-street parking and loading facilities in accordance with the objectives of
the Comprehensive Plan of the city.
(Ord. 09-O-5, passed 5-18-2009)
§ 1288.02  INTERPRETATION.
   Accessory off-street parking and loading facilities shall be provided as a
condition precedent to occupancy of all residential, institutional,
recreational, places of assembly, business, office, research and industrial
uses in conformance with the provisions of this chapter as follows:
   (a)   Whenever a building is constructed or a new use established;
   (b)   Whenever an existing building is altered and there is an increase of
the number of dwelling units, seating capacity or floor area of a building; and
   (c)   Whenever the use of an existing building is changed to a use which
requires more off-street parking facilities, except that certain nonconforming
uses may continue as provided in §
1282.03, Nonconforming Use of Buildings.
(Ord. 09-O-5, passed 5-18-2009)
§ 1288.03  MEASUREMENT DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of determining the off-street parking and loading facilities
required as accessory to a use definitions and standards for measurement are
established as follows:
   (a)   "Floor area; parking requirements" means the total area of all the
floors of the building used by the principal activity as enumerated in the
schedule, §
1288.05, measured from the exterior faces of the building. Basement areas or
other floors or parts thereof, designed, arranged or used exclusively for
accessory storage or similar uses, may be excluded from the floor area.
   (b)   "Floor area; loading requirements" means the total floor area used for
the main and accessory activities and storage areas of the building served.
   (c)   "Seating capacity" means the number of seating units installed or
indicated on plans for places for assembly; where not indicated on plans, it
shall be assumed that a seating unit will occupy six square feet of floor area
exclusive of all aisles or areas used for assembly.
   (d)   "Employees" wherever the parking requirement is based on employees,
means the maximum number of employees on duty on the premises at one time or on
any two successive shifts, whichever is the greater.
(Ord. 09-O-5, passed 5-18-2009)
§ 1288.04  REQUIRED PARKING AND DESIGN STANDARDS.
   (a)   Application for providing facilities. An application for a permit to
construct a building or parking area or for a certificate of occupancy for a
change in use of land or a building, shall include a site plan drawn to scale
and fully dimensioned, showing the proposed design of the parking area and
loading facilities to be provided in compliance with the provisions of this
Zoning Code.
   (b)   Determination of required parking facilities. The minimum number of
spaces required for accessory off-street parking shall be determined by
applying the measurement units in §
1288.03, the standards for designing parking areas in subsection (c) of this
section, the schedule of accessory parking requirements for the various uses in
§
1288.05 and any other applicable provisions of this Zoning Code. Where the
computation results in a fractional space in excess of one-half, it shall be
counted as one additional required space.
   (c)   Design standards. The plan of the parking spaces of a parking area
included with an application to construct a building or parking area or change
in use, shall be designed, dimensioned and the number of spaces determined in
accordance with the drawing entitled Standards for Designing Parking Areas,
which is a part of this Zoning Code. Design standards for enclosed parking
areas, garages, shall be in accordance with other provisions of the Zoning
Code.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ec7ad15d617dbba9e0ee3d1ed637d1d7d3b2411d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3514.jpg]
 
(Ord. 09-O-5, passed 5-18-2009)
§ 1288.05  SCHEDULE OF PARKING REQUIREMENTS.
   The number of off-street parking spaces for each permitted use shall be not
less than provided in the following schedule unless modified in other sections
of this Zoning Code:
 
Building, Use or Activity Minimum Spaces Required
(a)   Residential
   (1)   One-family and two-family dwellings                                2 spaces per dwelling unit
   (2)   Multi-family dwellings                                             2 spaces per dwelling unit, of which not less than 1 space per unit shall be
                                                                                  enclosed
                                                                                  1 space per rental unit plus 1 space for each employee. Facilities with places
   (3)   Hotels, motels                                                     of assembly and/or places serving food and drinks shall provide additional
                                                                                  parking spaces as indicated in §
                                                                                  1288.05(b)(4) and (c)(2).
   (4)   Senior housing                                                     1-½ spaces per each unit of which 1 space shall be an enclosed space attached
                                                                                  to the dwelling unit
(b)   Community facilities
   (1)   Governmental. Municipal, county, state and federal buildings,      1 space per 4 seats of area used for public assembly, plus 1 space for each
principally administrative functions                                              employee; plus 1 space per 500 sq. ft. of other parts of the building
   (2)   Civic. Art galleries, libraries, museums, churches, club and commun1 space per 3 seats of seating capacity of largest area used for public
centers                                                                           assembly, plus 1 space for each employee
   (3)   Educational. Public and private, primary and secondary schools     1 space per 3 seats of seating capacity of largest area used for public
                                                                                  assembly, plus 1 space per full-time faculty and staff member
   (4)   Places of Assembly. Auditoriums, lodge halls, theaters, gymnasiums 1 space per 3 seats of seating capacity of area used for assembly
stadiums
   (5)   Health and welfare.
      (a)   General and special hospitals                                1 space per 2 beds, plus 1 space for each employee
      (b)   Nursing home                                                 1 space per each 5 patients, plus 1 space for each employee
(c)   Business and offices.
   (1)   Retail stores, services                                            1 space for each 250 sq. ft. of floor area
   (2)   Places serving food and drinks                                     1 space per 50 sq. ft. of indoor customer service area or 1 space per 2 seats,
                                                                                  whichever is greater, plus 1 space for each employee
 
 
Building, Use or Activity Minimum Spaces Required
   (3)   Offices
                                                                           5 spaces for
                                                                           each doctor
                                                                           and/or
                                                                           dentist or 1
      A.   Medical and dental offices                             space per
                                                                           every 250 sq.
                                                                           ft.,
                                                                           whichever is
                                                                           greater
                                                                           1 space per
      B.   All other offices, above and below first floor         300 sq. ft.
                                                                           of office
                                                                           floor area
                                                                           1 space per
      C.   Office floor area on first floor                       250 sq. ft.
                                                                           of office
                                                                           floor area
                                                                           1 space per
                                                                           30 sq. ft. of
                                                                           assembly
                                                                           rooms, or 1
                                                                           space per
                                                                           each 4 seats,
   (4)   Mortuaries                                                  whichever
                                                                           requires the
                                                                           greater
                                                                           number, but
                                                                           in no case
                                                                           shall there
                                                                           be less than
                                                                           20 spaces
                                                                           1 space for
                                                                           each 1,200
   (5)   Automobile and recreational vehicle sales                   sq. ft. of
                                                                           sales area,
                                                                           but not less
                                                                           than 6 spaces
                                                                           1 space per
                                                                           1.5 employees
                                                                           on the 2
                                                                           largest
                                                                           successive
                                                                           shifts, or 1
(d)   Service and manufacturing. Wholesale, distribution, laboratories, space per
general services, machine shops, manufacturing plants                      every 350 sq.
                                                                           ft. of
                                                                           building
                                                                           area,
                                                                           whichever is
                                                                           the greater
                                                                           (see also §
                                                                           1288.09(d))
 
   (e)   Other buildings or uses.  For specific buildings or uses not scheduled
above, the Zoning Inspector shall apply the unit of measurement set forth in
the schedule in this section which is deemed to be most similar to the proposed
building or use.
   (f)   Drive-in facilities.  Drive-thru facilities serving or selling food
and drinks shall provide not less than ten off-street car parking spaces in
addition to the parking spaces as may be required in accordance with the
standard for indoor customer service areas. Drive-in windows, pick-up and
control stations, ticket booths and similar facilities shall provide spaces in
a waiting line to accommodate at least six vehicles on the lot occupied by the
facility. Driveways to such service and parking areas shall be located in
accordance with the provisions of §
1288.12.
   (g)   Retail stores exceptions.  For certain retail uses that may generate
less traffic than other retail stores, the Planning and Zoning Commission may
permit the improvement of fewer spaces but in no case shall the number of
improved parking spaces be less than one space per 800 square foot of floor
area, provided that the approved site development plan shall indicate the
additional parking spaces that would normally be required if the use were to
change to a use requiring more parking spaces. These additional parking spaces
shall be shown on the approved site plan as "land banked" parking.
(Ord. 09-O-5, passed 5-18-2009)
§ 1288.06  PARKING SPACES FOR PHYSICALLY HANDICAPPED.
   Parking spaces for the physically handicapped shall be designated in
compliance with the requirements of the Ohio Building Code as follows:
 
Total Number of Spaces in the Lot or Required Number of Accessible Spaces
Structure
Up to 100                            1 space per 25 parking spaces
101 to 200                           4 spaces plus 1 space per 50 spaces over
                                     100
201 to 500                           6 spaces plus 1 space per 75 spaces over
                                     200
 
   The number of handicapped spaces may be included in the total number of
spaces required for a particular use. All such spaces for the physically
handicapped shall be designated by free standing signs as provided for pursuant
to the Ohio Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices, Type R-59-A and/or R-59-
B.
(Ord. 09-O-5, passed 5-18-2009)
§ 1288.07  MODIFICATIONS OF REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   Parking for single and mixed uses.  A building occupied by one use
shall provide the off-street parking spaces as required for the specific use. A
building or group of buildings, occupied by two or more uses, operating
normally during the same hours, shall provide spaces for not less than the sum
of the spaces if required for each use. For a large unit development of
business uses, such as a shopping center or office building complex, spaces
shall be provided for the total area of the building or buildings as set forth
in the schedule, §
1288.05, instead of the requirements based on separate uses.
   (b)   Joint use of parking facilities. Institutions, places of amusement or
assembly, items enumerated in §
1288.05(b), may make arrangements with business establishments which normally
have different hours of operation for sharing up to, but not more than 50
percent of their requirements in abutting parking areas which are accessory to
such business uses, provided that an area shall be reserved for the full number
of spaces required in the event an agreement to share spaces is terminated.
Where there is a sharing of facilities by different owners or tenants, there
shall be a written agreement covering a period of time as may be required by
the Planning and Zoning Commission. Should any of the uses be changed or the
facilities discontinued, the required spaces for the use or uses remaining
shall be provided elsewhere as a condition precedent to the continued use of
such building or buildings.
(Ord. 09-O-5, passed 5-18-2009)
§ 1288.08  CONTINUATION OF FACILITIES.
   Required off-street parking and loading facilities accessory to an existing
use on the effective date of this Zoning Code, and those required as accessory
to a use created or a building constructed or altered thereafter, shall be
continued and maintained in operation, shall not be used for any outdoor
purpose other than parking and shall not be reduced below the requirements
during the period that the main use is maintained.
(Ord. 09-O-5, passed 5-18-2009)
§ 1288.09  LOCATION OF FACILITIES.
   Accessory parking facilities shall be provided at locations as set forth in
this chapter except as may be modified by the provisions in other chapters of
this Zoning Code.
   (a)   Residential districts and uses. Required off-street parking facilities
shall be located on the same lot as the dwelling unit to which they are
accessory; in addition, in all multi-family districts, the parking facilities
shall be located within a walking distance of 200 feet of the building entrance
of the dwelling unit to be served.
   (b)   Amusement and assembly uses. Parking facilities shall be located on
the same lot as the institution, place of amusement or assembly to which it is
accessory, enumerated in §
1288.05(b). All parking areas and driveways serving the uses covered in this
subsection shall be further regulated in relation to any adjoining residential
district lines as may be set forth in other sections of this Zoning Code.
   (c)   Business districts uses. Parking facilities shall be located on the
same lot as the main use served in all business districts. All parking areas
and driveways serving the uses covered in this subsection shall be further
regulated in relation to any adjoining district lines as may be set forth in
other chapters of this Zoning Code.
   (d)   Industrial districts and uses. Accessory parking facilities shall be
provided on the same lot as the main use served in industrial districts.
Wherever the application of the standards set forth in §
1288.05(d), as to number of employees, results in fewer parking spaces than
required by the application of such standard as to the square feet of a
building, the Zoning Inspector may permit the construction of the lesser number
of spaces if the additional area required to provide the number of spaces under
the square feet of a building standard is reserved and held as an open area,
along with all required yard areas, for future construction of parking spaces
until the use of the building is changed to a classification having a greater
number of employees in relation to the building area.
   (e)   Required yards for off-street parking and loading. Minimum yards shall
be provided as indicated in the yard regulations for each zoning district.
(Ord. 09-O-5, passed 5-18-2009; Am. Ord. 11-O-38, passed 7-11-2011)
§ 1288.10  IMPROVEMENTS OF PARKING AREAS.
   Parking areas and access driveways shall be designed, constructed, altered,
graded and maintained as follows:
   (a)   Grading and pavement.  Parking areas and access driveways shall be so
graded and drained so as to dispose of all surface water. Drainage shall not be
allowed to flow across a public sidewalk or onto adjacent properties. The areas
and driveways shall be improved with bituminous or Portland cement pavement, in
accordance with the standards established by the Building Code.
   (b)   Design of areas.  Parking areas shall be so arranged and marked to
provide for orderly and safe parking and storage of vehicles in accordance with
the design standards mentioned in §
1288.04(c) and shall be so improved with bumper guards or curbs to define
parking spaces or limits of paved areas, except at entrances and exits, so as
to prevent encroachment of vehicles into adjacent areas, public ways or
setbacks as required by regulations for certain district or by provisions in
other sections of this Zoning Code.
   (c)   Signs. Signs located on or related to parking areas shall be permitted
as provided in
Chapter 1286.
(Ord. 09-O-5, passed 5-18-2009)
§ 1288.11  LANDSCAPING.
   (a)   Interior parking lot landscaping.  The interior of parking areas of
more than 20 vehicles shall have a minimum of five percent of the parking lot
planted as landscaped island areas or an area equal to five percent of the
parking lot shall be set aside for landscaping of the parking lot in order to
provide visual relief from broad expanses of pavement. Each landscaped island
shall be not less than ten feet in any horizontal dimension and shall provide
at least one shade tree having a clear trunk height of six feet and a caliper
of not less than two inches. Shrub plantings adjacent to the building along the
perimeter of the lot shall not be counted as interior landscaping. For the
purpose of this section, the area of the parking lot shall be the total
vehicular service area, including circulation lanes.
   (b)   Parking and loading areas adjacent to residential districts. All
loading areas and parking areas accommodating five or more vehicles for
commercial, industrial, retail or general public use or non one-family uses
abutting one-family residential lots in a residential district, shall be
screened from view from such properties through landscaping or ornamental walls
or fences to promote harmony with the adjacent property development.
      (1)   Screening shall consist of one or any combination of the following:
         A.   A dense vegetative planting incorporating trees and/or shrubs of
a variety which shall be equally effective in winter and summer, e.g.
evergreens; and/or
         B.   A landscaped mound or berm.
      (2)   Visual screening walls, fences or mounds and fences in combination
shall be a minimum of six feet high in order to accomplish the desired
screening effect.
      (3)   Vegetation shall be planted within such minimum height to assure
that the required six-foot screening effect shall be achieved not later than 12
months after the initial installation.
      (4)   All screening shall be free of advertising or other signs.
      (5)   Landscaping shall be maintained and replaced when necessary.
      (6)   Materials used in any ornamental wall or fence shall be compatible
with the character of the development and abutting properties.
(Ord. 09-O-5, passed 5-18-2009)
§ 1288.12  ILLUMINATION OF PARKING AREAS.
   Parking areas shall be illuminated whenever necessary to protect the public
safety. Lighting fixtures shall be so designed and located so as not to reflect
direct rays of light in adjoining residential districts and streets. The
intensity shall not be of excessive brightness nor cause a glare hazardous to
pedestrians or automobile drivers. Illumination shall be permitted as provided
in
Chapter 1296.
(Ord. 09-O-5, passed 5-18-2009; Am. Ord. 11-O-38, passed 7-11-2011)
§ 1288.13  DRIVEWAYS TO PARKING AREAS.
   (a)   The location, width and number of driveways serving off-street parking
facilities shall be planned in such a manner as to interfere as little as
possible with the use of adjacent property and the flow of traffic on the
street system.
   (b)   Except for one-family and two-family dwellings, driveways to parking
areas shall be provided for all permitted uses according to the standards set
forth in the following schedule:
 
               Minimum         Number of Drives
               Distance from                                    Minimum
Number of      Center Line of                                   Distance
Parking Spaces Access Drive to                  Minimum Number  Between
Served         Right- of-Way   Min. Max.        of Access Lanes Centerline of
               at Nearest                                       Drives (a)
               Intersecting
               Street (a)
19 or less     40              1    2           1               50
20 to 59       40              1    2           2               50
60 to 299      100             1    2           2               50
300 to 999     150             1    2           3               100
 
(a)   The Planning and Zoning Commission may require these distances to be
increased in order to minimize interference with the flow of traffic on
dedicated streets. The Commission may permit a decrease in the required
distances if in the opinion of the Commission such decrease will not unduly
interfere with the flow of traffic on dedicated streets.
   (c)   Parking facilities shall be designed so that all vehicles may be
driven forward into the street. This provision shall apply to all permitted
uses in all use districts except for one-family and two-family dwellings
located on local residential streets. One-family and two-family dwellings
located on streets designated as major streets or arterial streets as shown on
the city Thoroughfare Plan or Comprehensive Plan shall comply with this
provision. The width of driveways to parking areas measured at the street
property line (right-of-way) shall not exceed four lanes in width and shall
conform to the following schedule. In the case of a four-lane drive, the lanes
shall be designed as two adjacent entrance and exit lanes divided by a barrier
a minimum of six feet wide.
 
Number of Lanes in Drive Width of Driveway
                         Minimum (in feet) Maximum (in feet)
One lane                 10                12
Two lanes                20                24
Three lanes              30                34
Four lanes               40(a)             46(a)
 
(a)   Plus a minimum six-foot divider.
(Ord. 09-O-5, passed 5-18-2009)
§ 1288.14  LOADING FACILITIES.
   Accessory loading and unloading facilities shall be provided as a condition
precedent to occupancy of all business, service and industrial buildings
hereafter erected and altered to such uses. Such facilities shall be maintained
as long as such building is occupied or unless equivalent facilities are
provided in conformance with the regulations of this chapter.
   (a)   Allocation of use. Space required and allocated for any off-street
loading shall not, whole so allocated, be used to satisfy the space
requirements for off-street parking. An off-street loading space shall not be
used for repairing or servicing of motor vehicles, and it shall be available
for its designated purpose when needed.
   (b)   Location of facility.  In an industrial district, a loading space or
loading dock shall not be permitted in a front yard or constructed on any part
of the front face of a building. A loading space or loading dock may be
constructed on a side face of a building provided the loading dock is located
at least 55 feet away from the front face of the building as measured from the
side of the loading dock closest to the front face of the building to the
closest part of the front face of the building. A loading space or loading dock
may be located on the rear face of a building. In all situations, a loading
space or loading dock shall be in accordance with side or rear yards as
required for parking areas in §
1288.09(e).  In a business district a required loading space shall be permitted
as provided in §§
1288.09 and
1288.14.
   (c)   Access driveways.  Each required off-street loading space shall be
designed for direct vehicular access by means of a driveway or driveways, to a
public street in a manner which will least interfere with traffic movements.
The access shall be located so that the driveway center line shall be not less
than 40 feet from the nearest intersecting street line.
   (d)   Improvements.  All accessory off-street loading spaces shall be
improved as required for parking areas as set forth in the Building Code.
   (e)   Minimum size criteria. Each required off-street loading space for
buildings less than 20,000 square feet in gross floor area shall be at least
ten feet wide by at least 25 feet in length. Each required loading space for a
building of 20,000 square feet or more of floor area shall be not less than 14
feet wide by 60 feet in length.  The above areas shall be exclusive of the
maneuvering space and each space shall have a vertical clearance of at least 17
feet.
   (f)   Schedule of required loading facilities.  Buildings of less than 5,000
square feet of floor area shall be provided with sufficient off-street loading
facilities so that a truck will not obstruct a public right-of- way.  Buildings
of 5,000 square feet or more shall be provided with accessory off-street
loading spaces as follows:
 
                          Gross Floor Area of Required Minimum Number of
Building, Use or Activity Building            Spaces
                          (in square feet)
                                 5,000 to 10,000         1
Retail stores, all types         10,000 to 40,000        2
                                 40,000 to 100,000       3
Printing, publishing warehouses, 5,000 to 40,000         1
storage establishments           40,000 to 100,000       2
Servicing, cleaning, repairing,  5,000 to 40,000         1
testing or manufacturing         40,000 to 100,000       2
establishments                   each additional 100,000 1 additional space
 
      If a proposed use does not require the number of loading spaces as
provided in the above schedule due to the nature of the business or industrial
use, the Zoning Inspector may permit the construction of a lesser number of
spaces, provided however, the additional area required to provide the number of
spaces in the schedule shall be reserved and held as open area (along with all
required yards) for future construction of loading spaces in the event the use
of the building is changed to require the additional loading spaces.
(Ord. 09-O-5, passed 5-18-2009)
§ 1288.15  ACCESS TO BUSINESS AND INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS.
   No access driveways shall be permitted in or through any residential area to
gain ingress or egress to land or buildings in a business or industrial
district.
(Ord. 09-O-5, passed 5-18-2009)
CHAPTER 1290:  FENCES
Section
1290.01   Purpose.
1290.02   Definitions.
1290.03   Permitted fences.
1290.04   Prohibited fence construction.
1290.05   Permit.
1290.06   Maintenance.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Destruction or removal of barriers along limited-access highways - see Ohio
R.C. 3767.201
   Fences for junkyards - see Ohio R.C. 4737.07, 4737.09
   Fences for motor vehicle salvage dealers - see Ohio R.C. 4738.09
   Fences generally - see Ohio R.C. Ch. 971
   Obstruction of highways - see Ohio R.C. 5571.14, 5589.10
   Power to regulate erection of fences - see Ohio R.C. 715.27
§ 1290.01  PURPOSE.
   The purpose of these regulations is to assure occupants of privacy, security
and to enhance the overall appearance and enjoyment of their property. The
Planning and Zoning Commission approval is required for certain types of fences
that may impact adjoining properties as to natural light, circulation of air
and flow of storm water.
(Ord. 09-O-37, passed 9-21-2009)
§ 1290.02  DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this chapter:
   (a)   Agricultural fence.  "Agricultural fence" means any of the permitted
fences used to contain livestock and protect agricultural or nursery products.
Examples of permitted agricultural fences are:
      (1)   Post and rail fence: A fence that consists of vertical posts and
horizontal rails or split rail.
      (2)   Woven wire fence.
      (3)   Electric fence. An electrified fence whose controller meets the
requirements of Underwriters Laboratories Standard UL69 Electric-Fence
Controller and which is installed in accordance with the manufacturer's
recommendations.
   (b)   Chain link fence.  "Chain link fence" means a fence, usually made of
metal, which consists of wire loops interconnected into a series of joined
links.
   (c)   Fence.  "Fence" means a continuous man-made structure or device, or
the placement of hedges, trees, bushes or other plants intended to enclose or
delineate an otherwise open area of land.
   (d)   Front yard, side yard, and rear yard.  "Front yard," "side yard" and
"rear yard" shall have the same meaning as contained in §
1261.10(b).
   (e)   Height not to exceed.  "Height not to exceed" means the height of a
fence as measured from the existing grade line to the top of the fence with an
allowable deviation of no more than six inches to allow for clearance and/or
uneven terrain.
   (f)   Living fence.  "Living fence" means a fence, created by human effort,
which consists of the growth or placement of hedges, trees, bushes, plants, or
any combination thereof, into a vision-impairing or solid living fence.
   (g)   Ornamental fence.  "Ornamental fence" means a fence that is designed
and constructed of conventional material commonly utilized for the construction
of decorative fencing, consistent and in harmony with the other uses in the
zoning district in which it is located to achieve beauty or decorative effect.
Exotic and/or unusual fence materials and/or design, not normally found or
customarily utilized in the district in which it is located are prohibited,
subject to §
1290.03(g). Examples of permitted ornamental fences are:
      (1)   Rail or split rail fence: A fence constructed of narrow wooden
timbers (whole or split) placed horizontally between upright supporting posts.
      (2)   Picket fence: A fence constructed of upright poles or slats having
not less than 25 percent of the area of its vertical plane open to light and
air.
      (3)   Wrought iron fence: A fence constructed of wrought iron.
   (h)   Privacy fence.  "Privacy fence" means a fence made to inhibit public
view and provide seclusion.  Examples of permitted privacy fences are:
      (1)   Lattice weave or woven fence: A fence made of interwoven strips or
slats (flexible or semi-flexible material), in which the pattern has the
appearance of plaited basket.
      (2)   Palisade fence: A fence constructed with a row of large stakes
placed upright against each other.
      (3)   Board on board fence: A board fence with vertical boards placed
alternatively on opposite rails.
      (4)   Solid board fence: A board fence with less than 25 percent of the
area of the vertical plane open to light and air.
      (5)   Solid wall fence: A fence constructed of stone or brick or
commercially manufactured masonry products similar to decorative stone or
brick; no other type of material is permitted.
   (i)   Vision-impairing fence.  "Vision-impairing fence" means a fence that
is located within the right-of-way.
(Ord. 09-O-37, passed 9-21-2009; Am. Ord. 11-O-38, passed 7-11-2011)
§ 1290.03  PERMITTED FENCES.
   No fence shall be built, erected, constructed, altered or moved upon, and
onto or within any portion of a lot, except for the following permitted fences:
   (a)   Privacy fences.  Privacy fences shall be permitted only in a side and
rear yard, with a height not to exceed six feet six inches.  Privacy fences
must be erected no less than six inches from the common property line of an
adjacent lot.
   (b)   Ornamental fences.  Ornamental fences shall be permitted as follows:
      (1)   Front yard.  Ornamental fences shall be permitted in a front yard
with a height not to exceed four feet six inches, must be not less than six
inches from the common property line of an adjacent lot and must be not closer
than six inches to a street right-of-way line.
      (2)   Side and rear yard.  Ornamental fences shall be permitted in a side
and rear yard with a height not to exceed six feet six inches and must be not
less than six inches from the common property line of an adjacent lot.
   (c)   Chain link fences. Chain link fences must be dark green or black in
color, and must be vinyl-coated or painted, and shall be permitted only in a
side and rear yard, with a height not to exceed six feet six inches, and must
be not less than six inches from the common property line of an adjacent lot.
   (d)   Living fences. Living fences shall be permitted in a front, side and
rear yard and must be maintained not less than six inches from the common
property line with an adjacent lot and must be maintained not less than six
inches from a street right-of-way line. There is no height requirement for
living fences.
   (e)   Solid wall fence.  Solid wall fences shall be permitted as follows:
      (1)   Front yard.  Solid wall fences shall be permitted in a front yard
with a height not to exceed four feet six inches and shall be constructed in a
manner that will not interfere with the natural flow of water.
      (2)   Side and rear yard. Solid wall fences shall be permitted in a side
and rear yard with a height not to exceed six feet six inches and shall be
constructed in a manner that will not interfere with the natural flow of water.
   (f)   Unless otherwise permitted by the Planning and Zoning Commission
pursuant to subsection (g) below, an agricultural fence shall be permitted only
in the side and rear yard of the premises, actually devoted to agricultural
pursuits, and must be maintained not less than six inches from the common
property line with an adjacent lot, and shall not exceed six feet in height.
   (g)   Planning and Zoning Commission approval when required.  Planning and
Zoning Commission approval is required for the following:
      (1)   Any fence that exceeds six feet six inches in height, including but
not limited to fences for recreational purposes, agricultural deer fences, and
privacy fences where unusual topography creates the need for increased fence
height to maintain privacy.
      (2)   All non-residential fences or an agricultural fence in the front
yard.
      (3)   Any fence that uses barbed-wire, as outlined in §
1290.04(b).
      (4)   Any ornamental fence that utilizes exotic and/or unusual fence
materials and/or design.
      The Planning and Zoning Commission shall determine whether the
restrictions herein contained constitute a practical difficulty, as that term
is set forth and explained in §
1264.05 and shall also consider the effect and impact of the fence upon the
neighboring properties and their owners, and if approved may attach such
conditions to its approval that would ensure that it would not be harmful to
the health safety, welfare or value of the neighboring properties or their
owners.
(Ord. 09-O-37, passed 9-21-2009)
§ 1290.04  PROHIBITED FENCE CONSTRUCTION.
   (a)   No fence shall be constructed within the city in any area that
constitutes a road right-of-way, nor shall any fence interfere with natural
water flow or a drainage swale.
   (b)   No person shall erect or maintain within the city a barbed-wire fence.
This section does not prevent the placement and use of not more than three
strands of barbed wire on top of a fence, other than a barbed-wire fence,
provided such strands are not less than 72 inches from the ground and are used
for security purposes, upon approval of the Planning and Zoning Commission as
outlined in §
1290.03(g)(3).
   (c)   A vision-impairing fence.
(Ord. 09-O-37, passed 9-21-2009)
§ 1290.05  PERMIT.
   No person shall construct or erect a fence in the city without first
obtaining a permit from the Zoning Inspector.
(Ord. 09-O-37, passed 9-21-2009)
§ 1290.06  MAINTENANCE.
   All fences erected or standing within the city shall be maintained in good
condition, be structurally sound and be attractively finished at all times in
accordance with §
1462.15.  Any ground between such fences and property lines shall be well
maintained at all times with the grass in any such area not exceeding five
inches. Any such fences shall be designed, constructed and finished so that the
supporting members thereof shall face the property of the owner of the fence.
(Ord. 09-O-37, passed 9-21-2009)
CHAPTER 1292:  WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITIES
Section
1292.01   Purpose.
1292.02   Definitions.
1292.03   Permitted locations.
1292.04   Application for construction of new facilities or expansion of
existing facilities.
1292.05   Application for co-location, removal or replacement on or of existing
facilities.
1292.06   Type of construction.
1292.07   Site development.
1292.08   Co-location.
1292.09   General requirements.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Cable television - see B.R. & T.
Ch. 818
   Privileged communications in telecommunications relay services - see Ohio
R.C. 2317.02, 2921.22, 4931.27, 4931.35, 4931.99
   Telecommunications services - see Ohio R.C. Ch. 4927
   Telegraph and telephone companies - see Ohio R.C. Ch. 4931
§ 1292.01  PURPOSE.
   (a)   The purpose of this chapter is to establish appropriate locations,
site development standards and permit requirements to allow for the
construction and subsequent maintenance of telecommunication systems, including
towers and antennas.
   (b)   This chapter is intended to establish a process which will provide for
wireless communication facilities sufficient to allow adequate service to
citizens, the traveling public and others within the city.
   (c)   The approval process is directed at maintaining a balance between the
city's right to preserve its land use policies for the health, safety, welfare
and aesthetics of the community and the federal government's interest in
providing for and spurring competition in the telecommunications area. In the
interest of maintaining consistency with the residential character of the city,
a primary objective of this legislation is to minimize the adverse visual
impact of these facilities, making the site, location and construction the
least intrusive as possible.
(Ord. 97-O-43, passed 7-14-1997; Am. Ord. 17-O-57, passed 12-18-2017)
§ 1292.02  DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following
meanings.
   (a)   Antenna.  "Antenna" means the specific device the surface of which is
used to capture an incoming radio frequency signal and/or to transmit an
outgoing radio frequency signal. The term includes the following types:
      (1)   An omni-directional (or "whip") antenna receives and transmits
signals in a 360-degree pattern and is up to 15 feet in height and up to four
inches in diameter.
      (2)   A directional (or "panel") antenna receives and transmits signals
in a directional pattern typically encompassing an arc of 120 degrees.
      (3)   A parabolic (or "dish") antenna is a bowl-shaped device that
receives and transmits signals in a specific directional pattern.
      (4)   An ancillary antenna is an antenna that is less than 12 inches in
its largest dimension and is not directly used to provide personal wireless
communications services. An example would be a global positioning satellite
(GPS) antenna.
      (5)   All other transmitting or receiving equipment not specifically
described herein shall be regulated in conformity with the type of antenna
described herein which most closely resembles such equipment.
   (b)   Co-location.  "Co-location" means the use of a single support
structure and/or site by more than one wireless communications provider.
   (c)   Equipment enclosure.  "Equipment enclosure" means a structure,
shelter, cabinet or vault used to house and protect the electronic equipment
necessary for processing wireless communications signals.
   (d)   Personal wireless service. "Personal wireless service" means a broad
range of spectrum-based services, including commercial mobile services such as
personal communications services (PCS), cellular radio mobile services and
paging services.
   (e)   Substantial expansion.  "Substantial expansion" means an increase in
the size of an existing facility by 25 percent or more of the height or width
of tower and/or equipment enclosure or a 25 percent or more increase in the
footprint of the existing site's ancillary structures (i.e., fencing and the
like).
   (f)   Support structure. "Support structure" means the structure to which
the antenna and other necessary associated hardware is mounted. Support
structures include, but are not limited to, the following:
      (1)   Lattice tower. "Lattice tower" means a support structure
constructed of vertical metal struts and cross braces forming a triangular or
square structure which often tapers from the foundation to the top.
      (2)   Monopole.  "Monopole" means a support structure constructed of a
single, self-supporting hollow metal tube securely anchored to a foundation.
      (3)   Existing nonresidential structure.  "Existing nonresidential
structure" means existing structures as specified in further sections to which
antennas may be attached which conform to the requirements of this chapter.
   (g)   Telecommunications.  "Telecommunications" means the technology which
enables information to be exchanged through the transmission of voice, video or
data signals by means of electrical or electromagnetic systems.
   (h)   Wireless communications facility.  "Wireless communications facility"
means an unstaffed facility for the transmission and reception of radio or
microwave signals used for communications. The term includes the equipment and
structures involved in receiving telecommunications or radio signals from a
mobile radio communications source and transmitting those signals to a central
switching computer which connects the mobile unit with the land-based telephone
lines.
(Ord. 97-O-43, passed 7-14-1997; Am. Ord. 17-O-57, passed 12-18-2017)
§ 1292.03  PERMITTED LOCATIONS.
   (a)   New wireless communications facilities may be located on
nonresidential use properties with the following institutional uses: municipal/
government, schools or public parks. Additionally, wireless communication
facilities may be located inside or attached to existing electric high tension
towers.
   (b)   These facilities shall be subject to the regulations set forth in this
chapter and the regulations of the particular zoning district in which the
facility is proposed to be located, but only to the extent such regulations do
not conflict with the regulations set forth in this chapter.
   (c)   Wireless communication providers are expected to co-locate facilities.
In the event a new structure is necessary, providers are expected to site the
facilities in locations which are substantially sheltered from view. Facilities
requiring construction of a support structure should be located on a site that
is effectively isolated from view by structures or terrain features. The
location of the facility shall comply with all natural resource protection
standards, including those for flood plain wetlands and steep slopes.
(Ord. 97-O-43, passed 7-14-1997; Am. Ord. 17-O-57, passed 12-18-2017)
§ 1292.04  APPLICATION FOR CONSTRUCTION OF NEW FACILITIES OR EXPANSION OF
EXISTING FACILITIES.
   (a)   Applicants for construction of new facilities or expansion of existing
facilities are to appear before the Planning and Zoning Commission for a
preview of the proposed wireless communication antenna and/or tower site(s).
This preview shall be conducted at a regularly scheduled meeting of the
Planning and Zoning Commission after the applicant's submission of a site plan
showing the location, type of structure and height being proposed and
surrounding land uses. The applicant shall provide:
      (1)   A diagram or map showing the appearance of the proposed facility;
      (2)   A site/landscaping plan showing the specific placement of the
facility on the site; showing the location of existing structures, trees and
other significant site features; and indicating type, locations and size of
plant materials used to screen facility components and the proposed color(s)
for the facility;
      (3)   A signed statement indicating that:
         A.   The applicant agrees to allow for the potential co-location of
the equipment for two additional wireless communication facilities by other
providers on the applicant's structure or within the same site location and
will respond to written requests for co-location within 30 days and provide a
copy to the city; and
         B.   The applicant agrees to remove the facility within six months
after the site's use is discontinued.
      (4)   A lease agreement with the landholder that allows the landholder to
enter into leases with other providers; and provides that if the provider fails
to remove the facility within six months after its discontinued use, a bond
will be provided by the applicant to compensate the landholder for the cost of
removal of the facility;
      (5)   The applicable fees on deposit as required and certification from a
registered engineer that the proposal is in compliance with all federal, state
and local regulations;
      (6)   A list of competitors and their addresses so that the city may
notify the competitors of the application to encourage co-location; and
      (7)   In addition, an applicant for construction of a new facility shall
provide evidence acceptable to the city that there is no technically suitable
space for the applicant's facilities reasonably available on an existing tower
within the geographic area to be served. If another existing tower is
technically suitable, the applicant must demonstrate that it has made written
request to co-locate on the existing tower and that the request was rejected by
the owner of the tower.
   (b)   Approval for construction of new telecommunication facilities or
expansion of existing facilities by the Planning and Zoning Commission shall
become effective only following review and a public hearing by City Council. A
copy of the approval of the Commission shall be filed with the Clerk of Council
by the Clerk of the Commission. If, within the 30-day period next succeeding
such filing, Council, by a majority vote, disapproves the Commission's action
in granting the permit, the permit shall be void and shall not be issued.
Otherwise, it, together with any additional conditions imposed by Council,
becomes and is in full force and effect on the day next succeeding the 30-day
period. However, should Council approve the action of the Commission within the
30-day period, the permit becomes in full force and effect from the date of the
approval. Any decision to deny a permit to place, construct or modify a
wireless communication antenna and/or tower shall be in writing and supported
by substantial evidence contained in a written record of the proceedings of
Council. A time limit of one year shall be included in the permit for
commencement of construction.
   (c)   Fees for the construction of new facilities or substantial expansion
of existing facilities shall be as follows:
      (1)   New wireless communication tower and facility and expansion of
existing facilities: the fee as stated in §
236.07 of the City of Kirtland Codified Ordinances; and
      (2)   New wireless communication antenna: the fee as stated in §
236.07 of the City of Kirtland Codified Ordinances.
(Ord. 97-O-43, passed 7-14-1997; Am. Ord. 17-O-20, passed 7-3-2017; Am. Ord.
17-O-57, passed 12-18-2017)
§ 1292.05  APPLICATION FOR CO-LOCATION, REMOVAL OR REPLACEMENT ON OR OF
EXISTING FACILITIES.
   (a)   Applicants for co-location, removal, or replacement on or of existing
facilities are to submit a plan detailing the proposed co-location, removal, or
replacement with the Zoning Inspector. The applicant shall provide sufficiently
detailed plans to clearly determine whether the proposed co-location, removal,
or replacement:
      (1)   Will increase the existing height of the tower;
      (2)   Whether mounting the antenna will involve adding more than four new
equipment cabinets or one new equipment shelter over the original approved
plans;
      (3)   Whether it would involve adding an appurtenance to the body of the
tower that would protrude from the edge of the tower more than 20 feet, or more
than the width of the tower structure at the level of the appurtenance,
whichever is greater;
      (4)   Whether it involves excavation outside the current tower site
defined, herein, as the leased or owned property surrounding the tower and any
access or utility easements related to the site; and
      (5)   The Zoning Inspector shall review the application and make a
determination whether the information provided indicates that the co-location,
removal, or replacement exceeds any of the criteria established in divisions
(a)(1) through (a)(4) above. If it does not, then the Zoning Inspector may
administratively issue a permit for co-location, removal, or replacement. If
the information provided indicates that the proposed co-location, removal, or
replacement exceeds any of the criteria set forth in divisions (a)(1) through
(a)(4) above, then, in such event, the Zoning Inspector shall refer the
application to the Planning and Zoning Commission for review and approval,
pursuant to §
1292.04, on the basis that the application seeks a substantial change of the
physical dimensions of the tower or base station.
   (b)   The applicant shall further provide a lease agreement with the
landholder that provides for removal of the additional equipment within 90 days
after its discontinued use.
   (c)   The applicable fees as required on deposit and certification from a
registered engineer that the proposal is in compliance with all federal, state,
and local regulations.
   (d)   If the application is reviewed by the Planning and Zoning Commission
then the requirement for review and a public hearing by City Council may be
waived upon notification of Council by the Planning and Zoning Commission that
the co-location, removal, or replacement of existing facilities does not
require the construction of a new tower or associated facilities and that the
applicant's proposal will have no significant impact on the existing appearance
of the facility.
   (e)   The fee for co-location, removal, or replacement of a wireless
communication facility on or of an existing structure is as stated in the Fee
Schedule in §
236.07 of the Kirtland Code of Ordinances if administratively approved a fee as
stated in the Fee Schedule in §
236.07 of the Kirtland Code of Ordinances if approval is required by the
Planning and Zoning Commission.
(Ord. 97-O-43, passed 7-14-1997; Am. Ord. 13-O-46, passed 9-16-2013; Am. Ord.
17-O-20, passed 7-3-2017; Am. Ord. 17-O-57, passed 12-18-2017)
§ 1292.06  TYPE OF CONSTRUCTION.
   (a)   A wireless communication monopole tower shall be constructed up to,
but not including, 200 feet in height above the finished grade, unless a lesser
height is technically feasible to service the geographical service area of the
applicant and potential co-locators.
   (b)   All applicants shall be required to construct or locate on a base
tower structure and structure foundation that is designed to be buildable up
to, but not including, 200 feet above the finished grade. Such structure shall
be designed to have sufficient structural capacity to allow for at least three
providers to be located on the structure when constructed to the maximum
allowable height. The wireless communication facility shall also be designed to
show that the applicant has enough space on its site plan for an equipment
building large enough to accommodate at least three users. If an equipment
building is initially constructed to accommodate only one user, space shall be
reserved on site for equipment building expansions to accommodate at least
three users. The maximum size of above-ground equipment buildings is 300 square
feet for one provider and 750 square feet in total.
   (c)   Towers and antennas shall be designed in accordance with provisions in
the 2017 Ohio Building Code Section 3108 Telecommunication and Broadcast
Towers.
(Ord. 97-O-43, passed 7-14-1997; Am. Ord. 17-O-57, passed 12-18-2017)
§ 1292.07  SITE DEVELOPMENT.
   (a)   Free-standing telecommunications facilities (i.e., those not located
on or in existing electric high tension towers) shall conform to the following
site development standards.
      (1)   Support structures shall be set back from all residential property
lines a distance of no less than the height of the tower and shall comply with
all required setbacks of the zoning district in which such tower is located.
The Planning and Zoning Commission may permit the tower to be located closer to
a residential property line if the visual impact is therefore reduced, but in
no case shall it be located less than 100 feet from a residential property
line.
      (2)   Support structures shall be designed and placed on the site in a
manner that takes maximum advantage of existing trees, mature vegetation and
structures so as to use existing site features to screen as much of the total
facility as possible from view and to use existing site features as a
background so that the facility blends into the background.
      (3)   Support structures, panel and parabolic antennas and any associated
hardware shall be painted a nonreflective color or color scheme appropriate and
inconspicuous to the background against which the facility would be viewed from
a majority of points within its viewshed. The final colors and color scheme
must meet the approval of the Planning and Zoning Commission and blend with
surrounding environmental characteristics.
      (4)   The maximum size of equipment buildings is 200 square feet for one
provider and 400 square feet in total. The maximum building height shall not
exceed ten feet for flat-roof buildings and 14 feet for buildings with a pitch
roof design. If there are multiple users, the equipment must be sheltered in a
single building, unless the applicant can show a technical necessity for a
separate building, in which case multiple buildings must appear to be a single
building.
(Am. Ord. 06-O-49, passed 10-16-2006)
   (b)   Fencing shall be constructed for both aesthetic and public safety
reasons. Fencing shall be at least six feet in height, but no more than eight
feet. Barbed wire at the top of the fence is permitted. The color and type of
fence must meet the approval of the Planning and Zoning Commission.
   (c)   Existing vegetation shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible.
A buffer area of not less than ten feet in depth shall be placed between the
facility and the public right-of-way and any adjacent residential uses. This
buffer shall be landscaped with hardy evergreen shrubbery or trees in a tight
configuration at least six feet in height, so as to screen the facility. The
landscaping shall be maintained and promptly restored when necessary by the
owner of the tower.
(Ord. 97-O-43, passed 7-14-1997; Am. Ord. 17-O-57, passed 12-18-2017)
§ 1292.08  CO-LOCATION.
   A permittee shall cooperate with other providers in co-locating additional
antennas on support structures. A permittee shall exercise good faith in co-
locating with other providers and sharing the permitted site; provided, such
shared use does not give rise to a substantial technical level impairment of
the ability to provide the permitted use. Such good faith shall include sharing
technical information to evaluate the feasibility of co-location. All
applicants shall demonstrate reasonable efforts in developing a co-location
alternative for their proposal.
(Ord. 97-O-43, passed 7-14-1997; Am. Ord. 17-O-57, passed 12-18-2017)
§ 1292.09  GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   "No Trespassing" signs shall be posted around the facility with a
telephone number of a contact in case of emergency.
   (b)   The owner or operator of the facility shall agree to remove a non-
functioning facility within six months of ceasing its use.
   (c)   The owner or operator shall be required as a condition of issuance of
a permit to post a cash or surety bond acceptable to the Law Director of not
less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) per vertical foot from natural grade of
the wireless communication tower, which bond shall insure that, an abandoned,
obsolete or destroyed wireless communication antenna and/or tower shall be
removed within six months of cessation of use and abandonment. Any co-locator
shall be required to additionally execute such a bond, as principal, to insure
that the bond will be in place during the period of time that the co-locator
occupies the tower. The bond of a co-locator shall be in the amount of one
hundred dollars ($100.00) per vertical foot measured from the natural grade to
the highest point of the apparatus co-located on the tower.
(Am. Ord. 06-O-12, passed 3-20-2006)
   (d)   Outdoor storage of any supplies, vehicles or equipment related to the
use of the facility is hereby prohibited, except during initial construction or
to supply emergency power in the event of a power outage.
   (e)   Except as required by law, an antenna or a tower shall not be
illuminated and lighting fixtures or signs shall not be attached to the antenna
or tower. If lighting is required by FAA regulations, white strobe lights shall
not be permitted at night unless no other alternative is permitted by the FAA.
Lighting for security purposes shall be permitted only with prior approval of
the Planning and Zoning Commission.
   (f)   No advertising shall be permitted on the facility.
   (g)   There shall be a separation of at least one-half mile between new
wireless communication towers. The Planning and Zoning Commission may waive
this requirement with the approval of the City Council.
   (h)   Vehicular access to the equipment and facility shall be integrated
with existing parking and drives to the extent feasible, taking into
consideration existing traffic flow and safety.
   (i)   If an access road is developed exclusively for the facility, a locking
gate shall be installed to prevent unauthorized use of the access road.
   (j)   The wireless telecommunications facility shall be fully automated and
unstaffed except for periodic and necessary maintenance (except in the event of
an emergency or during construction).
   (k)   Construction activity shall take place only within the following times
and days: 9:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. Monday through Saturday and 12:00 noon to 6:00
p.m. on Sunday, to minimize the impact of construction noise on nearby
residents.
   (l)   The owner/operator shall provide the city with information identifying
procedures and contacts in the event of an emergency.
(Ord. 97-O-43, passed 7-14-1997; Am. Ord. 17-O-57, passed 12-18-2017)
CHAPTER 1294:  RIPARIAN SETBACKS
Section
1294.01   Public purpose.
1294.02   Applicability and compliance.
1294.03   Conflicts with other regulations and severability.
1294.04   Definitions.
1294.05   Establishment of designated watercourses and riparian setbacks.
1294.06   Uses permitted in riparian setbacks.
1294.07   Uses prohibited in riparian setbacks.
1294.08   Non-conforming structures or uses in riparian setbacks.
1294.09   Variances within riparian setbacks.
1294.10   Procedures for variances and appeals.
1294.11   Inspection of riparian setbacks.
1294.99   Penalty.
§ 1294.01  PUBLIC PURPOSE.
   (a)   It is hereby determined that the system of rivers, streams and other
natural watercourses within Kirtland contributes to the health, safety and
general welfare of the residents of Kirtland. The specific purpose and intent
of this regulation is to regulate uses and developments within riparian
setbacks that would impair the ability of riparian areas to:
      (1)   Reduce flood impacts by absorbing peak flows, slowing the velocity
of flood waters and regulating base flow;
      (2)   Assist in stabilizing the banks of watercourses to reduce bank
erosion and the downstream transport of sediments eroded from watercourse
banks;
      (3)   Reduce pollutants in watercourses during periods of high flows by
filtering, settling and transforming pollutants already present in
watercourses;
      (4)   Reduce pollutants in watercourses by filtering, settling and
transforming pollutants in runoff before they enter watercourses;
      (5)   Provide watercourse habitats with shade and food;
      (6)   Reduce the presence of aquatic nuisance species to maintain a
diverse aquatic system;
      (7)   Provide habitat to a wide array of wildlife by maintaining diverse
and connected riparian vegetation; and
      (8)   Benefit Kirtland economically by minimizing encroachment on
watercourse channels and the need for costly engineering solutions such as
dams, retention basins and rip rap to protect structures and reduce property
damage and threats to the safety of watershed residents; and by contributing to
the scenic beauty and environment of Kirtland, and thereby preserving the
character of Kirtland, the quality of life of the residents of Kirtland, and
corresponding property values.
   (b)   The following regulation has been enacted to protect these services of
riparian areas by providing reasonable controls governing structures and uses
within a riparian setback along designated watercourses in Kirtland.
(Ord. 02-O-33, passed 7-8-2002)
§ 1294.02  APPLICABILITY AND COMPLIANCE.
   (a)   This regulation shall apply to all lands that are within the
jurisdiction of Kirtland and that border designated watercourses as defined in
§
1294.05 of this regulation.
   (b)   No approvals or permits shall be issued by Kirtland without full
compliance with the terms of this regulation where applicable.
(Ord. 02-O-33, passed 7-8-2002)
§ 1294.03  CONFLICTS WITH OTHER REGULATIONS AND SEVERABILITY.
   (a)   Where this regulation imposes a greater restriction upon land than is
imposed or required by any other provision of law, regulation, contract or
deed, the provisions of this regulation shall control.
   (b)   This regulation shall not limit or restrict the application of other
provisions of law, regulation, contract or deed, or the legal remedies
available thereunder, except as provided in §
1294.03(A) of this regulation.
   (c)   If any clause, section or provision of this regulation is declared
invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, validity of
the remainder shall not be affected thereby.
(Ord. 02-O-33, passed 7-8-2002)
§ 1294.04  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this regulation, the following terms shall have the
meaning herein indicated:
   (a)   Damaged or diseased trees. "Damaged or diseased trees" means trees
that have split trunks; broken tops; heart rot; insect or fungus problems that
will lead to imminent death; undercut root systems that put the tree in
imminent danger of falling; lean as a result of root failure that puts the tree
in imminent danger of falling; or any other condition that puts the tree in
imminent danger of being uprooted or falling into or along a watercourse or
onto a structure.
   (b)   Designated watercourse. "Designated watercourse" means a watercourse
that is contained within, flows through or borders Kirtland and meets the
criteria set forth in §
1294.05 of this regulation.
   (c)   Federal Emergency Management Agency. "Federal Emergency Management
Agency (FEMA)" means the agency with overall responsibility for administering
the National Flood Insurance Program.
   (d)   Impervious cover. "Impervious cover" means any surface that cannot
effectively absorb or infiltrate water. This may include roads, streets,
parking lots, rooftops and sidewalks.
   (e)   Kirtland. "Kirtland", throughout this regulation, this shall refer to
the City of Kirtland, its designated representatives, boards or commissions.
   (f)   Noxious weed. "Noxious weed" means any plant species defined by the
Ohio Department of Agriculture as a "noxious weed" and listed as such by the
Department. For the purposes of this regulation, the most recent version of
this list at the time of application of this regulation shall prevail.
   (g)   100-year floodplain. "100-year floodplain" means any land susceptible
to being inundated by water from a base flood. The base flood is the flood that
has a one percent or greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given
year.
   (h)   Ohio Environmental Protection Agency. "Ohio Environmental Protection
Agency" is referred throughout this regulation as the "Ohio EPA."
   (i)   Ordinary high water mark. "Ordinary high water mark" means the point
of the bank or shore to which the presence and action of surface water is so
frequent as to leave a district marked by erosion, destruction or prevention of
woody terrestrial vegetation, predominance of aquatic vegetation or other
easily recognized characteristic. The ordinary high water mark defines the bed
of a watercourse.
   (j)   Riparian area. "Riparian area" means naturally vegetated land adjacent
to watercourses that, if appropriately sized, helps to stabilize streambanks,
limit erosion, reduce flood flows, and/or filter and settle out runoff
pollutants or performs other functions consistent with the purposes of this
regulation.
   (k)   Riparian setback. "Riparian setback" means those lands in Kirtland
that fall within the area defined by the criteria set forth in §
1294.05 of this regulation.
   (l)   Soil and Water Conservation District. "Soil and Water Conservation
District" means an entity organized under Ohio R.C. Chapter 1515 referring to
either the Soil and Water Conservation District Board or its designated
employees.
   (m)   Soil disturbing activity. "Soil disturbing activity" means clearing,
grading, excavating, filling or other alteration of the earth's surface where
natural or human-made ground cover is destroyed and which may result in, or
contribute to, erosion and sediment pollution.
   (n)   Substantial damage. "Substantial damage" means damage of any origin
sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its
before damaged condition would be equal to, or would exceed, 50% of the market
value of the structure before the damage occurred.
   (o)   Watercourse. "Watercourse" means any natural brook, channel, creek,
river or stream.
   (p)   Wetland. "Wetland" means those areas that are inundated or saturated
by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support,
and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation
typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, including swamps,
marshes, bogs and similar areas. (40 C.F.R. part 232, as amended)
(Ord. 02-O-33, passed 7-8-2002)
§ 1294.05  ESTABLISHMENT OF DESIGNATED WATERCOURSES AND RIPARIAN SETBACKS.
   (a)   Designated watercourses shall include those watercourses meeting any
one of the following criteria:
      (1)   All watercourses draining an area greater than one-half square
mile; or
      (2)   All watercourses draining an area less than one-half square mile
and having a defined bed and bank. In determining if watercourses have a
defined bed and bank, the Zoning Inspector may consult with representatives of
the Lake County SWCD or other technical experts as necessary. Any costs
associated with such consultations may be assessed to the applicant.
   (b)   Riparian setbacks on designated watercourses are established as
follows:
      (1)   A minimum of 120 feet on either side of all watercourses draining
an area greater than 20 square miles.
      (2)   A minimum of 75 feet on either side of all watercourses draining an
area greater than one-half square mile and up to 20 square miles.
      (3)   A minimum of 25 feet on either side of all watercourses draining an
area less than one-half square mile and having a defined bed and bank as
determined in §
1294.05(a)(2) of this regulation.
   (c)   Riparian Setback Map. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall create
a map identifying designated watercourses and their riparian setbacks. The
following shall apply to the Riparian Setback Map.
      (1)   It shall be published as a reference document and the information
contained therein shall be believed to be accurate.
      (2)   It shall be a guide only.
      (3)   Nothing herein shall prevent the Planning and Zoning Commission
from making additions, amendments or deletions to the Riparian Setback Map.
      (4)   If any discrepancy is found at the time of application of this
regulation between the Riparian Setback Map and the criteria for designated
watercourses or riparian setbacks as set forth in §
1294.05(a) and (b) of this regulation, §
1294.05(a) and (b) shall prevail.
   (d)   The following conditions shall apply in riparian setbacks.
      (1)   Riparian setbacks shall be measured in a horizontal direction
outward from the ordinary high water mark of each designated watercourse.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this regulation, riparian setbacks
shall be preserved in their natural state.
      (3)   Where the 100-year floodplain is wider than a riparian setback on
either or both sides of a designated watercourse, the riparian setback shall be
extended to the outer edge of the 100-year floodplain. The 100-year floodplain
shall be defined by FEMA. If a FEMA defined floodplain does not exist for a
designated watercourse, the Zoning Inspector may require a site-specific
floodplain delineation in conformance with standard engineering practices and
approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission. Any costs associated with
reviewing this site-specific floodplain delineation may be assessed to the
applicant.
      (4)   Where wetlands are identified within a riparian setback, the
minimum riparian setback width shall be extended to the outer boundary of the
wetland. Wetlands shall be delineated by a site survey approved by the Planning
and Zoning Commission using delineation protocols accepted by the U.S. Army
Corps of Engineers and the Ohio EPA at the time of application of this
regulation. If a conflict exists between the delineation protocols of these two
agencies, the delineation protocol that results in the most inclusive area of
wetland shall apply. Any costs associated with such a delineation may be
assessed to the applicant.
   (e)   The applicant shall be responsible for delineating riparian setbacks,
including any expansions or modifications as required by §
1294.05(d)(3) and (d)(4) of this regulation, and identifying these setbacks on
all subdivisions, land development plans, and/or zoning permit applications
submitted to the Zoning Inspector. This delineation shall be shown on the Lake
County Geographic Information System base map and shall be submitted to the
Zoning Inspector as an AutoCAD drawing in both electronic and paper copy
formats. This delineation shall be subject to review and approval by the
Planning and Zoning Commission. Any costs associated with such review may be
assessed to the applicant.
   (f)   Prior to any soil disturbing activity, riparian setbacks shall be
clearly delineated by the applicant on site, and such delineation shall be
maintained throughout soil disturbing activities.
   (g)   No approvals or permits shall be issued by the Zoning Inspector prior
to delineation of riparian setbacks in conformance with this regulation.
(Ord. 02-O-33, passed 7-8-2002)
§ 1294.06  USES PERMITTED IN RIPARIAN SETBACKS.
   (a)   By right uses without a permit. Open space uses that are passive in
character shall be permitted in riparian setbacks, including, but not limited
to, those listed in §
1294.06(a)(1) through (a)(3) of this regulation. No use permitted under this
regulation shall be construed as allowing trespass on privately held lands.
      (1)   Recreational activity. Passive recreational uses, as permitted by
federal, state, and local laws, such as hiking, fishing, hunting, picnicking,
and similar uses.
      (2)   Removal of damaged or diseased trees. Damaged or diseased trees may
be removed.
      (3)   Revegetation and/or reforestation. Riparian setbacks may be
revegetated and/or reforested with native, noninvasive plant species.
   (b)   By conditional use permit granted by the Planning and Zoning
Commission. When granting conditional use permits for the following uses, the
Planning and Zoning Commission may, for good cause, attach such conditions as
it deems appropriate. Permits issued under this subsection are issued to the
applicant only, shall not be transferred, and shall be void if not implemented
within one year of issuance.
      (1)   Streambank stabilization/erosion control measures. Streambank
stabilization/erosion control measures may be allowed provided that such
measures are ecologically compatible and substantially utilize natural
materials and native plant species where practical and available. Such
streambank stabilization/erosion control measures shall only be undertaken upon
approval of a Streambank Stabilization/Erosion Control Plan by the Planning and
Zoning Commission. Any costs associated with review of Streambank
Stabilization/Erosion Control Plans may be assessed to the applicant.
      (2)   Crossings. Crossings of designated watercourses through riparian
setbacks may only be allowed upon approval of a Crossing Plan by the Planning
and Zoning Commission. Such crossings shall minimize disturbance in riparian
setbacks and shall mitigate any necessary disturbances. Any costs associated
with review of Crossing Plans may be assessed to the applicant.
      (3)   Historic building reconstruction. Reconstruction of historic
buildings within riparian setbacks may only be allowed upon approval of a
Historic Building Reconstruction Plan by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
Such reconstruction shall be limited to the historic areas outlined in §
1222.07 of this Zoning Code, shall minimize disturbance in riparian setbacks,
and shall mitigate any necessary disturbances. Any costs associated with review
of Historic Building Reconstruction Plans may be assessed to the applicant.
      (4)   Landscaping. The removal of natural vegetation within a riparian
setback and the subsequent cultivation of lawns, landscaping, shrubbery or
trees may be allowed provided that such cultivation is done in conformance with
a Landscaping Plan approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission. Any costs
associated with review of Landscaping Plans may be assessed to the applicant.
Landscaping Plans shall meet the following criteria:
         A.   Maintain trees in the riparian setback larger than nine inches in
caliper (diameter) as measured 54 inches above the ground to the maximum extent
possible; and
         B.   Maintain trees, shrubbery, and other non-lawn, woody vegetation
in the riparian setback to the maximum extent possible.
(Ord. 02-O-33, passed 7-8-2002)
§ 1294.07  USES PROHIBITED IN RIPARIAN SETBACKS.
   Any use not authorized under this regulation shall be prohibited in riparian
setbacks. By way of example, the following uses are specifically prohibited,
however, prohibited uses are not limited to those examples listed here.
   (a)   Construction. There shall be no structures, except as permitted under
§
1294.06 of this regulation.
   (b)   Dredging and the like. There shall be no drilling, filling, dredging
or dumping of soils, spoils, liquids, yard wastes or solid materials, except
for noncommercial composting of uncontaminated natural materials and except as
permitted under §
1294.06 of this regulation.
   (c)   Roads or driveways. There shall be no roads or driveways, except as
permitted under §
1294.06 of this regulation.
   (d)   Motorized vehicles. There shall be no use of motorized vehicles,
except for the use of lawn mowers, tractors and other mechanized vehicles or
equipment necessary to mow, trim, cut, cultivate, plant or maintain vegetation
or to remove damaged or diseased trees, all as permitted in riparian setbacks
under §
1294.06 of this regulation, or as needed to eradicate invasive species or
noxious weeds.
   (e)   Disturbance of natural vegetation. There shall be no disturbance of
natural vegetation within riparian setbacks except for the following:
      (1)   Maintenance of lawns, landscaping, shrubbery or trees existing at
the time of passage of this regulation;
      (2)   Cultivation of lawns, landscaping, shrubbery or trees in accordance
with an approved Landscaping Plan submitted in conformance with §
1294.06(b)(3) of this regulation; and
      (3)   Conservation measures designed to remove damaged or diseased trees
or to control noxious weeds or invasive species.
   (f)   Parking lots. There shall be no parking lots.
   (g)   New surface and/or subsurface sewage disposal or treatment areas.
Riparian setbacks shall not be used for the disposal or treatment of sewage,
except as necessary to repair or replace an existing home sewage disposal
system and in accordance with recommendations by the Lake County General Health
District.
(Ord. 02-O-33, passed 7-8-2002)
§ 1294.08  NON-CONFORMING STRUCTURES OR USES IN RIPARIAN SETBACKS.
   Non-conforming structures and uses are defined in
Chapter 1282.
   (a)   A non-conforming use, existing at the time of passage of this
regulation and within a riparian setback, that is not permitted under this
regulation may be continued but shall not be changed or enlarged unless changed
to a use permitted under this regulation.
   (b)   A non-conforming residential or commercial structure, existing at the
time of passage of this regulation and within a riparian setback, that is not
permitted under this regulation may be continued or replaced. Such structures
may also be enlarged provided such enlargement remains a minimum distance from
the ordinary high water mark of the designated watercourse of no less than the
distance between the ordinary high water mark and the foundation of the
existing residential or commercial structure at its nearest point to the
designated watercourse.
   (c)   A nonconforming accessory structure, existing at the time of passage
of this regulation and in the riparian setback, that is not permitted under
this regulation may be continued or replaced but shall not have the existing
building footprint or roofline expanded or enlarged.
   (d)   A non-conforming structure or use, existing at the time of passage of
this regulation and within a riparian setback, that has substantial damage and
that is discontinued, terminated or abandoned for a period of one year or more
may not be revived, restored or reestablished.
(Ord. 02-O-33, passed 7-8-2002)
§ 1294.09  VARIANCES WITHIN RIPARIAN SETBACKS.
   (a)   The Planning and Zoning Commission may grant a variance to this
regulation as provided herein. In granting a variance, the following conditions
shall apply.
      (1)   In determining whether there is unnecessary hardship with respect
to the use of a property or practical difficulty with respect to maintaining
the riparian setback as established in §
1294.05 of this regulation, such as to justify the granting of a variance, the
Planning and Zoning Commission shall consider the potential harm or reduction
in riparian functions that may be caused by a proposed structure or use.
      (2)   The Planning and Zoning Commission may not authorize any structure
or use in a Zoning District other than those authorized in the Zoning Code.
      (3)   Variances shall be void if not implemented within one year of the
date of issuance.
   (b)   In making a determination under §
1294.09(A) of this regulation, the Planning and Zoning Commission may consider
the following.
      (1)   The natural vegetation of the property as well as the percentage of
the parcel that is in the 100-year floodplain. The criteria of
Chapter 1446 Flood Plain Management may be used as guidance when granting
variances in the 100-year floodplain.
      (2)   The extent to which the requested variance impairs the flood
control, erosion control, water quality protection or other functions of the
riparian setback. This determination shall be based on sufficient technical and
scientific data.
      (3)   The degree of hardship, with respect to the use of a property or
the degree of practical difficulty with respect to maintaining the riparian
setback as established in §
1294.05 of this regulation, placed on the landowner by this regulation and the
availability of alternatives to the proposed structure or use.
      (4)   Soil-disturbing activities permitted in the riparian setback
through variances should be implemented to minimize clearing to the extent
possible and to include Best Management Practices necessary to minimize erosion
and control sediment.
      (5)   The presence of significant impervious cover or smooth vegetation
such as maintained lawns, in the riparian setback compromises its benefits to
Kirtland. Variances should not be granted for asphalt or concrete paving in the
riparian setback. Variances may be granted for gravel driveways when necessary.
      (6)   Whether a property, otherwise buildable under the ordinances of
Kirtland, will be made unbuildable because of this regulation.
   (c)   In order to maintain the riparian setback to the maximum extent
possible, the Planning and Zoning Commission may consider granting variations
to other area or setback requirements imposed on a property by the Zoning Code.
   (d)   In granting a variance under §
1294.09, the Planning and Zoning Commission, for good cause, may impose such
conditions that it deems appropriate to maintain the purposes of this
regulation as outlined in §
1294.01.
(Ord. 02-O-33, passed 7-8-2002)
§ 1294.10  PROCEDURES FOR VARIANCES AND APPEALS.
   (a)   Any applicant seeking a variance to the conditions imposed under this
regulation or an appeal to an administrative decision made under this
regulation, other than a decision by the Planning and Zoning Commission, may
apply to or appeal to the Planning and Zoning Commission. The following
conditions shall apply.
      (1)   When filing an application for an appeal to an administrative
decision, the applicant shall file a notice of appeal specifying the grounds
therefor with the administrative official within 20 days of the administrative
official’s decision. Upon determining that the application is complete and upon
receipt of the required fee as stated in the Fee Schedule in §
236.07 of the City of Kirtland Codified Ordinances, the administrative official
shall transmit to the Planning and Zoning Commission the application and a
transcript constituting the record from which the administrative decision
subject to appeal was based. This transmission shall occur no less than 14 days
prior to a regularly scheduled meeting of the Planning and Zoning Commission in
order to be placed on the agenda for that meeting.
      (2)   When applying for a variance, the applicant shall file a variance
request with the Planning and Zoning Commission.
      (3)   Applications for appeals or variances made under §
1294.10(a)(1) or (a)(2) of this regulation shall contain the following
information:
         A.   The name, address and telephone number of the applicant;
         B.   Proof of ownership or authorization to represent the property
owner;
         C.   The location of the property, including street address and
permanent parcel number;
         D.   The current zoning of the property;
         E.   A description of the project for which the appeal or variance is
sought;
         F.   A description of the administrative decision being appealed or
the conditions of the regulation from which a variance is sought; and
         G.   Names and addresses of each property owner within 500 feet as
shown in the current records of the Lake County Auditor typed on gummed labels.
      (4)   Applications for variances or appeals of administrative decisions
shall not be resubmitted to the Planning and Zoning Commission within one year
of the date of a final decision by the Planning and Zoning Commission on the
original application, unless the applicant shows the Planning and Zoning
Commission either of the following:
         A.   Newly discovered evidence that could not have been presented with
the original submission; or
         B.   Evidence of a substantial change in circumstances since the time
of the original submission.
   (b)   A decision by the Planning and Zoning Commission in response to an
application for a variance request or an appeal of an administrative decision
filed pursuant to §
1294.10(A) of this regulation shall be final.
(Ord. 02-O-33, passed 7-8-2002; Am. Ord. 17- O-20, passed 7-3-2017)
§ 1294.11  INSPECTION OF RIPARIAN SETBACKS.
   (a)   The delineation of riparian setbacks shall be inspected by the Zoning
Inspector:
      (1)   Prior to soil disturbing activities authorized by the Planning and
Zoning Commission under a subdivision, land development plan, and/or zoning
permit. The applicant shall provide the Zoning Inspector with at least two
working days notice prior to starting such soil disturbing activities; and
      (2)   Prior to activities authorized by the Planning and Zoning
Commission under §
1294.06(b) of this regulation. The applicant shall provide the Zoning Inspector
with at least two working days notice prior to starting such activities.
   (b)   Riparian setbacks shall also be inspected at any time evidence is
brought to the attention of the Zoning Inspector that uses or structures are
occurring that may reasonably be expected to violate the provisions of this
regulation.
(Ord. 02-O-33, passed 7-8-2002)
§ 1294.99  PENALTY.
   (a)   Any person who shall violate any section of this regulation shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor of first degree and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
subject to punishment as provided in
Chapter 1262 and shall be required to restore the riparian setback through a
restoration plan approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
   (b)   The imposition of any other penalties provided herein shall not
preclude Kirtland from instituting an appropriate action or proceeding in a
court of proper jurisdiction to prevent an unlawful development, or to
restrain, correct or abate a violation, or to require compliance with the
provisions of this regulation or other applicable laws, ordinances, rules or
regulations or the orders of the Zoning Inspector.
(Ord. 02-O-33, passed 7-8-2002)
CHAPTER 1296: OUTDOOR LIGHTING
Section
1296.01   Purpose and intent.
1296.02   Definitions.
1296.03   General requirements.
1296.04   Exceptions.
1296.05   Non-conforming lighting.
1296.99   Penalty.
§ 1296.01  PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   It is the intent of this code to preserve, protect, and enhance the lawful
nighttime use and enjoyment of any and all property through the use of
appropriate lighting practices and systems. Such individual fixtures and
lighting systems shall be designed, constructed, and installed to: control
glare, prevent light trespass, minimize obtrusive light, and conserve energy
while maintaining safety, security and productivity.
(Ord. 11-O-1, passed 2-23-2011)
§ 1296.02  DEFINITIONS.
   (a)   Cut-off angle (of a lumenaire).  "Cut-off angle (of a lumenaire)"
means the angle, measured up from the nadir, between the vertical axis and the
first line of site at which the bare source is not visible.
   (b)   Director light.  "Director light" means light emitted directly from
the lamp, off of the reflector or reflector diffuser, or through the refractor
or diffuser lens of a lumenaire.
   (c)   Foot candle.  "Foot candle" means a unit of illuminance equal to one
lumen per square foot or 10.76 Lux.
   (d)   Flood or spot light.  "Flood or spot light" means any light fixture or
lamp that incorporates a reflector or a refractor to concentrate the light
output into a directed beam in a particular direction.
   (e)   Full cut-off or fully shielded lumenaire.  "Full cut-off or fully
shielded lumenaire" means a lumenaire constructed or shielded in such a manner
that all light emitted by the lumenaire, either directly from the lamp or
indirectly from the lumenaire, is projected below the horizontal plane through
the lumenaire's lowest light emitting part as certified by the manufacturer.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ec7ad15d617dbba9e0ee3d1ed637d1d7d3b2411d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3544.jpg]
 
   (f)   Glare.  "Glare" means light emitting from a lumenaire with an
intensity great enough to cause annoyance, discomfort, or loss of visual
performance and visibility.
   (g)   Light trespass.  "Light trespass" means the unwanted shining of direct
light produced by a lumenaire beyond the boundaries of the property on which it
is located. Light that is of an intrusive and objectionable nature.
   (h)   Lux.  "Lux" means the SI unit of illuminance. One lux is one lumen per
square yard. 10.76 lux is equal to one lumen per square foot or one foot
candle.
   (i)   Recessed ceiling fixture.  "Recessed ceiling fixture" means an outdoor
lighting fixture recessed into a canopy ceiling so that the bottom of the
fixture is flush with the ceiling.
   (j)   Temporary outdoor lighting.  "Temporary outdoor lighting" means
lighting that is applied temporarily for construction, safety, seasonal events,
or public events.
   (k)   Uplighting.  "Uplighting" means any light source that distributes
illumination above a 90 degree horizontal plane.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ec7ad15d617dbba9e0ee3d1ed637d1d7d3b2411d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3546.jpg]
 
(Ord. 11-O-1, passed 2-23-2011)
§ 1296.03  GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   Outdoor lighting fixtures in retail business, offices, institutions,
industrial, all other nonresidential uses, multi-family developments and mobile
home parks shall comply with the following regulations:
      (1)   Where used for safety or security reasons, only fully shielded
lumenaires shall be utilized.
      (2)   The cut-off angle or placement of all lumenaires shall be such that
the level of lighting shall not exceed 10.76 lux or one foot candle at the
property line of any non-residential use and shall be zero foot candles at the
property line adjoining a residential use.
      (3)   All on-site lighting of buildings, lawns, parking areas and signs
shall be designed so as to not shine onto any adjacent property or building or
to cause glare onto any public street.
      (4)   Light levels shall be measured in foot candles with a direct
reading, portable light meter.  Readings shall be taken only after the cell has
been exposed long enough to take a constant reading. Measurements shall be
taken at the property line, along a horizontal plane at a height of three and
one-half feet above the ground.
      (5)   All non-essential outdoor lighting fixtures, including parking,
display and aesthetic lighting, shall be turned off after business hours. Only
that lighting needed for safety or security may remain lit after close of
business, in which case the lighting shall be reduced to the minimum level
necessary.
      (6)   Island canopy ceiling fixtures shall be recessed so that direct
light cannot radiate onto adjacent properties or roadways.
      (7)   With the exception of flag lighting or ground level signs, no
lighting may be pointed in an upward direction.
      (8)   The height of pole-mounted lighting fixtures in parking lots and
elsewhere on the site shall not exceed 22 feet.
      (9)   A photometric drawing showing light levels on the site and at the
property lines shall be required as part of the site development plan.
   (b)   Outdoor lighting for one-family and two-family dwellings:
      (1)   All HID lighting (including mercury vapor) will have full cut-off
fixtures or be shielded to prevent the trespass of glare from direct light onto
adjacent properties.
      (2)   All spot or flood lighting will be shielded or aimed in such a way
as to not direct light to trespass onto other residential properties.
      (3)   Lamps on raised posts shall be permitted provided posts are not
located in the street right-of-way, are not more than nine feet above grade and
that lighting does not create a glare on adjoining residences.
(Ord. 11-O-1, passed 2-23-2011)
§ 1296.04  EXCEPTIONS.
   The following types of illumination are exempted from the outdoor lighting
requirements:
   (a)   Kerosene, propane, battery and natural gas lamps.
   (b)   All low voltage lighting rated at 24 volts or less.
   (c)   Temporary lighting as required or provided by a governmental entity
for special events or public construction.
   (d)   Street lighting provided as required by a public utility in the public
right-of-way.
(Ord. 11-O-1, passed 2-23-2011)
§ 1296.05  NON-CONFORMING LIGHTING.
   There shall be no change in use or lamp type or any replacement or
structural alteration made, without conforming to all applicable requirements
of this code.
(Ord. 11-O-1, passed 2-23-2011)
§ 1296.99  PENALTY.
   Any person, firm, or corporation who violates any provision of this code
shall be guilty of a minor misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof, shall be
subject to the penalties as set forth in
Chapter 698 of the City of Kirtland Code of Ordinances for minor misdemeanors.
Each day upon which said violation continues shall constitute a separate
offense.
(Ord. 11-O-1, passed 2-23-2011)
CHAPTER 1299:  AMENDING PROCEDURES
Section
1299.01   Authority for amendments.
1299.02   Initiation of zoning amendments.
1299.03   Map amendments initiated by property owner(s).
1299.04   Amendments initiated by Planning and Zoning Commission.
1299.05   Amendments initiated by Council.
§ 1299.01  AUTHORITY FOR AMENDMENTS.
   Subject to
Article V, § 5 entitled "Mandatory Zoning Referendum" of the Charter of the
City of Kirtland, whenever the public necessity, convenience, general welfare
or good zoning practices require, City Council may by ordinance amend, revise,
rearrange, renumber or recodify this Planning and Zoning Code or amend,
supplement, change or repeal the boundaries or classification of property
according to the procedures set forth in this chapter and subject to the
procedures provided by law.
(Ord. 07-O-16, passed 7-16-2007)
§ 1299.02  INITIATION OF ZONING AMENDMENTS.
   Amendments to the Zoning Ordinance may be initiated in one of the following
ways:
   (a)   By the filing of an application to the Planning and Zoning Commission
by the owner or person authorized by the owner within the area proposed to be
changed or affected by the amendment;
   (b)   By the adoption of a motion by the Planning and Zoning Commission; and
   (c)   By the passage of a resolution by City Council.
(Ord. 07-O-16, passed 7-16-2007)
§ 1299.03  MAP AMENDMENTS INITIATED BY PROPERTY OWNER(S).
   (a)   Meeting with Planning and Zoning Commission. An application for a map
amendment initiated by the property owner or person authorized by the owner
within the area proposed to be changed or affected by the amendment shall be
submitted and reviewed. Prior to submitting an application for an amendment to
the Zoning Map, the applicant shall appear before the Planning and Zoning
Commission to informally discuss the proposed rezoning. However, no action
shall be taken at such meeting and discussions, opinions, suggestions or
recommendations of the Planning and Zoning Commission shall not be considered
by the applicant as approval or disapproval by the Commission.
   (b)   Application. An application to amend the Zoning Ordinance shall be
filed with the Zoning Inspector. Applications for amendments to the Zoning Map
shall contain the following information:
      (1)   Name, address, phone number and e-mail address of the applicant;
      (2)   An accurate legal description of the parcel(s) proposed to be
rezoned, drawn by a registered surveyor;
      (3)   A statement of the reason(s) for the proposed amendment;
      (4)   Present use and zoning districts of subject property and adjoining
properties;
      (5)   Proposed use and zoning district; and
      (6)   A Preliminary Development Plan at a scale of not more than 50 feet
to one inch shall include the following.
         A.   Survey. A survey of the property by a registered surveyor showing
topography at two foot intervals; land owned and proposed for development,
adjoining lots and location of oil and gas well easements on the subject
property and on adjoining properties.
         B.   Buildings. The location, area, height and use of all existing and
proposed main and accessory buildings; distances of buildings to property lines
and nearest buildings on adjoining properties.
         C.   Traffic. The proposed system of on-site vehicular circulation and
location of access drives.
         D.   Parking areas. The layout and estimate of the number of spaces;
distances from parking areas and drives to property lines.
         E.   Signs. The location, size and height of all signs to be placed on
the property.
         F.   Landscaping. The location and sizes of areas to be landscaped.
         G.   Stormwater. The proposed method for managing stormwater.
         H.   Utilities. The type and location of water supply; the method of
treating sanitary sewage.
         I.   Environmental Overlay District. The location of any of the
environmental elements on the property.
      (7)   The names and addresses of the owners of all properties within 500
feet of the subject property as shown on the current record of the County
Auditor of Lake County;
      (8)   A statement on how the proposed map amendment relates to the
Comprehensive Plan of the City of Kirtland;
      (9)   Payment of the application fee in an amount established by City
Council. After the filing of an application, the Zoning Inspector shall
transmit the application to the Planning and Zoning Commission for its
consideration and recommendation at the next regularly scheduled meeting,
provided such application is received by the Zoning Inspector at least 15 days
prior to the scheduled meeting.
   (c)   Notice and public hearing by Planning and Zoning Commission. Within 45
days of receipt of the application, or extension thereof, the Planning and
Zoning Commission shall hold a public hearing. A written notice of the hearing
shall be mailed by the Planning and Zoning Commission, by first class mail, at
least 15 days prior to the date of hearing, to all owners of property within
500 feet of the area proposed to be changed, using for this purpose the names
and addresses of such owners as shown upon the records of the Auditor of Lake
County or the list of property owners furnished by the applicant under §
1299.03(b). The Commission shall further cause publication of notice to such
hearing to be made at least once in a newspaper of general circulation, at
least 15 days prior to the date of the hearing. The published notice shall
include the time and place of the public hearing, a summary of the proposed
amendment and a statement that opportunity to be heard will be afforded to any
person interested. During such 15 days the text of the proposed ordinance or
amendment, the maps or plans shall be on file for public examination in the
office of the Zoning Inspector.
   (d)   Recommendation by Planning and Zoning Commission.
      (1)   The Planning and Zoning Commission shall recommend one of the
following:
         A.   That the amendment be approved as requested;
         B.   That the amendment be approved as modified by the Planning and
Zoning Commission as the Commission may deem reasonable or necessary; or
         C.   That the amendment be denied.
      (2)   The Planning and Zoning Commission shall take action on the
proposed amendment within 45 days from the meeting at which the application for
the amendment was received from the Zoning Inspector unless an extension of
time has been agreed upon by the applicant.
   (e)   Notice and public hearing by Council. Upon receipt of the
recommendation from the Planning and Zoning Commission, Council shall set a
time for a public hearing on the proposed amendment. Notice of the public
hearing shall be given by Council by at least one publication in one or more
newspapers of general circulation in the city. The notice shall be published at
least 15 days before the date of the required hearing. The published notice
shall include the time and place of the public hearing, a summary of the
proposed amendment and a statement that opportunity to be heard will be
afforded to any person interested. During such 15 days, the text of the
proposed ordinance or amendment, the maps or plans, if applicable, and the
recommendations of the Planning and Zoning Commission shall be on file for
public examination in the office of the Clerk of Council or in such other
office as is designated by Council.
   (f)   Notice to property owners by Council. If the proposed amendment
intends to rezone or redistrict ten or less parcels of land, as listed on the
tax duplicate, written notice of the hearing shall be mailed by the Clerk of
Council, by first class mail, at least 15 days before the day of the public
hearing to all owners of property within 500 feet of such area proposed to be
rezoned or redistricted to the names and addresses of owners as shown upon the
records of the Auditor of Lake County. The notice shall contain the same
information as required of notices published in newspapers as specified in
subsection (c) hereof. Failure of delivery of such notice shall not invalidate
any such amendment.
   (g)   Action by Council.
      (1)   After the public hearing required by subsection (e) hereof, Council
shall either adopt or deny the recommendation of the Planning and Zoning
Commission or adopt some modification thereof. Concurrence by a majority of the
full Council members shall be required to adopt, amend or overrule the
recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission.
      (2)   Any such proposal may be amended prior to the voting thereon by
Council without further notice or postponement, if such amendment to the
proposal shall be germane to the subject matter thereof and is in accordance
with the recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission. Council
approval, with modification of the recommendation of the Planning and Zoning
Commission, shall not be considered as overruling such Commission
recommendation.
(Ord. 07-O-16, passed 7-16-2007)
§ 1299.04  AMENDMENTS INITIATED BY PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION.
   The Planning and Zoning Commission on its own initiative may, by the passage
of a motion, recommend to City Council changes in the text of the Zoning
Ordinance or changes in the Zoning Map.
   (a)   Notice and public hearing by Planning and Zoning Commission. Prior to
any Planning and Zoning Commission initiated rezoning or redistricting
recommendation of parcel of land, written notice shall be sent by the Planning
and Zoning Commission to the name and address of the owner of any such parcel
proposed to be changed as shown upon the records of the Auditor of Lake County.
The written notice shall be sent by first class mail at least 15 days prior to
the day of the Planning and Zoning Commission to consider such recommendation
and shall include a summary of the proposed amendment. Prior to any Planning
and Zoning Commission recommendation regarding a proposed change in the text of
the Zoning Ordinance the Commission shall cause publication of notice of such
hearing to be made at least once in a newspaper of general circulation at least
15 days prior to the date of the hearing. The published notice shall include
the time and place of the public hearing, a summary of the proposed amendment
and a statement that opportunity to be heard will be afforded to any interested
person. During such 15 days the text of the proposed ordinance or amendment,
the maps or plans shall be on file in the office of the Zoning Inspector.
   (b)   Recommendation by Planning and Zoning Commission. The Planning and
Zoning Commission shall recommend one of the following:
      (1)   That the amendment as proposed by the Commission be approved;
      (2)   That the amendment be modified and approved; or
      (3)   That the amendment be tabled for future action.
   (c)   Notice and public hearing by Council. Upon receipt of the
recommendation from the Planning and Zoning Commission, Council shall set a
time for a public hearing on the proposed amendment. Notice of the public
hearing shall be given by Council by at least one publication in one or more
newspapers of general circulation in the city. The notice shall be published at
least 15 days before the date of the required hearing. The published notice
shall include the time and place of the public hearing, a summary of the
proposed amendment and a statement that opportunity to be heard will be
afforded to any person interested. During such 15 days, the text of the
proposed ordinance or amendment, the maps or plans, if applicable, and the
recommendations of the Planning and Zoning Commission shall be on file for
public examination in the office of the Clerk of Council or in such other
office as is designated by Council.
   (d)   Notice to property owners by Council. If the proposed amendment
intends to rezone or redistrict ten or less parcels of land, as listed on the
tax duplicate, written notice of the hearing shall be mailed by the Clerk of
Council, by first class mail, at least 15 days before the day of the public
hearing to all owners of property within 500 feet of such area proposed to be
rezoned or redistricted to the names and addresses of owners as shown upon the
records of the Auditor of Lake County. The notice shall contain the same
information as required of notices published in newspapers as specified in
subsection (a) hereof. Failure of delivery of such notice shall not invalidate
any such amendment.
   (e)   Action by Council.
      (1)   After the public hearing required by subsection (c) hereof, Council
shall either adopt or deny the recommendation of the Planning and Zoning
Commission or adopt some modification thereof. Concurrence by a majority of the
full Council members shall be required to adopt, amend or overrule the
recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission.
      (2)   Any such proposal may be amended prior to the voting thereon by
Council without further notice or postponement, if such amendment to the
proposal shall be germane to the subject matter thereof and is in accordance
with the recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission. Council
approval, with modification of the recommendation of the Planning and Zoning
Commission, shall not be considered as overruling such Commission
recommendation.
(Ord. 07-O-16, passed 7-16-2007)
§ 1299.05  AMENDMENTS INITIATED BY COUNCIL.
   Amendments to the Zoning Ordinance initiated by the passage of a resolution
by City Council shall comply with the following:
   (a)   Referral to Planning and Zoning Commission. After the adoption of a
resolution by Council, the resolution shall be referred to the Planning and
Zoning Commission for its consideration and recommendation.
   (b)   Notice and public hearing by Planning and Zoning Commission. The
Planning and Zoning Commission shall hold a public hearing. A written notice of
the hearing shall be mailed by the Planning and Zoning Commission, by first
class mail, at least 15 days prior to the date of hearing, to all owners of
property within 500 feet of the area proposed to be changed, using for this
purpose the names and addresses of such owners as shown upon the records of the
Auditor of Lake County. The Commission shall further cause publication of
notice to such hearing to be made at least once in a newspaper of general
circulation, at least 15 days prior to the date of the hearing. The published
notice shall include the time and place of the public hearing, a summary of the
proposed amendment and a statement that opportunity to be heard will be
afforded to any person interested. During such 15 days, the text of the
proposed ordinance or amendment, the maps or plans shall be on file in the
office of the Zoning Inspector.
   (c)   Recommendation by Planning and Zoning Commission.
      (1)   The Planning and Zoning Commission shall recommend one of the
following:
         A.   That the amendment be granted as requested;
         B.   That the amendment be granted as modified by the Planning and
Zoning Commission; or
         C.   That the amendment be denied.
      (2)   The Planning and Zoning Commission shall act upon the referral by
Council within 60 days after receipt of any request for a recommendation unless
additional time is granted by Council. (See City Charter
Article III, § 2.)
   (d)   Notice and public hearing by Council. Upon receipt of the
recommendation from the Planning and Zoning Commission, Council shall set a
time for a public hearing on the proposed amendment. Notice of the public
hearing shall be given by Council by at least one publication in one or more
newspapers of general circulation in the city. The notice shall be published at
least 15 days before the date of the required hearing. The published notice
shall include the time and place of the public hearing, a summary of the
proposed amendment and a statement that opportunity to be heard will be
afforded to any person interested. During such 15 days, the text of the
proposed ordinance or amendment, the maps or plans, if applicable, and the
recommendations of the Planning and Zoning Commission shall be on file for
public examination in the office of the Clerk of Council or in such other
office as is designated by Council.
   (e)   Notice to property owners by Council. If the proposed amendment
intends to rezone or redistrict ten or less parcels of land, as listed on the
tax duplicate, written notice of the hearing shall be mailed by the Clerk of
Council, by first class mail, at least 15 days before the day of the public
hearing to all owners of property within 500 feet of such area proposed to be
rezoned or redistricted to the names and addresses of owners as shown upon the
records of the Auditor of Lake County. The notice shall contain the same
information as required of notices published in newspapers as specified in
subsection (b) hereof. Failure of delivery of such notice shall not invalidate
any such amendment.
   (f)   Action by Council.
      (1)   After the public hearing required by subsection (d) hereof, Council
shall either adopt or deny the recommendation of the Planning and Zoning
Commission or adopt some modification thereof. Concurrence by a majority of the
full Council members shall be required to adopt, amend or overrule the
recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission.
      (2)   Any such proposal may be amended prior to the voting thereon by
Council without further notice or postponement, if such amendment to the
proposal shall be germane to the subject matter thereof and is in accordance
with the recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission. Council
approval, with modification of the recommendation of the Planning and Zoning
Commission, shall not be considered as overruling such Commission
recommendation.
(Ord. 07-O-16, passed 7-16-2007)
PART FOURTEEN - BUILDING AND HOUSING CODE
   Chapter
      TITLE TWO - BUILDING STANDARDS
         
1420.   Regional Dwelling House Code. (Repealed)
         
1422.   Residential Code of Ohio.
         
1424.   Ohio Building Code, Ohio Mechanical Code, Ohio Plumbing Code and the
National Electrical Code.
      TITLE FOUR - MISCELLANEOUS BUILDING REGULATIONS
         
1440.   Abandoned Service Stations.
         
1442.   Excavations, Landfills and Grading.
         
1444.   Fences. (Repealed)
         
1446.   Flood Damage Reduction.
         
1448.   Moving of Buildings.
         
1450.   Permits; Certificates of Occupancy.
         
1452.   Site and Grading Plans.
         
1454.   Early Warning Fire Detection Systems.
         
1456.   Unsafe Buildings.
         
1458.   Address Markings.
         
1460.   Registration of Contractors.
         
1462.   Exterior Property Maintenance Code.
         
1464.   Erosion and Sediment Control.
         
1466.   Comprehensive Stormwater Management.
TITLE TWO - BUILDING STANDARDS
CHAPTER 1420:  REGIONAL DWELLING HOUSE CODE (Repealed)
Section
Editor's note:
   
Chapter 1420 was repealed by Ord. 89-O-2, passed February 21, 1989. See
Chapter 1422.
CHAPTER 1422:  RESIDENTIAL CODE OF OHIO
Section
1422.01   Adoption by reference.
1422.02   File and distribution copies.
1422.03   Definitions.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Adoption of technical codes by reference - see Ohio R.C. 731.231
   Division of Building, Engineering and Inspection - see ADM.
Ch. 242
   Ohio Basic Building Code - see Ohio R.C. 3781.10
   Ohio State building standards - see Ohio R.C. Ch. 3781
   Permits; certificates of occupancy - see B. & H.
Ch. 1450
   Site and grading plans - see B. & H.
Ch. 1452
§ 1422.01  ADOPTION BY REFERENCE.
   There is hereby adopted, for the purpose of establishing rules and
regulations for the location, design, materials, construction, alteration,
repair, equipment, use, occupancy, maintenance, removal and demolition of
dwellings and appurtenant structures, except insofar as such matters are
otherwise specifically provided for in any other applicable law or ordinance,
that certain code known as the 2013 Residential Code of Ohio for One, Two and
Three Family Dwellings, including all subsequent editions, amendments and
modifications of same, save and except such portion thereof as may be
hereinafter amended or deleted.
(Ord. 08-O-34, passed 10-6-2008; Am. Ord. 13-O-7, passed 3-4-2013)
§ 1422.02  FILE AND DISTRIBUTION COPIES.
   The 2013 Residential Code of Ohio for One, Two and Three Family Dwellings is
available online for examination and/or purchase through the Lake County
Building Department’s website at www.lakecountyohio.gov/buildinginspection.
(Ord. 89-O-2, passed 2-21-1989; Am. Ord. 08-O-34, passed 10-6-2008; Am. Ord.
13-O-7, passed 3-4-2013)
§ 1422.03  DEFINITIONS.
   As used in the Residential Code of Ohio for One, Two and Three Family
Dwellings:
   (a)   Building Official. "Building Official" means the Lake County Building
Inspector.
   (b)   City of Kirtland. "City of Kirtland" is hereby inserted in any and all
blank spaces provided in such code for references to "the appropriate
jurisdiction." Words and terms used in such code shall be construed to mean the
words, terms and titles applicable to the City of Kirtland.
(Ord. 89-O-2, passed 2-21-1989; Am. Ord. 08-O-34, passed 10-6-2008)
CHAPTER 1424:  OHIO BUILDING CODE, OHIO MECHANICAL CODE, OHIO PLUMBING CODE AND
THE NATIONAL ELECTRICAL CODE
Section
1424.01   Adoption by reference.
1424.02   File and distribution copies.
1424.03   Definitions.
§ 1424.01  ADOPTION BY REFERENCE.
   There is hereby adopted, for the purpose of establishing uniform minimum
requirements for the erection, construction, repair, alteration and maintenance
of buildings the 2011 Ohio Building Code, the 2011 Ohio Mechanical Code, the
2011 Ohio Plumbing Code and the 2011 National Electrical Code, including all
subsequent editions, amendments and modifications of same, save and except such
portion thereof as may be hereinafter amended or deleted.
(Ord. 08-O-35, passed 10-6-2008; Am. Ord. 13-O-8, passed 3-4-2013)
§ 1424.02  FILE AND DISTRIBUTION COPIES.
   The 2011 Ohio Building Code, the 2011 Ohio Mechanical Code, the 2011 Ohio
Plumbing Code and the 2011 National Electrical Code are available online for
examination and/or purchase through the Lake County Building Department's
website at www.lakecountyohio.gov/buildinginspection.
(Ord. 08-O-35, passed 10-6-2008; Am. Ord. 13-O-8, passed 3-4-2013)
§ 1424.03  DEFINITIONS.
   As used in the Ohio Building Code, the Ohio Mechanical Code, the Ohio
Plumbing Code and the National Electrical Code:
   (a)   Building Official.  "Building Official" means the Lake County Building
Inspector.
   (b)   City of Kirtland.  "City of Kirtland" is hereby inserted in any and
all blank spaces provided in such code for references to "the appropriate
jurisdiction."  Words and terms used in such code shall be construed to mean
the words, terms and titles applicable to the City of Kirtland.
(Ord. 08-O-35, passed 10-6-2008)
TITLE FOUR - MISCELLANEOUS BUILDING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1440:  ABANDONED SERVICE STATIONS
Section
1440.01   Abandoned station defined.
1440.02   Abandonment prohibited.
1440.03   Declaration of nuisance
1440.04   Notice of hearing
1440.05   Photographs; findings of hearing.
1440.06   Order to abate.
1440.07   Noncompliance; remedy of city.
1440.08   Inoperative stations.
1440.09   Storage of vehicles.
1440.99   Penalty.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Abandoned service stations - see Ohio R.C. 3791.11 to 3791.13, 3791.99
   Storage of junk vehicles - see GEN. OFF.
660.07
   Willfully leaving vehicles on private or public property - see TRAF.
452.05
§ 1440.01  ABANDONED STATION DEFINED.
   As used in this chapter, "abandoned station" means a gasoline or automotive
service station which has ceased operation or has been closed to the public for
at least six months in any 12-month period, except that a closure caused by a
public street improvement project or by any other public improvement project
shall not be considered abandonment.
(Ord. 76-O-40, passed 3-15-1976)
§ 1440.02  ABANDONMENT PROHIBITED.
   No person shall allow a gasoline or automotive service station to become
abandoned in the manner provided in this chapter.
(Ord. 76-O-40, passed 3-15-1976)
§ 1440.03  DECLARATION OF NUISANCE.
   A gasoline or automotive service station which has been abandoned is hereby
declared to be a public nuisance, and continued vacancy of the structure is
hereby determined to be a blighting influence depreciating the value and
diminishing the enjoyment and use of adjoining and nearby properties.
(Ord. 76-O-40, passed 3-15-1976)
§ 1440.04  NOTICE OF HEARING.
   Whenever the Zoning Inspector finds an abandoned gasoline or automotive
service station, the Inspector shall send notice, by certified mail, addressed
to the owner of record and/or the lessee of the premises at his or her last
known address or to the address to which tax bills are sent, of a hearing to be
held on the question of abandonment.
(Ord. 76-O-40, passed 3-15-1976)
§ 1440.05  PHOTOGRAPHS; FINDINGS OF HEARING.
   The Zoning Inspector shall cause photographs of the service station to be
made and to be filed in and kept in the office of the Inspector, together with
a written report of the findings of the hearing. The Inspector shall cause a
written notice to be served on the owner and/or lessee stating the findings at
the hearing with respect to whether or not the service station has been deemed
abandoned.
(Ord. 76-O-40, passed 3-15-1976)
§ 1440.06  ORDER TO ABATE.
   (a)   If it has been determined by the Zoning Inspector at the hearing that
the station in question has been abandoned, the notice referred to in §
1440.05 shall contain an order that the owner or other person responsible shall
abate such abandoned conditions within 60 days either by placing the station in
operation in accordance with the Zoning Code, adapting and using the building
for another permitted use or razing and demolishing the service station
structure and removing the pumps and signs and any other advertising or
promotional fixture and equipment.
   (b)   The underground storage tanks shall either be removed or filled with
inert material under the supervision and direction of the Fire Chief.
Depressions caused by the removal of any structure or tank shall be backfilled
and rounded over sufficiently higher than the adjoining ground surface to allow
for settlement to the grade level of the lot.
(Ord. 76-O-40, passed 3-15-1976)
§ 1440.07  NONCOMPLIANCE; REMEDY OF CITY.
   Upon the failure, neglect or refusal of the owner, lessee or other
responsible person to comply with the notice to abate the abandonment, the
Zoning Inspector shall cause the removal of the abandoned service station by
the city, razing and demolishing the structure, pumps, signs and other
advertising or promotional fixtures. The Inspector shall cause the cost of the
demolition and removal of the building and other structures, along with the
cost of either removing or filling the underground storage tanks and all other
related items, to be levied as an assessment, to be recovered in accordance
with law.
(Ord. 76-O-40, passed 3-15-1976)
§ 1440.08  INOPERATIVE STATIONS.
   (a)   An inoperative gasoline or automotive service station (those closed to
the public for two consecutive weeks), which does not come within the
definition of an abandoned station, shall be maintained in accordance with the
Zoning Code and the owner shall cut all grass and remove all rubbish and weeds
from the premises.
   (b)   The parking of motor vehicles upon such premises is prohibited, and
the owner shall place in the window of such gasoline or automotive service
station a "no parking" sign of at least ten square feet in area to notify the
public.
(Ord. 76-O-40, passed 3-15-1976)
§ 1440.09  STORAGE OF VEHICLES.
   No operator of a gasoline or automotive service station, or an employee
thereof, shall permit a vehicle not owned by such person or employee to stand
outdoors on the premises for more than 24 hours. In the case of a junk vehicle,
no person shall permit such vehicle to stand on any property for more than 72
hours without the person who owns or is entitled to possession of such
premises, or the employee of such person, filing a complaint in writing with a
municipal law enforcement officer.
(Ord. 76-O-40, passed 3-15-1976)
§ 1440.99  PENALTY.
   Whoever violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of this
chapter is guilty of a minor misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than one
hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) for each offense. A separate offense shall be
deemed committed each day during or on which a violation or noncompliance
occurs or continues.
(Ord. 76-O-40, passed 3-15-1976)
CHAPTER 1442:  EXCAVATIONS, LANDFILLS AND GRADING
Section
1442.01   Purpose.
1442.02   Definitions.
1442.03   Permit required.
1442.04   Application for permit.
1442.05   Grading regulations.
1442.06   Security/performance bond.
1442.07   Permit approval, conditional approval or denial.
1442.08   Permit duration, suspension, revocation or assignment.
1442.09   Responsibility of permittee, permittee's engineer and contractor.
1442.10   Inspection.
1442.11   Hazards.
1442.12   Procedures for variances and appeals.
1442.13   Nuisances.
1442.14   Enforcement
1442.15   Liability and property damage insurance.
1442.99   Penalty.
§ 1442.01  PURPOSE.
   (a)   It is the declared intent of the city to promote the conservation of
natural resources, including the natural beauties of the land, streams and
watersheds, hills and vegetation; to protect public health and safety,
including the reduction or elimination of the hazards of earth slides, mud
flows, rock falls, undue settlement, erosion, siltation and flooding or other
special conditions; by minimizing the adverse effects of grading, cut and fill
operations, water runoff and soil erosion. Therefore, the following regulatory
provisions of this chapter are adopted for the purpose of stringent control of
all aspects of grading operations within the city limits.
   (b)   Any grading within the city limits shall conform to the provisions of
this chapter, and other applicable provisions of this code and to the latest
edition of the city standard specifications and details.
(Ord. 07-O-36, passed 11-7-2007)
§ 1442.02  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this section the terms defined in this subsection have
the meanings ascribed to them as follows.
   (a)   Applicant. "Applicant" means any persons, corporation, partnership,
association of any type, public agency or any other legal entity who submits an
application to the City Engineer for a permit pursuant to this chapter.
   (b)   Architect. "Architect" means a professional architect registered in
and by the State of Ohio.
   (c)   As-graded. "As-graded" means the surface conditions existent on
completion of grading.
   (d)   Bedrock. "Bedrock" means in-place solid rock.
   (e)   Bench. "Bench" means a relatively level stop excavated into earth
material on which fill is to be placed, or within a cut or fill slope.
   (f)   Berm. "Berm" means a built up mound of soil approximately one foot
above grade or higher, all along the perimeter of a property, or the heel (top)
of a slope to prevent water runoff from running onto adjacent property or
eroding a slope.
   (g)   Best management practices. "Best management practices" means a
technique or series of techniques which, when used in an erosion control plan,
is proven to be effective in controlling construction related runoff, erosion
and sedimentation.
   (h)   Blending. "Blending" means the intermixing and compaction of natural
site soils, such as of materials from two natural soil horizons, or for the
intermixing and compaction of natural site soils with imported soil or other
materials.
   (i)   Borrow. "Borrow" means earth material acquired from an off-site
location for use in grading on a site.
   (j)   Buttress fill. "Buttress fill" means a compacted fill which is placed
in an area where soft natural soils beneath a planned fill would be over-
stressed by the weight of the fill. The buttress fill is placed after the soft
natural soils have been removed.
   (k)   Certification. "Certification" means a written opinion concerning the
progress and completion of the work, prepared by a registered geotechnical
engineer.
   (l)   City. "City" means the City of Kirtland or its designated official.
   (m)   City Engineer. "City Engineer" means the City Engineer for the city or
his or her authorized representative.
   (n)   Civil engineering. "Civil engineering" means the application of the
knowledge of the forces of nature, principles of mechanics and the properties
of materials to the evaluation, design and construction of civil works for the
beneficial uses of humankind.
   (o)   Contour rounding. "Contour rounding" means the rounding of cut and
fill slopes in the horizontal plane to blend with existing contours or to
provide horizontal variation, to eliminate the artificial appearance of slopes.
   (p)   Compaction. "Compaction" means the densification of a fill by
mechanical means.
   (q)   Competent material. "Competent material" means earth material capable
of withstanding the loads which are to be imposed upon it without failure to
detrimental settlement, as certified by the soils engineer.
   (r)   Depth of cut or fill. "Depth of cut or fill" means the vertical
distance between existing natural ground and the finish elevation at any
location.
   (s)   Drainageway. "Drainageway" means natural or humanmade channel which
collects and intermittently or continuously conveys stormwater runoff.
   (t)   Earth material. "Earth material" means any rock, natural soil or fill
and/or any combination thereof.
   (u)   Erosion. "Erosion" means the wearing away of the ground surface as a
result of the movement of wind, water and/or ice.
   (v)   Excavation. "Excavation" means the mechanical removal of earth
material.
   (w)   Existing grade. "Existing grade" means the grade prior to grading.
   (x)   Fill. "Fill" means a deposit of earth material placed by artificial
means.
   (y)   Final erosion and sediment control plan (final plan). "Final erosion
and sediment control plan (final plan)" means a set of best management
practices or equivalent measures designed to control surface runoff and erosion
and to retain sediment on a particular site after all other planned final
structures and permanent improvements have been erected or installed.
   (z)   Finish grade. "Finish grade" means the final grade of the site which
conforms to the approved plan.
   (aa)   Geotechnical engineer. "Geotechnical engineer" means a civil engineer
licensed in the State of Ohio, experienced and knowledgeable in the practice of
geotechnical engineering and approved by the city.
   (bb)   Geotechnical engineering. "Geotechnical engineering" means the
application of the principles of soil mechanics in the investigation,
evaluation and design of civil works involving the use of earth materials and
the inspection and testing of the construction thereof.
   (cc)   Grade. "Grade" means the vertical location of the ground surface.
   (dd)   Grading. "Grading" means any land disturbance, excavation or fill or
any combination thereof.
   (ee)   Height of cut and fill slopes. "Height of cut and fill slopes" means
the finished vertical distance from the top to toe of slope, measured prior to
the application of any required slope rounding.
   (ff)   Interim erosion and sediment control plan (interim plan). "Interim
erosion and sediment control plan (interim plan)" means a set of best
management practices or equivalent measures designed to control surface runoff
and erosion and to retain sediment on a particular site during the period in
which preconstruction and construction-related land disturbances, fills and
soil storage occur, and before final improvements are completed.
   (gg)   Key. "Key" means a designated compacted fill placed in a trench
excavated in earth material beneath the bottom of a proposed fill slope.
   (hh)   Land disturbance/land disturbing activities. "Land disturbance/land
disturbing activities" means any moving or removing by manual or mechanical
means of the soil mantle or top six inches of soil, whichever is more shallow,
including, but not limited to, excavations.
   (ii)   Land fill. "Land fill" means any activity depositing soil or other
earth materials.
   (jj)   Manual of standards. "Manual of standards" means a compilation of
technical standards and design specifications adopted by the City Engineer as
being proven methods of controlling construction-related surface runoff,
erosion and sedimentation.
   (kk)   Modification. "Modification" means any procedure that will reduce the
Atterberg limits (liquid limit, plastic limit and Plasticity Index) of a soil.
   (ll)   Nesting. "Nesting" means the placement of large rocks such that voids
in the fill are created such that required compaction becomes difficult or
impossible.
   (mm)   Permittee. "Permittee" means the applicant in whose name a valid
permit is duly issued pursuant to this chapter and his or her agents, employees
and others acting under his or her direction.
   (nn)   Replacement. "Replacement" means the removal and wasting of natural
soil materials judged unsuitable for the support of dwellings or other site
improvements and their replacement with suitable soil materials properly
compacted.
   (oo)   Reworking. "Reworking" means the mechanical densification or
consolidation of natural loose soil material.
   (pp)   Rough grade. "Rough grade" means the stage at which the grade
approximately conforms within one vertical foot to the approved plan.
   (qq)   Sediment. "Sediment" means earth material deposited by water or wind.
   (rr)   Site. "Site" means any lot or parcel of land or contiguous
combination thereof, where grading is performed or permitted.
   (ss)   Slope. "Slope" means an inclined ground surface, the inclination of
which is expressed as a ratio of horizontal distance to vertical distance.
   (tt)   Slope control specialist. "Slope control specialist" means a
professional landscape architect or other professional person experienced in
erosion control work, retained by the permittee in a professional or
consultative capacity (not as a contractor performing construction work on the
site) and responsible for analysis, plans, specifications, supervision and
certifications regarding slope control planting and related slope control work,
other than grading, for a specific project.
   (uu)   Soil. "Soil" means the top layer of the earth's surface, excluding
rock.
   (vv)   Stabilization. "Stabilization" means any procedure that will result
in increased strength of a soil to a required level.
   (ww)   Terrace. "Terrace" means a relatively level step constructed in the
face of a graded slope surface for drainage and maintenance purposes.
   (xx)   Variable slope. "Variable slope" means the variation in steepness of
a cut or fill slope in either, or a combination of the horizontal or vertical
plane of the slope.
   (yy)   Vertical slope rounding. "Vertical slope rounding" means the rounding
the tops or toes of cut and fill slopes.
   (zz)   Wet season. "Wet season" means the period from November 30 to April
30.
(Ord. 07-O-36, passed 11-7-2007)
§ 1442.03  PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (a)   No person may grade, fill, excavate or store or dispose of soil and
earth materials or perform any other land-disturbing or land-filling activity
without first obtaining a permit as set forth in this chapter. No permit shall
be granted until the applicant has obtained approval of all his or her
legislative requirements, such as, but not limited to, use permits, hillside
planned development permit, tentative map, building permit or site plan review,
where required. The environmental impact report shall be considered in the
granting of a permit, and conditions may be imposed by the city to minimize or
mitigate the negative environmental impacts of the proposed work. The City
Engineer shall determine when appropriate approvals and conditions have been
met.
   (b)   All land-disturbing or land-filling activities or soil storage shall
be undertaken in a manner designed to minimize surface runoff, erosion and
sedimentation. A person performing such activities need not apply for a permit
pursuant to this chapter, if all the following criteria are met:
      (1)   The site upon which land area is disturbed or filled is 10,000
square feet or less;
      (2)   Finished slopes are less than one vertical to four horizontal;
      (3)   Volume of soil or earth materials disturbed or stored is 50 cubic
yards or less;
      (4)   Rainwater runoff is diverted, either during or after construction,
by the activities from an area smaller than 5,000 square feet;
      (5)   An impervious surface, if any, of less than 5,000 square feet is
created;
      (6)   No drainageway is blocked or has its stormwater carrying capacities
or characteristics modified; and
      (7)   The activity does not take place within 50 feet, by horizontal
measurement, from the top of the bank of a watercourse, the mean high water
mark (line of vegetation) of a body of water or within the wetlands associated
with a watercourse or water body, whichever distance is greater.
   (c)   Subsections (a) and (b)(1) through (6) of this section
notwithstanding, the following activities are always categorically exempt from
the permit requirements:
      (1)   An excavation below finished grade for basements and footings if a
building, retaining wall or other structure is authorized by a valid building
permit. This shall not exempt any fill made with material from such excavation
nor exempt any excavation having an unsupported height greater than five feet
after the completion of the structure;
      (2)   Cemetery graves;
      (3)   Excavations for wells or tunnels;
      (4)   Exploratory excavations under the direction of geotechnical
engineers;
      (5)   Agricultural use of land that is operated in accordance with a
conservation plan approved by the Lake County Soil and Water District (LCSWD)
or when it is determined by the LCSWD that such use will not cause excessive
erosion or sediment losses, provided:
         A.   Cut or fills do not exceed three feet in depth; and
         B.   Cut or fill slopes are no steeper than two horizontal to one
vertical.
      (6)   Subsection (b)(7) of this section notwithstanding, any activity
where total volume of material disturbed, stored, disposed of or used as fill
does not exceed 25 cubic yards is always categorically exempt from the permit
requirements;
      (7)   Work conducted in any city street, public right-of-way or easement
when the work is for a public facility, public utility or other public purpose
and for which an encroachment permit has been issued;
      (8)   City public works projects; and
      (9)   Emergency work authorized by the city necessary to protect life,
limb or property or to maintain the safety, use or stability of a public way or
drainage.
(Ord. 07-O-36, passed 11-7-2007)
§ 1442.04  APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.
   (a)   To obtain a permit the applicant shall first file a written
application on a form approved by the city containing no less than the
following information:
      (1)   Name, address and telephone number of the applicant;
      (2)   Names, addresses and telephone numbers of any and all contractors,
subcontractors or persons actually doing the land-disturbing and land-filling
activities and their respective tasks;
      (3)   Name, addresses and telephone numbers of the person(s) responsible
for the preparation of the site map and grading plan;
      (4)   Name, address and telephone number of the registered geologist
responsible for the preparation of the soils and geological report, where
required;
      (5)   An estimate of the time schedule of work;
      (6)   The city business license number of the contractor performing the
work;
      (7)   Date of application;
      (8)   Signature(s) of the owner(s) of the site or of an authorized
representative; and
      (9)   Description of site location.
   (b)   The application shall be accompanied by not less than the following
material:
      (1)   General plans and data.
         A.   Application form;
         B.   Site map and grading plan;
         C.   Interim erosion and sediment control plan;
         D.   Final erosion and sediment control plan;
         E.   Geotechnical engineering report, where required;
         F.   Work schedule;
         G.   An engineer's estimate of the quantity of soil and cost of the
work to be done;
         H.   Ten percent cash bond or certificate of deposit;
         I.   Any supplementary material required by the City Engineer; and
         J.   Application fees (inspection and plan checking fees) shall be
paid. Permit fees shall be established by Council resolution.
      (2)   Specific plans and data.
         A.   Grading plan and site map. Plans shall be 24 inches by 36 inches
and to a form approved by the City Engineer. The plans shall contain the
following items, plus any additional material which the City Engineer deems
necessary to show conformance of the proposed grading with the requirements of
this section and other related ordinances. They shall contain:
            1.   A vicinity map showing the location of the site in
relationship to the surrounding area's watercourses, water bodies and other
significant geographic features, and roads and other significant structures;
            2.   Boundary lines of the site;
            3.   The location of any existing wells and sewage disposal
systems;
            4.   The location of any existing buildings or structures on the
property where the work is to be performed, and the location of any buildings
or structures on adjacent land within 100 feet of the proposed work;
            5.   Accurate contours showing the topography of the existing
ground extending at least 100 feet outside all boundary lines of the site, or
sufficient to show on-site and off-site drainage;
            6.   Elevations, locations, cross-sections, extent and slope of all
proposed grading shown by contours or other acceptable means and location of
any rock disposal areas, buttress fills, subdrains or other special features to
be included in the work;
            7.   Detailed plans of all surface and subsurface drainage systems
and facilities, walls, cribbing or other erosion protection devices to be
constructed in connection with, or as part of the proposed work, together with
a map showing the draining area and estimated runoff of the area served by any
drainage systems or facilities;
            8.   Location and graphic representation of all existing and
proposed natural and human-made drainage facilities;
            9.   Location of proposed final surface runoff, erosion and
sediment control measures;
            10.   A statement of the quantities of material to be excavated
and/or filled and the amount of such material to be imported to, or exported
from, the site;
            11.   Outline of the methods to be used in clearing vegetation, and
in storing and disposing of the cleared vegetative matter;
            12.   Proposed sequence and schedule of excavation filling, and
other land-disturbing and filling activities, and soils or earthen material
storage and disposal; and
            13.   Location of any buildings or structures on the property where
the work is to be performed and the location of any buildings or structures on
land of adjacent owners which are within 50 feet of the property or which may
be affected by the proposed grading operations.
         B.   Erosion and sediment control measures. Erosion and sediment
control measures shall be designed in accordance with
Chapter 1464 of the ordinances of the City of Kirtland and as approved by the
Lake County Soil and Water Conservation District (LCSWCD).
         C.   Geotechnical. The report required in this chapter shall be
prepared by a professional geotechnical engineering firm under the direction of
a registered geotechnical engineer.
            1.   Sufficient soil samples, obtained by borings or test pits, to
represent a true cross-section of the cut and fill areas and of the material to
be used as fill shall be taken and tested under the supervision of the soils
engineer. All soils shall be classified in accordance with the Unified Soils
Classification System. The report, shall cover the following:
               a.   A description of the geology of the site;
               b.   Conclusions and recommendations regarding the effect of
geologic conditions on the proposed development;
               c.   Data regarding the nature, distribution, strength,
expansive quality and erodibility of existing soils;
               d.   Data regarding the nature, distribution, strength and
erodibility of soils to be placed on the site, if any;
               e.   Conclusions and recommendations for grading procedures;
               f.   Conclusions and recommended designs for interim soil
stabilization devices and measures and for permanent soil stabilization after
construction is completed;
               g.   Design criteria for corrective measures when necessary;
               h.   Opinions and recommendations covering adequacy of sites to
be developed by the proposed grading; and
               i.   Any potential groundwater condition which may affect soil
strength, consolidation or slope stability shall be defined and evaluated. This
is of particular importance in areas subject to vibratory or shock loadings;
            2.   A complete and detailed specification shall be prepared by the
soils engineer for clearing, grubbing, and all aspects of grading, including
utility trench backfill, with special emphasis on the depth of fill layers,
compaction methods, moisture content, frequency of field density tests, and
minimum density to be obtained in the field as related to laboratory density
tests;
            3.   A statement regarding specified grading slopes shall be
prepared by the geotechnical engineer, giving professional opinion including
the following:
               a.   Shrinkage or settlement of a fill constructed in compliance
with the proposed specification for controlled earthwork;
               b.   The safe load-bearing capacity of such controlled sites;
               c.   The maximum slope ratios necessary for slope stability for
proposed fill and cut slopes, with recommended planting on the slope to assure
freedom from erosion; and
               d.   The remaining movement, if any, anticipated in cut areas.
Any forecast of appreciable settlement shall be supported by appropriate site
soils data.
            4.   Recommendations included in this report and approved by the
city shall be incorporated in the grading plans and/or specifications;
            5.   All or portions of this requirement may be waived by the City
Engineer; provided that:
               a.   The average ground slope of the site is less than ten
percent;
               b.   The total disturbed area is less than ten thousand square
feet;
               c.   There are no known geologic hazards on or adjacent to the
site; and
               d.   Volume of soil or earth materials disturbed or stored is
500 cubic yards or less.
            6.   The city reserves the right to require additional soils and/or
geologic investigations be made if it deems necessary in order to further
insure the safety and maintainability of the site.
(Ord. 07-O-36, passed 11-7-2007)
§ 1442.05  GRADING REGULATIONS.
   (a)   General.
      (1)   Grading shall be designed, to the extent possible that lot lines
are at the top of slope and with adequate property line setback from the slope
to provide for required vertical slope rounding.
      (2)   Grading shall be designed wherever possible to be at the same
elevation or below adjoining properties outside the development so as not to
negate the privacy of the adjoining property owners. If it is not possible and
there are adjoining properties which will be adversely affected, the developer
shall be required to either move the slope onto the adjacent property owner's
land replacing fences and improvements or replace the property owner's fence
(if one exists) at the top of the slope and deed the slope to the property
owner. The city may waive this requirement if the adversely affected property
owner fails to negotiate for either option.
      (3)   Stockpiling of materials shall be subject to city approval and
shall be removed or relocated when required for public health or safety.
      (4)   All graded surfaces and materials, whether filled, excavated,
transported or stockpiled, shall be wetted, protected or contained in such a
manner as to prevent any nuisance from dust, or spillage upon adjoining
property or streets. Equipment and materials on the site should be used in such
a manner as to avoid excessive dust.
      (5)   All grading and noise therefrom including, but not limited to,
warming of equipment motors in residential zones, or within 1,000 feet of any
residential occupancy, hotel, motel or hospital is prohibited between the hours
of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of the following day, Monday through Saturday. No
operation, as described herein shall occur on Sunday before 12:00 noon, and
such operation shall cease on or before 6:00 p.m. on Sunday, unless other hours
are approved by the Mayor, upon receipt of evidence that an emergency exists
which would constitute a hazard to persons or property.
      (6)   Whenever any portion of the work requires entry onto adjacent
property for any reason, the permit applicant shall obtain a right of entry
from the adjacent property owner or his or her authorized representative in a
form acceptable to the city, and shall file a copy of the fully executed right
of entry with the city prior to issuance of the grading permit and/or approval
of the grading plans.
   (b)   Setbacks.
      (1)   The tops and toes of cut and fill slopes shall be set back from
property lines and structures as far as necessary to provide for safety of
adjacent property, safety of pedestrians and vehicular traffic, required slope
rounding, adequate foundation support, required swales, berms and drainage
facilities and applicable zoning requirements.
      (2)   The setbacks and other restrictions specified by this section are
minimum and may be increased by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
   (c)   Preparation of ground. The ground surface shall be prepared to receive
fill by removing vegetation, noncomplying fill, topsoil and other unsuitable
materials, scarifying to provide a bond with the new fill, and where slopes are
steeper than five to one, and the height is greater than five feet, by benching
into competent material, as determined by the geotechnical engineer. The area
beyond the toe of fill shall be sloped for sheet overflow or a drain shall be
provided. Unsuitable soil is soil which, in the opinion of the city or the
engineer, is not competent to support other soil or fill to support structures
or to satisfactorily perform the other functions for which the soil is
intended.
   (d)   Cut and fill slopes.
      (1)   Cut and fill slopes shall be, in general, no steeper than is safe
for the intended use or is necessary to insure the protection and safety of
adjacent properties.
      (2)   Unless recommended otherwise by the geotechnical engineer, and
approved by the city, the steepness of cut or fill slopes shall not exceed four
horizontal to one vertical.
      (3)   The height of cut and fill slopes (including retaining walls) and
the maximum depth of cut or fill shall not exceed that which is shown on the
approved plan.
      (4)   Vertical slope rounding shall be in accordance with details as
approved by the City Engineer.
      (5)   Cut and fill slopes shall be contour rounded as approved by the
city during the various stages of approval.
      (6)   Variable slopes shall be used to mitigate environmental and visual
impacts of grading.
      (7)   Cut and fill slopes shall be provided with subsurface drainage as
necessary for stability.
   (e)   Excavations and embankments.
      (1)   General.
         A.   Cut and fills shall be designed to balance as near as possible to
avoid the nuisances created by off-site hauling. If off-site hauling is
determined necessary by the city, details of the hauling operation, including,
but not limited to, size of trucks, haul route, dust and debris control
measures and time and frequency of haul trips shall be submitted to the city
for approval. The city may place such restrictions as are necessary to minimize
health, safety and general welfare problems which might arise from this
hauling.
         B.   Fill slopes shall not be constructed on natural slopes steeper
than two horizontal to one vertical.
         C.   All fills shall be compacted to at least 100 percent of standard
Proctor maximum dry density unless otherwise approved by the City Engineer.
      (2)   Fill material.
         A.   Detrimental amounts of organic material shall not be permitted in
fills. No rock or similar irreducible material with a maximum dimension greater
than 12 inches shall be buried or placed in fills.
         B.   The city may permit placement of larger rock when the
geotechnical engineer properly devises a method of placement, continuously
inspects its placement and approves the fill stability. The following
conditions shall also apply.
            1.   Prior to issuance of the grading permit, potential rock
disposal areas shall be delineated on the grading plan.
            2.   Rock shall be placed to assure filling of all voids with
fines.
(Ord. 07-O-36, passed 11-7-2007)
§ 1442.06  SECURITY/PERFORMANCE BOND.
   (a)   Amount and form of security.
      (1)   General. The applicant shall provide security for the performance
of the work described and delineated on the approved grading plan and interim
and final erosion and sediment control plans. The estimated cost of work shall
be as approved and certified by the City Engineer.
      (2)   Types of guarantees. The permittee may execute financial guarantees
and shall file such guarantees with the city concurrently with the application
for approval of the plan required herein. Such guarantees may be in the form of
a performance or surety bond, a certified check or any other type of surety
approved by the city.
      (3)   Terms. The terms of such guarantees shall be determined by the Law
Director with confirmation by Council. Bonds shall be executed by the applicant
as principal with a surety company authorized in the State of Ohio.
      (4)   Amount of guarantee. The financial guarantees shall be in an amount
equal to the estimate total costs of materials and labor required for the
completion of the work, as certified by the City Engineer. When any portion of
the work has, upon inspection, been found satisfactorily completed, a reduction
in the bonds or partial withdrawal of funds equal to the estimated costs of
such completed work may be authorized.
   (b)   Action against security.
      (1)   Should the city find that the permittee has failed to comply with
any of the following or should any of the following conditions exist, the City
Engineer may take appropriate action against the security after giving written
notice to the permittee and surety:
         A.   The permittee ceases land-disturbing activities and/or filling
and abandons the worksite for a seven-day period prior to completion of the
work;
         B.   The permittee fails to conform to the approved erosion and
sediment control plans;
         C.   The permittee fails to correct a hazardous condition, to remedy
defective work or repair damage caused by the work; and
         D.   The permittee fails to conform to the approved grading plan and/
or any condition of approval.
      (2)   The written notice to the permittee and surety by the City Engineer
shall include:
         A.   The work to be completed and/or repairs to be made; and
         B.   The time in which all work is to be completed.
      (3)   Should the required work not be completed within the time specified
by the city, the city may cause such work to be completed or partially
completed to a condition acceptable to the city, and deduct the cost thereof
from any cash deposit or collect such amount from the surety.
   (c)   Release of surety. Any unused security posted with the city for
faithful performance shall be released as follows:
      (1)   Eighty-five percent of the unused security will be returned upon
completion and acceptance of the work by the City Engineer (less any
outstanding claims); and
      (2)   Any remainder of the security will be released 12 months after
completion and acceptance by the City Engineer provided all defective work is
corrected to the satisfaction of the City Engineer.
(Ord. 07-O-36, passed 11-7-2007)
§ 1442.07  PERMIT APPROVAL, CONDITIONAL APPROVAL OR DENIAL.
   (a)   General. No permit shall be approved or issued until all required
plans, reports, documents and security have been submitted and approved by the
Planning and Zoning Commission and all fees have been paid.
   (b)   Action by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
      (1)   Application submittal. An application for a permit pursuant to this
chapter shall be submitted to the City Engineer by the property owner or his or
her authorized agent no less than 14 days prior to the regularly scheduled
meeting of the Planning and Zoning Commission in order to be placed on the
agenda for that meeting. Upon determining that the application is complete and
upon receipt of the required fee, the City Engineer shall forward the
application to the Planning and Zoning Commission for review and action.
      (2)   Notification of property owners. The Planning and Zoning
Commission, upon receipt of the forwarded application from the City Engineer
shall notify owners of properties within 500 feet of the perimeter of the
property or properties that is the subject application to be considered by the
Planning and Zoning Commission.
      (3)   Review by Commission. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall
review the complete application package as transmitted by the City Engineer and
if necessary, request additional data, clarification of submitted data or
correction of defective submissions at the first regularly scheduled meeting of
the Planning and Zoning Commission that the application appears on the agenda.
If deemed necessary, the Commission, with the consent of the applicant, may
refer an application to qualified consultants for review. The cost of such
review shall be at the expense of the applicant.
      (4)   Approval of permit. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall review
the application and shall approve the permit if it determines that the proposed
grade changes will not adversely affect the public welfare, health, safety, and
convenience. The Planning and Zoning Commission may impose reasonable
conditions on any such approval including, but not limited to, conditions
relating to the following:
         A.   The method of removing or depositing the soil or substance;
         B.   The term of the permit;
         C.   The type and/or quantity of the soil or substance to be removed
or deposited;
         D.   The effect on adjacent property by virtue of odors, noise, dust,
drainage or erosion;
         E.   The probable effect upon a public right-of-way, particularly
damage to the road surface;
         F.   The reclamation of land; and
         G.   Such other matters as may reasonably be required to protect the
public health, safety, welfare and convenience.
   (c)   Conditions. Any conditions so imposed by the Planning and Zoning
Commission shall be part of the permit and shall bind the applicant and his or
her successors or assignees.
(Ord. 07-O-36, passed 11-7-2007)
§ 1442.08  PERMIT DURATION, SUSPENSION, REVOCATION OR ASSIGNMENT.
   (a)   Duration of permit.
      (1)   Permits issued under this chapter shall be valid for the period
specified on the permit form or as specified by an improvement agreement.
      (2)   Should grading not commence within 60 calendar days of the time
specified on the permit, the City Engineer may void the permit and require a
reapplication for issuance of a new permit.
      (3)   The Planning and Zoning Commission may grant an extension of time
upon a showing of just cause by the permittee. The City Engineer may require
additional fees or reasonable conditions in consideration for such time
extension.
   (b)   Suspension or revocation of permit.
      (1)   General. The City Engineer shall first resort to the procedures set
forth in this section before any other enforcement procedure set forth in this
chapter is implemented.
      (2)   Suspension.
         A.   The Mayor shall suspend the permit and issue a stop work order,
and the permittee shall cease all work on the work site, except work necessary
to remedy the cause of the suspension, upon notification of such suspension
when:
            1.   The City Engineer determines that the permit was issued in
error or on the basis of incorrect information supplied or in violation of any
ordinance or regulation or the provisions of this title;
            2.   The permittee fails to submit reports where required;
            3.   The work on site is not being performed in accordance with
approved plans and specifications;
            4.   The permittee fails to comply with an order to modify the work
within the time limits imposed by the City Engineer; or
            5.   The permittee is causing excessive erosion and/or sediment.
         B.   The Mayor may reinstate a suspended permit upon the permittee's
correction of the cause of the suspension.
      (3)   Revocation.
         A.   The City Engineer may revoke the permit and issue a stop work
order upon finding the permittee:
            1.   Conducts or carries on the grading in such a manner as to
materially affect adversely the health, welfare or safety of persons residing
or working in the neighborhood of the property of the permittee;
            2.   Conducts or carries on the grading so that the grading is
materially detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to property or
improvements in the neighborhood; or
            3.   Fails to cease work under an order of suspension.
         B.   Any revocation will be effective immediately upon notification by
the City Engineer. The City Engineer shall not reinstate a revoked permit.
(Ord. 07-O-36, passed 11-7-2007)
§ 1442.09  RESPONSIBILITY OF PERMITTEE, PERMITTEE'S ENGINEER AND CONTRACTOR.
   (a)   Permittee/contractor.
      (1)   The permittee and/or the permittee's engineers, contractors or
agents shall be responsible for the satisfactory and safe conduct of all work.
      (2)   The permit applicant and grading contractor shall be responsible
for the protection of adjacent properties during grading operations. Prior to
commencing any grading of the site, the exterior boundaries shall be marked as
required by the City Engineer. Boundary markers shall be maintained throughout
the grading operation. Temporary barriers and/or protective fencing shall be
used when necessary to protect adjacent properties.
      (3)   In addition to the security to be posted in accordance herewith,
the applicant shall agree to employ a geotechnical engineer to give technical
supervision and inspect the work whenever a soils report has been required for
the proposed grading.
      (4)   The permittee shall, at all times, be in conformity with the
approved grading plan.
      (5)   The permittee shall notify the City Engineer within 36 hours of the
following:
         A.   The beginning of the permitted activity;
         B.   The completion of rough grading;
         C.   The completion of finish grading; or
         D.   The installation of all erosion control devices and the
completion of planting requirements; and
         E.   The readiness of the site for final inspection, including but not
limited to, finished grading, installation of drainage devices and final
erosion control measures.
      (6)   The permittee shall submit to the City Engineer written reports if:
         A.   There are any delays in obtaining materials, machinery, services
or manpower necessary to the implementation of the grading plans as scheduled;
         B.   There are any delays in land-disturbing or filling activities or
soil storage;
         C.   The work is not being done in conformance with the approved
grading plan; or
         D.   There are any departures from the approved grading plan.
      (7)   Unless this requirement is waived by the City Engineer, the
permittee shall submit recommendations for corrective measures, if necessary
and appropriate, with the reports.
      (8)   The city will review all reports submitted by the permittee. The
City Engineer may require the permittee to modify the site map and grading
plan, interim or final plans, and maintenance methods and schedules. The City
Engineer shall notify the permittee in writing of the requirement and specify a
reasonable period of time within which the permittee must comply. All
modifications are subject to the City Engineer's approval.
   (b)   Geotechnical engineer.
      (1)   The geotechnical engineer's area of responsibility shall include,
but need not be limited to, the professional inspection and certification
concerning the preparation of ground to receive fills, testing for required
compaction, stability of all finished slopes and design of buttress fills and
the design and need for subdrains and other groundwater control devices, where
required.
      (2)   Upon completion of the grading, the geotechnical engineer shall
certify that the site was graded and filled with material in accordance with
the approved specifications. He or she shall also give his or her professional
opinion regarding remaining shrinkage or settlement, expansive characteristics,
slope stability, load-bearing qualities, and of any other conditions pertinent
to construction upon the completed cut or fill.
(Ord. 07-O-36, passed 11-7-2007)
§ 1442.10  INSPECTION.
   (a)   General.
      (1)   All grading operations for which a permit is required shall be
monitored and tested by a testing laboratory acceptable to the city at a
frequency acceptable to the City Engineer. The cost and expense of such testing
shall be borne by the permittee.
      (2)   The city, upon at least 36 hours' prior notification from the
permittee or his or her agent, shall inspect the work at the following stages
of the work and shall either approve the portion then completed, or shall
notify the permittee or his or her agent wherein it fails to comply with the
requirements of this chapter:
         A.   Initial. When the site has been cleared of vegetation and
unapproved soils have been scarified and/or removed, benched or otherwise
prepared and before any fill is placed;
         B.   Rough. When rough grading has been completed and approximate
final elevations have been established; and
         C.   Final. When all grading has been completed, all drainage
facilities installed and slope planting completed and all certifications filed
with the city.
      (3)   In addition to the inspections specified in this section, the city
may make such other inspections as it deems necessary to determine that the
work is being performed in compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
   (b)   Testing.
      (1)   The geotechnical engineer or testing laboratory shall perform
sufficient testing during the grading operations to adequately certify that the
grading is performed in accordance with the approved plans, specifications and
as required by this chapter.
      (2)   Regular, representative compaction tests and soils samples shall be
made on all fills and submitted to the city. The test results, including the
dry density, moisture content, location, elevation and sampling date of each
sample taken shall be reported, along with sufficient data to correlate with
laboratory analyses submitted. A sketch of the locations shall be provided.
   (c)   Final reports and as-built plans. Upon final completion of the work,
the following reports and drawings and supplements thereto shall be submitted
to the city: A summary geotechnical report prepared by the geotechnical
engineer, including locations and elevations of field density tests, summaries
of field and laboratory tests and other substantiating data and comments on any
changes made during grading and their effect on the recommendations made in the
investigation report. The report shall include a final description of the
geology of the site, including any new information disclosed during the grading
and the effect of same on recommendations incorporated in the approved grading
plan. A certification shall be provided as to the adequacy of the site for the
intended use as affected by soil and geologic factors.
(Ord. 07-O-36, passed 11-7-2007)
§ 1442.11  HAZARDS.
   Whenever the City Engineer determines that any existing excavation or
embankment or fill has or may become a hazard to life or limb or endangers
property, or adversely affects the safety, use or stability of a public way,
drainage channel or the property of another, the owner of the property upon
which the excavation or fill is located, or other person or agent in control of
the property, upon receipt in writing from the city, shall within the period
specified therein repair or eliminate such excavation or embankment so as to
eliminate the hazard and be in conformance with the requirements of this
chapter.
(Ord. 07-O-36, passed 11-7-2007)
§ 1442.12  PROCEDURES FOR VARIANCES AND APPEALS.
   (a)   Any applicant seeking a variance to the requirements imposed under
this
Chapter 1442, or an appeal of an administrative decision made pursuant to this
chapter, other than a decision of the Planning and Zoning Commission, may apply
for such variance to and/or appeal such administrative decision to the Planning
and Zoning Commission of the City of Kirtland subject to the following.
      (1)   When filing an application for an appeal of an administrative
decision, the applicant shall file within 20 days of the administrative
official’s decision a notice of appeal with the administrative official
specifying the specific error(s) made by the administrative official. Upon
determining that the application is complete and upon receipt of the required
fee as stated in the Fee Schedule in §
236.07 of the City of Kirtland Codified Ordinances, the administrative official
shall transmit to the Planning and Zoning Commission the application and a
transcript constituting the record from which the administrative decision
subject to appeal was based. This transmission shall occur no less than 14 days
prior to a regularly scheduled meeting of the Planning and Zoning Commission in
order to be placed on the agenda for that meeting.
      (2)   When applying for a variance, the applicant shall file a variance
request with the Planning and Zoning Commission.
      (3)   Applications for appeals and/or variances made under this chapter
shall contain the following information:
         A.   The name, address, and telephone number of the applicant;
         B.   Proof of ownership or authorization to represent the property
owner;
         C.   The location of the property, including street address and
permanent parcel number;
         D.   The current zoning of the property;
         E.   A description of the project for which the appeal or variance is
sought;
         F.   In the case of an appeal, a description of the administrative
decision being appealed including the specific error(s) alleged to have been
made by the administrative official;
         G.   In the case of a variance request, identification of the specific
regulation from which a variance is sought along with a statement of why
compliance with the regulation imposes an unnecessary hardship or difficulty;
and
         H.   The information required under §
1442.04 of this chapter.
      (4)   Applications for appeals of an administrative decision and/or
variances shall not be resubmitted to the Planning and Zoning Commission within
one year of the date of a final decision by the Planning and Zoning Commission
on the original application, unless the applicant demonstrates to the Planning
and Zoning Commission either of the following:
         A.   Newly discovered evidence that could not have been presented with
the original application; or
         B.   Evidence of a substantial change in circumstances since the time
of the original application.
      (5)   A decision by the Planning and Zoning Commission made in response
to an application for a variance request or an appeal of an administrative
decision filed pursuant to this chapter shall be final.
(Ord. 07-O-36, passed 11-7-2007; Am. Ord. 17-O-20, passed 7-3-2017)
§ 1442.13  NUISANCES.
   The provisions of this chapter shall not be construed to authorize any
person to maintain a private or public nuisance upon their property, and
compliance with the terms of this chapter shall not be a defense in any action
to abate such nuisance.
(Ord. 07-O-36, passed 11-7-2007)
§ 1442.14  ENFORCEMENT.
   The City Engineer, Safety Director, and the Zoning Inspector and their duly
authorized representatives shall have the authority to examine all places of
business and persons within the city subject to the provisions of this chapter,
to determine if this chapter has been complied with and to enforce the
provisions of this chapter against any person found to be violating the same.
(Ord. 07-O-36, passed 11-7-2007)
§ 1442.15  LIABILITY AND PROPERTY DAMAGE INSURANCE.
   The permittee's contractor shall file a certificate of liability insurance
prior to commencing any work.
(Ord. 07-O-36, passed 11-7-2007)
§ 1442.99  PENALTY.
   Any person, firm or corporation who pleads guilty or is found guilty of
violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be fined not more than
five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisoned not more than 30 days, or both.
Each day of violation shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 07-O-36, passed 11-7-2007)
CHAPTER 1444:  FENCES(Repealed)
Section
Editor's note:
   This chapter was repealed by Ord. 94-O-27, passed June 20, 1994. See
Chapter 1290of the Planning and Zoning Code.
CHAPTER 1446:  FLOOD DAMAGE REDUCTION
Section
1446.01   General provisions.
1446.02   Definitions.
1446.03   Administration.
1446.04   Use and development standards for flood hazard reduction.
1446.05   Appeals and variances.
1446.06   Enforcement.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Altering, polluting and diverting watercourses - see GEN. OFF.
660.04
   Flood control by soil conservation district supervisors - see Ohio R.C.
1515.08
   Flood insurance - see Ohio R.C. 3925.34(C), 3941.02
   Professional consulting expenses required from permit applicants - see ADM.
236.07
   Water supply, sanitation, ditches - see Ohio R.C. 6101.01 et seq.
§ 1446.01  GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (a)   Statutory authorization.  ARTICLE XVIII, Section 3, of the Ohio
Constitution grants municipalities the legal authority to adopt land use and
control measures for promoting the health, safety, and general welfare of its
citizens. Therefore, the City Council of Kirtland, State of Ohio, does ordain
as follows:
   (b)   Findings of fact.  The city has special flood hazard areas that are
subject to periodic inundation which may result in loss of life and property,
health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services,
extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and
impairment of the tax base. Additionally, structures that are inadequately
elevated, floodproofed, or otherwise protected from flood damage also
contribute to the flood loss. In order to minimize the threat of such damages
and to achieve the purposes hereinafter set forth, these regulations are
adopted.
   (c)   Statement of purpose.  It is the purpose of these regulations to
promote the public health, safety and general welfare, and to:
      (1)   Protect human life and health;
      (2)   Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;
      (3)   Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
      (4)   Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
      (5)   Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water
and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located
in areas of special flood hazard;
      (6)   Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the proper use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to protect property and
minimize future flood blight areas;
      (7)   Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard
assume responsibility for their actions;
      (8)   Minimize the impact of development on adjacent properties within
and near flood prone areas;
      (9)   Ensure that the flood storage and conveyance functions of the
floodplain are maintained;
      (10)   Minimize the impact of development on the natural, beneficial
values of the floodplain;
      (11)   Prevent floodplain uses that are either hazardous or
environmentally incompatible; and
      (12)   Meet community participation requirements of the National Flood
Insurance Program.
   (d)   Methods of reducing flood loss.  In order to accomplish its purposes,
these regulations include methods and provisions for:
      (1)   Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health,
safety, and property due to water hazards, or which result in damaging
increases in flood heights or velocities;
      (2)   Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities,
which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
      (3)   Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels,
and natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel flood
waters;
      (4)   Controlling filling, grading, dredging, excavating, and other
development which may increase flood damage; and,
      (5)   Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers, which
will unnaturally divert flood, waters or which may increase flood hazards in
other areas.
   (e)   Lands to which these regulations apply.  These regulations shall apply
to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the city as
identified in subsection (f) of this section, including any additional areas of
special flood hazard annexed by the city.
   (f)   Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard.  For the
purposes of these regulations, the following studies and/or maps are adopted:
      (1)   Flood Insurance Study Lake County, Ohio and Incorporated Areas and
Flood Insurance Rate Map Lake County, Ohio and Incorporated Areas both
effective February 3, 2010.
      (2)   Any hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analysis authored by a
registered professional engineer in the State of Ohio which has been approved
by the city as required by §
1446.04(c), Subdivisions and Large Scale Developments.
      (3)   Any revisions to the aforementioned maps and/or studies are hereby
adopted by reference and declared to be a part of these regulations.  Such maps
and/or studies are on file at the Zoning Office, City of Kirtland, 9301
Chillicothe Road, Kirtland, Ohio 44094.
   (g)   Abrogation and greater restrictions.  These regulations are not
intended to repeal any existing ordinances including subdivision regulations,
zoning or building codes. In the event of a conflict between these regulations
and any other ordinance, the more restrictive shall be followed. These
regulations shall not impair any deed restriction covenant or easement but the
land subject to such interests shall also be governed by the regulations.
   (h)   Interpretation.  In the interpretation and application of these
regulations, all provisions shall be:
      (1)   Considered as minimum requirements;
      (2)   Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and,
      (3)   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
state statutes.
      Where a provision of these regulations may be in conflict with a state or
federal law, such state or federal law shall take precedence over these
regulations.
   (i)   Warning and disclaimer of liability.  The degree of flood protection
required by these regulations is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes
and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can
and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or
natural causes. These regulations do not imply that land outside the areas of
special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from
flooding or flood damage. These regulations shall not create liability on the
part of the city, any officer or employee thereof, or the Federal Emergency
Management Agency, for any flood damage that results from reliance on these
regulations or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
   (j)   Severability.  Should any section or provision of these regulations be
declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall
not affect the validity of the regulations as a whole, or any part thereof
other than the part so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid.
(Ord. 09-O-55, passed 12-21-2009)
§ 1446.02  DEFINITIONS.
   Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in these
regulations shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in
common usage and to give these regulations the most reasonable application.
   (a)   Accessory structure. "Accessory structure" means a structure on the
same lot with, and of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the
principal structure.
   (b)   Appeal. "Appeal" means a request for review of the Floodplain
Administrator's interpretation of any provision of these regulations.
   (c)   Base flood. "Base flood" means the flood having a one percent chance
of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. The base flood may also be
referred to as the 1% chance annual flood or 100- year flood.
   (d)   Base (100-year) flood elevation (BFE). "Base (100-year) flood
elevation (BFE)" means the water surface elevation of the base flood in
relation to a specified datum, usually the National Geodetic Vertical Datum of
1929 or the North American Vertical Datum of 1988, and usually expressed in
feet mean sea level (MSL).  In Zone AO areas, the base flood elevation is the
natural grade elevation plus the depth number (from one to three feet).
   (e)   Basement. "Basement" means any area of the building having its floor
subgrade (below ground level) on all sides.
   (f)   Development. "Development" means any manmade change to improved or
unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other
structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling
operations or storage of equipment or materials.
   (g)   Enclosure below the lowest floor. See "Lowest Floor."
   (h)   Executive Order 11988 (Floodplain Management). "Executive Order 11988
(Floodplain Management)", issued by President Carter in 1977, this order
requires that no Federally assisted activities be conducted in or have the
potential to affect identified special flood hazard areas, unless there is no
practicable alternative.
   (i)   Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). "Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA)" means the agency with the overall responsibility for
administering the National Flood Insurance Program.
   (j)   Fill. "Fill" is a deposit of earth material placed by artificial
means.
   (k)   Flood or Flooding. "Flood" or "flooding" means a general and temporary
condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
      (1)   The overflow of inland or tidal waters, and/or
      (2)   The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from
any source.
   (l)   Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM). "Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM)"
is usually the initial map, produced by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency, or U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, for a community
depicting approximate special flood hazard areas.
   (m)   Flood insurance rate map (FIRM). "Flood insurance rate map (FIRM)" is
an official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or the U.S.
Department of Housing and Urban Development has delineated the areas of special
flood hazard.
   (n)   Flood insurance risk zones. "Flood insurance risk zones" are zone
designations on FHBMs and FIRMs that indicate the magnitude of the flood hazard
in specific areas of a community. Following are the zone definitions:
      (1)   Zone A:  Special flood hazard areas inundated by the 100-year
flood; base flood elevations are not determined.
      (2)   Zones A1-30 and Zone AE:  Special flood hazard areas inundated by
the 100-year flood; base flood elevations are determined.
      (3)   Zone AO:  Special flood hazard areas inundated by the 100-year
flood; with flood depths of one to three feet (usually sheet flow on sloping
terrain); average depths are determined.
      (4)   Zone AH:  Special flood hazard areas inundated by the 100-year
flood; flood depths of one to three feet (usually areas of ponding); base flood
elevations are determined.
      (5)   Zone A99:  Special flood hazard areas inundated by the 100-year
flood to be protected from the 100-year flood by a federal flood protection
system under construction; no base flood elevations are determined.
      (6)   Zone B and Zone X (shaded):  Areas of 500-year flood; areas subject
to the 100-year flood with average depths of less than one foot or with
contributing drainage area less than one square mile; and areas protected by
levees from the base flood.
      (7)   Zone C and Zone X (unshaded):  Areas determined to be outside the
500-year floodplain.
   (o)   Flood insurance study (FIS). "Flood insurance study (FIS)" means the
official report in which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or the U.S.
Department of Housing and Urban Development has provided flood profiles,
floodway boundaries (sometimes shown on flood boundary and floodway maps), and
the water surface elevations of the base flood.
   (p)   Flood protection elevation. "Flood protection elevation," or FPE, is
the base flood elevation plus two feet of freeboard. In areas where no base
flood elevations exist from any authoritative source, the flood protection
elevation can be historical flood elevations, or base flood elevations
determined and/or approved by the Floodplain Administrator.
   (q)   Floodway. "Floodway" means the channel of a river or other watercourse
and the adjacent land areas that have been reserved in order to pass the base
flood discharge. A floodway is typically determined through a hydraulic and
hydrologic engineering analysis such that the cumulative increase in the water
surface elevation of the base flood discharge is no more than a designated
height. In no case shall the designated height be more than 0.5 foot at any
point within the community.
      The floodway is an extremely hazardous area, and is usually characterized
by any of the following: Moderate to high velocity flood waters, high potential
for debris and projectile impacts, and moderate to high erosion forces.
   (r)   Freeboard. "Freeboard" means a factor of safety usually expressed in
feet above a flood level for the purposes of floodplain management. Freeboard
tends to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood
heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and
floodway conditions, such as wave action, obstructed bridge openings, debris
and ice jams, and the hydrologic effect of urbanization in a watershed.
   (s)   Historic structure. "Historic structure" means any structure that is:
      (1)   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listings on the National Register;
      (2)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to
qualify as a registered historic district; or
      (3)   Individually listed on the State of Ohio's inventory of historic
places maintained by the Ohio Historic Preservation Office.
      (4)   Individually listed on the inventory of historic places maintained
by the city's historic preservation program, which program is certified by the
Ohio Historic Preservation Office.
   (t)   Hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analysis. "Hydrologic and
hydraulic engineering analysis" is an analysis performed by a professional
engineer, registered in the State of Ohio, in accordance with standard
engineering practices as accepted by FEMA, used to determine flood elevations
and/or floodway boundaries.
   (u)   Letter of map change (LOMC). "Letter of map change" is an official
FEMA determination, by letter, to amend or revise effective flood insurance
rate maps, flood boundary and floodway maps, and flood insurance studies. LOMCs
are broken down into the following categories:
      (1)   Letter of map amendment (LOMA).  A revision based on technical data
showing that a property was incorrectly included in a designated special flood
hazard area. A LOMA amends the current effective flood insurance rate map and
establishes that a specific property is not located in a special flood hazard
area.
      (2)   Letter of map revision (LOMR).  A revision based on technical data
that, usually due to manmade changes, shows changes to flood zones, flood
elevations, floodplain and floodway delineations, and planimetric features. One
common type of LOMR, a LOMR-F, is a determination concerning whether a
structure or parcel has been elevated by fill above the base flood elevation
and is, therefore, excluded from the special flood hazard area.
      (3)   Conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR).  A formal review and
comment by FEMA as to whether a proposed project complies with the minimum
National Flood Insurance Program floodplain management criteria. A CLOMR does
not amend or revise effective flood insurance rate maps, flood boundary and
floodway maps, or flood insurance studies.
   (v)   Lowest floor. "Lowest floor" means the lowest floor of the lowest
enclosed area (including basement) of a structure. This definition excludes an
"enclosure below the lowest floor" which is an unfinished or flood resistant
enclosure usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, in
an area other than a basement area, provided that such enclosure is built in
accordance with the applicable design requirements specified in these
regulations for enclosures below the lowest floor.
   (w)   Manufactured home. "Manufactured home" means a structure,
transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis
and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected
to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a
recreational vehicle.  For the purposes of these regulations, a manufactured
home includes manufactured homes and mobile homes as defined in Ohio R.C.
Chapter 3733.
   (x)   Manufactured home park. "Manufactured home park", as specified in the
Ohio Administrative Code 3701-27-01, means any tract of land upon which three
or more manufactured homes, used for habitation are parked, either free of
charge or for revenue purposes, and includes any roadway, building, structure,
vehicle, or enclosure used or intended for use as part of the facilities of the
park. A tract of land that is subdivided and the individual lots are not for
rent or rented, but are for sale or sold for the purpose of installation of
manufactured homes on the lots, is not a manufactured home park, even though
three or more manufactured homes are parked thereon, if the roadways are
dedicated to the local government authority.
   (y)   National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP). "National Flood Insurance
Program (NFIP)" is a federal program enabling property owners in participating
communities to purchase insurance protection against losses from flooding. This
insurance is designed to provide an insurance alternative to disaster
assistance to meet the escalating costs of repairing damage to buildings and
their contents caused by floods. Participation in the NFIP is based on an
agreement between local communities and the federal government that states if a
community will adopt and enforce floodplain management regulations to reduce
future flood risks to all development in special flood hazard areas, the
federal government will make flood insurance available within the community as
a financial protection against flood loss.
   (z)   New construction. "New construction" means structures for which the
"start of construction" commenced on or after the initial effective date of the
city's Flood Insurance Rate Map, February 1, 1980, and includes any subsequent
improvements to such structures.
   (aa)   Person. "Person" includes any individual or group of individuals,
corporation, partnership, association, or any other entity, including state and
local governments and agencies. An agency is further defined in Ohio R.C.
111.15 as any governmental entity of the state and includes, but is not limited
to, any board, department, division, commission, bureau, society, council,
institution, state college or university, community college district, technical
college district, or state community college. "Agency" does not include the
general assembly, the controlling board, the adjutant general's department, or
any court.
   (bb)   Recreational vehicle. "Recreational vehicle" means a vehicle which
is:
      (1)   Built on a single chassis;
      (2)   Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projection;
      (3)   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light
duty truck; and
      (4)   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
   (cc)   Registered professional architect. "Registered professional
architect" is a person registered to engage in the practice of architecture
under the provisions of Ohio R.C. 4703.01 to 4703.19.
   (dd)   Registered professional engineer. "Registered professional engineer"
is a person registered as a professional engineer under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4733.
   (ee)   Registered professional surveyor. "Registered professional surveyor"
is a person registered as a professional surveyor under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4733.
   (ff)   Special flood hazard area. Also known as "areas of special flood
hazard", it is the land in the floodplain subject to a one percent or greater
chance of flooding in any given year. Special flood hazard areas are designated
by the Federal Emergency Management Agency on flood insurance rate maps, flood
insurance studies, flood boundary and floodway maps and flood hazard boundary
maps as Zones A, AE, AH, AO, A1-30, and A99. Special flood hazard areas may
also refer to areas that are flood prone and designated from other federal,
state or local sources of data including but not limited to historical flood
information reflecting high water marks, previous flood inundation areas, and
flood prone soils associated with a watercourse.
   (gg)   Start of construction. "Start of construction" means the date the
building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair,
reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was
within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first
placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the
pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of
columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a
manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land
preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the
installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a
basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms;
nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings,
such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main
structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction
means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural
part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external
dimensions of a building.
   (hh)   Structure. "Structure" means a walled and roofed building,
manufactured home, or gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above
ground.
   (ii)   Substantial damage. "Substantial damage" means damage of any origin
sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its
before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value
of the structure before the damage occurred.
   (jj)   Substantial improvement. "Substantial improvement" means any series
of one or more incremental improvements within a ten-year period including:
reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure,
the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the
structure before the start of construction of the improvement(s). This term
includes structures, which have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the
actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include:
      (1)   Any improvement to a structure that is considered new construction;
      (2)   Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications
which have been identified prior to the application for a development permit by
the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to
assure safe living conditions; or
      (3)   Any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the
alteration would not preclude the structure's continued designation as a
historic structure.
   (kk)   Variance. "Variance" means a grant of relief from the standards of
these regulations consistent with the variance conditions herein.
   (ll)   Violation. "Violation" means the failure of a structure or other
development to be fully compliant with these regulations.
(Ord. 09-O-55, passed 12-21-2009)
§ 1446.03  ADMINISTRATION.
   (a)   Designation of the Floodplain Administrator.  The City Engineer is
hereby appointed to administer and implement these regulations and is referred
to herein as the Floodplain Administrator.
   (b)   Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator.  The
duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator shall include but
are not limited to:
      (1)   Evaluate applications for permits to develop in special flood
hazard areas.
      (2)   Interpret floodplain boundaries and provide flood hazard and flood
protection elevation information.
      (3)   Issue permits to develop in special flood hazard areas when the
provisions of these regulations have been met, or refuse to issue the same in
the event of noncompliance.
      (4)   Inspect buildings and lands to determine whether any violations of
these regulations have been committed.
      (5)   Make and permanently keep all records for public inspection
necessary for the administration of these regulations including flood insurance
rate maps, letters of map amendment and revision, records of issuance and
denial of permits to develop in special flood hazard areas, determinations of
whether development is in or out of special flood hazard areas for the purpose
of issuing floodplain development permits, elevation certificates, variances,
and records of enforcement actions taken for violations of these regulations.
      (6)   Enforce the provisions of these regulations.
      (7)   Provide information, testimony, or other evidence as needed during
variance hearings.
      (8)   Coordinate map maintenance activities and FEMA follow-up.
      (9)   Conduct substantial damage determinations to determine whether
existing structures, damaged from any source and in special flood hazard areas
identified by FEMA, must meet the development standards of these regulations.
   (c)   Floodplain development permits.  It shall be unlawful for any person
to begin construction or other development activity including but not limited
to filling; grading; construction; alteration, remodeling, or expanding any
structure; or alteration of any watercourse wholly within, partially within or
in contact with any identified special flood hazard area, as established in §
1446.01(f), until a floodplain development permit is obtained from the
Floodplain Administrator. Such floodplain development permit shall show that
the proposed development activity is in conformity with the provisions of these
regulations. No such permit shall be issued by the Floodplain Administrator
until the requirements of these regulations have been met.
   (d)   Application required.  An application for a floodplain development
permit shall be required for all development activities located wholly within,
partially within, or in contact with an identified special flood hazard area.
Such application shall be made by the owner of the property or his or her
authorized agent, herein referred to as the applicant, prior to the actual
commencement of such construction on a form furnished for that purpose. Where
it is unclear whether a development site is in a special flood hazard area, the
Floodplain Administrator may require an application for a floodplain
development permit to determine the development's location. Such applications
shall include, but not be limited to:
      (1)   Site plans drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions,
and topography of the area in question; the location of existing or proposed
structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities, and the location
of the foregoing.
      (2)   Elevation of the existing, natural ground where structures are
proposed.
      (3)   Elevation of the lowest floor, including basement, of all proposed
structures.
      (4)   Such other material and information as may be requested by the
Floodplain Administrator to determine conformance with, and provide enforcement
of these regulations.
      (5)   Technical analyses conducted by the appropriate design professional
registered in the State of Ohio and submitted with an application for a
floodplain development permit when applicable:
         A.   Floodproofing certification for non-residential floodproofed
structure as required in §
1446.04(e).
         B.   Certification that fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor of
a structure not meeting the design requirements of §
1446.04(d)(5) are designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces.
         C.   Description of any watercourse alteration or relocation that the
flood carrying capacity of the watercourse will not be diminished, and
maintenance assurances as required in §
1446.04(i)(3).
         D.   A hydrologic and hydraulic analysis demonstrating that the
cumulative effect of proposed development, when combined with all other
existing and anticipated development will not increase the water surface
elevation of the base flood by more than one-half foot in special flood hazard
areas where the Federal Emergency Management Agency has provided base flood
elevations but no floodway as required by §
1446.04(i)(2).
         E.   A hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analysis showing impact of
any development on flood heights in an identified floodway as required by §
1446.04(i)(1).
         F.   Generation of base flood elevation(s) for subdivision and large-
scale developments as required by § 1446.04(c).
      (6)   Floodplain development permit application and review fees.
         A.   In addition to any other required permit fee, applicant shall pay
a fee as stated in the Fee Schedule in §
236.07 of the City of Kirtland Codified Ordinances for a floodplain development
permit.
         B.   In addition to any other required review fees, applicant shall
pay the fees as stated in the Fee Schedule in §
236.07 of the City of Kirtland Codified Ordinances for review of a floodplain
development application. If the deposited review fees are insufficient to cover
the city's expenses for review consultants, the Floodplain Administrator shall
notify the applicant in writing and review will be suspended until additional
review monies are deposited with the city. Any unused review deposits will be
returned to the applicant.
         C.   In addition to any required permit and review fees, applicant
shall pay an application fee as stated in the Fee Schedule in §
236.07 of the City of Kirtland Codified Ordinances with any request for an
appeal or variance associated with floodplain development.
   (e)   Review and approval of a floodplain development permit application.
      (1)   Review.
         A.   After receipt of a complete application, the Floodplain
Administrator shall review the application to ensure that the standards of
these regulations have been met. No floodplain development permit application
shall be reviewed until all information required in subsection (d) of this
section has been received by the Floodplain Administrator.
         B.   The Floodplain Administrator shall review all floodplain
development permit applications to assure that all necessary permits have been
received from those federal, state or local governmental agencies from which
prior approval is required. The applicant shall be responsible for obtaining
such permits as required including permits issued by the U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers under Section 10 of the Rivers and Harbors Act and Section 404 of the
Clean Water Act, and the Ohio Environmental Protection Agency under Section 401
of the Clean Water Act.
      (2)   Approval within 30 days after the receipt of a complete
application, the Floodplain Administrator shall either approve or disapprove
the application. If an application is approved, a floodplain development permit
shall be issued. All floodplain development permits shall be conditional upon
the commencement of work within one year. A floodplain development permit shall
expire one year after issuance unless the permitted activity has been
substantially begun and is thereafter pursued to completion.
   (f)   Inspections.  The Floodplain Administrator shall make periodic
inspections at appropriate times throughout the period of construction in order
to monitor compliance with permit conditions.
   (g)   Post-construction certifications required.  The following as-built
certifications are required after a floodplain development permit has been
issued:
      (1)   For new or substantially improved residential structures, or
nonresidential structures that have been elevated, the applicant shall have a
Federal Emergency Management Agency Elevation Certificate completed by a
registered surveyor to record as-built elevation data. For elevated structures
in Zone A and Zone AO areas without a base flood elevation, the elevation
certificate may be completed by the property owner or owner's representative.
      (2)   For all development activities subject to the standards of
subsection (j)(1) of this section, a letter of map revision.
   (h)   Revoking a floodplain development permit.  A floodplain development
permit shall be revocable, if among other things, the actual development
activity does not conform to the terms of the application and permit granted
thereon. In the event of the revocation of a permit, an appeal may be taken to
the Board of Zoning Appeals in accordance with §
1446.05.
   (i)   Exemption from filing a development permit.  An application for a
floodplain development permit shall not be required for:
      (1)   Maintenance work such as roofing, painting, and basement sealing,
or for small nonstructural development activities (except for filling and
grading) valued at less than five thousand dollars ($5,000).
      (2)   Development activities in an existing or proposed manufactured home
park that are under the authority of the Ohio Department of Health and subject
to the flood damage reduction provisions of the Ohio Administrative Code
Section 3701.
      (3)   Major utility facilities permitted by the Ohio Power Siting Board
under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4906.
      (4)   Hazardous waste disposal facilities permitted by the Hazardous
Waste Siting Board under Ohio R.C. Chapter 3734.
      (5)   Development activities undertaken by a federal agency and which are
subject to Federal Executive Order 11988 - Floodplain Management.
         Any proposed action exempt from filing for a floodplain development
permit is also exempt from the standards of these regulations.
   (j)   Map maintenance activities.  To meet National Flood Insurance Program
minimum requirements to have flood data reviewed and approved by FEMA, and to
ensure that the city's flood maps, studies and other data identified in §
1446.01(f) accurately represent flooding conditions so appropriate floodplain
management criteria are based on current data, the following map maintenance
activities are identified:
      (1)   Requirement to submit new technical data.
         A.   For all development proposals that impact floodway delineations
or base flood elevations, the community shall ensure that technical data
reflecting such changes be submitted to FEMA within six months of the date such
information becomes available. These development proposals include:
            1.   Floodway encroachments that increase or decrease base flood
elevations or alter floodway boundaries;
            2.   Fill sites to be used for the placement of proposed structures
where the applicant desires to remove the site from the special flood hazard
area;
            3.   Alteration of watercourses that result in a relocation or
elimination of the special flood hazard area, including the placement of
culverts; and
            4.   Subdivision or large scale development proposals requiring the
establishment of base flood elevations in accordance with §
1446.04(c).
         B.   It is the responsibility of the applicant to have technical data,
required in accordance with subsection (j)(1) of this section, prepared in a
format required for a conditional letter of map revision or letter of map
revision, and submitted to FEMA. Submittal and processing fees for these map
revisions shall be the responsibility of the applicant.
         C.   The Floodplain Administrator shall require a conditional letter
of map revision prior to the issuance of a floodplain development permit for:
            1.   Proposed floodway encroachments that increase the base flood
elevation; and
            2.   Proposed development which increases the base flood elevation
by more than one- half foot in areas where FEMA has provided base flood
elevations but no floodway.
         D.   Floodplain development permits issued by the Floodplain
Administrator shall be conditioned upon the applicant obtaining a letter of map
revision from FEMA for any development proposal subject to subsection (j)(1)A.
of this section.
      (2)   Right to submit new technical data.  The Floodplain Administrator
may request changes to any of the information shown on an effective map that
does not impact floodplain or floodway delineations or base flood elevations,
such as labeling or planimetric details. Such a submission shall include
appropriate supporting documentation made in writing by the Mayor, and may be
submitted at any time.
      (3)   Annexation/detachment.  Upon occurrence, the Floodplain
Administrator shall notify FEMA in writing whenever the boundaries of the city
have been modified by annexation or the community has assumed authority over an
area, or no longer has authority to adopt and enforce floodplain management
regulations for a particular area. In order that the city flood insurance rate
map accurately represent the city boundaries, include within such notification
a copy of a map of the city suitable for reproduction, clearly showing the new
corporate limits or the new area for which the city has assumed or relinquished
floodplain management regulatory authority.
   (k)   Data use and flood map interpretation.  The following guidelines shall
apply to the use and interpretation of maps and other data showing areas of
special flood hazard:
      (1)   In areas where FEMA has not identified special flood hazard areas,
or in FEMA identified special flood hazard areas where base flood elevation and
floodway data have not been identified, the Floodplain Administrator shall
review and reasonably utilize any other flood hazard data available from a
federal, state, or other source.
      (2)   Base flood elevations and floodway boundaries produced on FEMA
flood maps and studies shall take precedence over base flood elevations and
floodway boundaries by any other source that reflect a reduced floodway width
and/or lower base flood elevations. Other sources of data, showing increased
base flood elevations and/or larger floodway areas than are shown on FEMA flood
maps and studies, shall be reasonably used by the Floodplain Administrator.
      (3)   When preliminary flood insurance rate maps and/or flood insurance
study have been provided by FEMA:
         A.   Upon the issuance of a letter of final determination by the FEMA,
the preliminary flood hazard data shall be used and replace all previously
existing flood hazard data provided from FEMA for the purposes of administering
these regulations.
         B.   Prior to the issuance of a letter of final determination by FEMA,
the use of preliminary flood hazard data shall only be required where no base
flood elevations and/or floodway areas exist or where the preliminary base
flood elevations or floodway area exceed the base flood elevations and/or
floodway widths in existing flood hazard data provided from FEMA. Such
preliminary data may be subject to change and/or appeal to FEMA.
      (4)   The Floodplain Administrator shall make interpretations, where
needed, as to the exact location of the flood boundaries and areas of special
flood hazard. A person contesting the determination of the location of the
boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation
as provided in §
1446.05, Appeals and Variances.
      (5)   Where a map boundary showing an area of special flood hazard and
field elevations disagree, the base flood elevations or flood protection
elevations (as found on an elevation profile, floodway data table, established
high water marks, etc.) shall prevail.
   (l)   Substantial damage determinations.  Damages to structures may result
from a variety of causes including flood, tornado, wind, heavy snow, fire, etc.
After such a damage event, the Floodplain Administrator shall:
      (1)   Determine whether damaged structures are located in special flood
hazard areas;
      (2)   Conduct substantial damage determinations for damaged structures
located in special flood hazard areas; and
      (3)   Make reasonable attempt to notify owners of substantially damaged
structures of the need to obtain a floodplain development permit prior to
repair, rehabilitation, or reconstruction.
      Additionally, the Floodplain Administrator may implement other measures
to assist with the substantial damage determination and subsequent repair
process. These measures include issuing press releases, public service
announcements, and other public information materials related to the floodplain
development permits and repair of damaged structures; coordinating with other
federal, state, and local agencies to assist with substantial damage
determinations; providing owners of damaged structures materials and other
information related to the proper repair of damaged structures in special flood
hazard areas; and assist owners of substantially damaged structures with
increased cost of compliance insurance claims.
(Ord. 09-O-55, passed 12-21-2009; Am. Ord. 17-O-20, passed 7-3-2017)
§ 1446.04  USE AND DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION.
   The following use and development standards apply to development wholly
within, partially within, or in contact with any special flood hazard area as
established in §
1446.01(f) or §
1446.03(k)(1):
   (a)   Use regulations.
      (1)   Permitted uses.  All uses not otherwise prohibited in this section
or any other applicable land use regulation adopted by the city are allowed
provided they meet the provisions of these regulations.
      (2)   Prohibited uses.
         A.   Private water supply systems in all special flood hazard areas
identified by FEMA, permitted under Ohio R.C. Chapter 3701.
         B.   Infectious waste treatment facilities in all special flood hazard
areas, permitted under Ohio R.C. Chapter 3734.
   (b)   Water and wastewater systems.  The following standards apply to all
water supply, sanitary sewerage and waste disposal systems not otherwise
regulated by the Ohio Revised Code:
      (1)   All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems;
      (2)   New and replacement sanitary sewerage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and
discharge from the systems into flood waters; and,
      (3)   On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment
to or contamination from them during flooding.
   (c)   Subdivisions and large developments.
      (1)   All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to
minimize flood damage and are subject to all applicable standards in these
regulations;
      (2)   All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and
constructed to minimize flood damage;
      (3)   All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to
reduce exposure to flood damage; and
      (4)   In all areas of special flood hazard where base flood elevation
data are not available, the applicant shall provide a hydrologic and hydraulic
engineering analysis that generates base flood elevations for all subdivision
proposals and other proposed developments containing at least 50 lots or five
acres, whichever is less.
      (5)   The applicant shall meet the requirement to submit technical data
to FEMA in §
1446.03(j)(l)A.4. when a hydrologic and hydraulic analysis is completed that
generates base flood elevations as required by subsection (c)(4) of this
section.
   (d)   Residential structures.
      (1)   New construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to
prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure resulting
from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy.
Where a structure, including its foundation members, is elevated on fill to or
above the base flood elevation, the requirements for anchoring and construction
materials resistant to flood damage are satisfied.
      (2)   New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed
with methods and materials resistant to flood damage.
      (3)   New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed
with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment
and other service facilities that are designed and/or elevated so as to prevent
water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of
flooding.
      (4)   New construction and substantial improvement of any residential
structure, including manufactured homes, shall have the lowest floor, including
basement, elevated to or above the flood protection elevation. Where flood
protection elevation data are not available the structure shall have the lowest
floor, including basement, elevated at least two feet above the highest
adjacent natural grade. Support structures and other foundation members shall
be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect as designed in
accordance with ASCE 24, Flood Resistant Design and Construction.
      (5)   New construction and substantial improvements, including
manufactured homes, that do not have basements and that are elevated to the
flood protection elevation using pilings, columns, posts, or solid foundation
perimeter walls with openings sufficient to allow unimpeded movement of flood
waters may have an enclosure below the lowest floor provided the enclosure
meets the following standards:
         A.   Be used only for the parking of vehicles, building access, or
storage;
         B.   Be designed and certified by a registered professional engineer
or architect to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior
walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters; or
         C.   Have a minimum of two openings on different walls having a total
net area not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area,
and the bottom of all such openings being no higher than one foot above grade.
The openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other coverings or
devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
      (6)   Manufactured homes shall be affixed to a permanent foundation and
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure
resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of
buoyancy. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of
over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors.
      (7)   Repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a
determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the
structure's continued designation as a historic structure and is the minimum
necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure, shall
be exempt from the development standards of subsection (d) of this section.
   (e)   Nonresidential structures.
      (1)   New construction and substantial improvement of any commercial,
industrial or other nonresidential structure shall meet the requirements of
subsections (d)(1) through (d)(3) and (d)(5) through (d)(7) of this section.
      (2)   New construction and substantial improvement of any commercial,
industrial or other non-residential structure shall either have the lowest
floor, including basement, elevated to or above the level of the flood
protection elevation; or, together with attendant utility and sanitary
facilities, shall meet all of the following standards:
         A.   Be dry floodproofed so that the structure is watertight with
walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water to the level of the
flood protection elevation;
         B.   Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and,
         C.   Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect,
through the use of a Federal Emergency Management Agency Floodproofing
Certificate, that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with
subsections (e)(2)A. and B.
   (f)   Accessory structures.  Relief to the elevation or dry floodproofing
standards may be granted for accessory structures containing no more than 600
square feet. Such structures must meet the following standards:
      (1)   They shall not be used for human habitation;
      (2)   They shall be constructed of flood resistant materials;
      (3)   They shall be constructed and placed on the lot to offer the
minimum resistance to the flow of floodwaters;
      (4)   They shall be firmly anchored to prevent flotation;
      (5)   Service facilities such as electrical and heating equipment shall
be elevated or floodproofed to or above the level of the flood protection
elevation; and
      (6)   They shall meet the opening requirements of subsection (d)(5)C.
   (g)   Recreational vehicles.  Recreational vehicles must meet at least one
of the following standards:
      (1)   They shall not be located on sites in special flood hazard areas
for more than 180 days, or
      (2)   They must be fully licensed and ready for highway use, or
      (3)   They must meet all standards of subsection (d) of this section.
   (h)   Above ground gas or liquid storage tanks.  All above ground gas or
liquid storage tanks shall be anchored to prevent flotation or lateral movement
resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads.
   (i)   Assurance of flood carrying capacity.  Pursuant to the purpose and
methods of reducing flood damage stated in these regulations, the following
additional standards are adopted to assure that the reduction of the flood
carrying capacity of watercourses is minimized:
      (1)   Development in floodways.
         A.   In floodway areas, development shall cause no increase in flood
levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. Prior to issuance of
a floodplain development permit, the applicant must submit a hydrologic and
hydraulic analysis, conducted by a registered professional engineer,
demonstrating that the proposed development would not result in any increase in
the base flood elevation; or
         B.   Development in floodway areas causing increases in the base flood
elevation may be permitted provided all of the following are completed by the
applicant:
            1.   Meet the requirements to submit technical data in §
1446.03(j)(l);
            2.   An evaluation of alternatives, which would not result in
increased base flood elevations and an explanation why these alternatives are
not feasible;
            3.   Certification that no structures are located in areas that
would be impacted by the increased base flood elevation;
            4.   Documentation of individual legal notices to all impacted
property owners within and outside the community, explaining the impact of the
proposed action on their property; and
            5.   Concurrence of the Mayor and the Chief Executive Officer of
any other communities impacted by the proposed actions.
      (2)   Development in riverine areas with base flood elevations but no
floodways.
         A.   In riverine special flood hazard areas identified by FEMA where
base flood elevation data are provided but no floodways have been designated,
the cumulative effect of any proposed development, when combined with all other
existing and anticipated development, shall not increase the base flood
elevation more than one-half foot at any point. Prior to issuance of a
floodplain development permit, the applicant must submit a hydrologic and
hydraulic analysis, conducted by a registered professional engineer,
demonstrating that this standard has been met; or,
         B.   Development in riverine special flood hazard areas identified by
FEMA where base flood elevation data are provided but no floodways have been
designated causing more than one-half foot increase in the base flood elevation
may be permitted provided all of the following are completed by the applicant:
            1.   An evaluation of alternatives which would result in an
increase of one-half foot or less of the base flood elevation and an
explanation why these alternatives are not feasible;
            2.   Completion of subsections (i)(1)B., items 1., 3., 4. and 5. of
this section.
      (3)   Alterations of a watercourse.  For the purpose of these
regulations, a watercourse is altered when any change occurs within its banks.
The extent of the banks shall be established by a field determination of the
"bankfull stage." The field determination of "bankfull stage" shall be based on
methods presented in Chapter 7 of the USDA Forest Service General Technical
Report RM-245, Stream Channel Reference Sites: An Illustrated Guide to Field
Technique or other applicable publication available from a federal, state, or
other authoritative source. For all proposed developments that alter a
watercourse, the following standards apply:
         A.   The bankfull flood carrying capacity of the altered or relocated
portion of the watercourse shall not be diminished. Prior to the issuance of a
floodplain development permit, the applicant must submit a description of the
extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of the
proposed development, and certification by a registered professional engineer
that the bankfull flood carrying capacity of the watercourse will not be
diminished.
         B.   Adjacent communities, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, and the
Ohio Department of Natural Resources, Division of Water, must be notified prior
to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse.  Evidence of such
notification must be submitted to the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
         C.   The applicant shall be responsible for providing the necessary
maintenance for the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse so that
the flood carrying capacity will not be diminished. The Floodplain
Administrator may require the permit holder to enter into an agreement with the
city specifying the maintenance responsibilities. If an agreement is required,
it shall be made a condition of the floodplain development permit.
         D.   The applicant shall meet the requirements to submit technical
data in §
1446.03(j)(1)A.3. when an alteration of a watercourse results in the relocation
or elimination of the special flood hazard area, including the placement of
culverts.
   (j)   Fill.  The following standards apply to all fill activities in special
flood hazard areas:
      (1)   Fill sites, upon which structures will be constructed or placed,
must be compacted to 95 percent of the maximum density obtainable with the
Standard Proctor Test method or an acceptable equivalent method.
      (2)   Fill slopes shall not be steeper than one foot vertical to three
feet horizontal.
      (3)   Adequate protection against erosion and scour is provided for fill
slopes. When expected velocities during the occurrence of the base flood of
five feet per second armoring with stone or rock protection shall be provided.
When expected velocities during the base flood are five feet per second or less
protection shall be provided by covering them with vegetative cover.
      (4)   Fill shall be composed of clean granular or earthen material.
(Ord. 09-O-55, passed 12-21-2009)
§ 1446.05  APPEALS AND VARIANCES.
   (a)   Board of Zoning Appeals.
      (1)   The Board of Zoning Appeals, as established by the city, shall hear
and decide appeals and requests for variances from the requirements of this
chapter.
      (2)   Meetings of the Board of Zoning Appeals shall be held as needed and
shall be held at the call of the Chairperson, or in his or her absence, the
Acting Chairperson. All meetings of the Board of Zoning Appeals shall be open
to the public except that the Board may deliberate in executive sessions as
part of quasi-judicial hearings in accordance with law. The Board of Zoning
Appeals shall keep minutes of its proceedings showing the vote of each member
upon each question and shall keep records of all official actions. Records of
the Board of Zoning Appeals shall be kept and filed in the Zoning Office, City
of Kirtland, 9301 Chillicothe Road, Kirtland, Ohio 44094.
   (b)   Powers and duties.
      (1)   The Board of Zoning Appeals shall hear and decide appeals where it
is alleged there is an error in any order, requirement, decision or
determination made by the Floodplain Administrator in the administration or
enforcement of these regulations.
      (2)   Authorize variances in accordance with subsection (d) of this
section.
   (c)   Appeals.  Any person affected by any notice and order, or other
official action of the Floodplain Administrator may request and shall be
granted a hearing on the matter before the Board of Zoning Appeals provided
that such person shall file, within 20 days of the date of such notice and
order, or other official action, a brief statement of the grounds for such
hearing or for the mitigation of any item appearing on any order of the
Floodplain Administrator's decision. Such appeal shall be in writing, signed by
the applicant, and be filed with the Floodplain Administrator. Upon receipt of
the appeal, the Floodplain Administrator shall transmit said notice and all
pertinent information on which the Floodplain Administrator's decision was made
to the Board of Zoning Appeals.
      Upon receipt of the notice of appeal, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall
fix a reasonable time for the appeal, give notice in writing to parties in
interest, and decide the appeal within a reasonable time after it is submitted.
   (d)   Variances.  Any person believing that the use and development
standards of these regulations would result in unnecessary hardship may file an
application for a variance. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall have the power to
authorize, in specific cases, such variances from the standards of these
regulations, not inconsistent with federal regulations, as will not be contrary
to the public interest where, owning to special conditions of the lot or
parcel, a literal enforcement of the provisions of these regulations would
result in unnecessary hardship.
      (1)   Application for a variance.
         A.   Any owner, or agent thereof, of property for which a variance is
sought shall make an application for a variance by filing it with the
Floodplain Administrator, who upon receipt of the variance shall transmit it to
the Board of Zoning Appeals.
         B.   Such application at a minimum shall contain the following
information:  Name, address, and telephone number of the applicant; legal
description of the property; parcel map; description of the existing use;
description of the proposed use; location of the floodplain; description of the
variance sought; and reason for the variance request.
      (2)   Notice for public hearing.  The Board of Zoning Appeals shall
schedule and hold a public hearing within 45 days after the receipt of an
application for a variance from the Floodplain Administrator. Prior to the
hearing, a notice of such hearing shall be given in one or more newspapers of
general circulation in the community at least ten days before the date of the
hearing.
      (3)   Public hearing.  At such hearing the applicant shall present such
statements and evidence as the Board of Zoning Appeals requires. In considering
such variance applications, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall consider and make
findings of fact on all evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified
in other sections of these regulations and the following factors:
         A.   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others.
         B.   The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion
damage.
         C.   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner.
         D.   The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility
to the community.
         E.   The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use
that are not subject to flooding or erosion damage.
         F.   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable.
         G.   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development.
         H.   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan
and floodplain management program for that area.
         I.   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles.
         J.   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and
sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site.
         K.   The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, and streets and
bridges.
      (4)   Variances shall only be issued upon:
         A.   A showing of good and sufficient cause.
         B.   A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship due to the physical characteristics of the property.
Increased cost or inconvenience of meeting the requirements of these
regulations does not constitute an exceptional hardship to the applicant.
         C.   A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights beyond that which is allowed in these regulations;
additional threats to public safety; extraordinary public expense, nuisances,
fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws.
         D.   A determination that the structure or other development is
protected by methods to minimize flood damages.
         E.   A determination that the variance is the minimum necessary,
considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
      Upon consideration of the above factors and the purposes of these
regulations, the Board of Zoning Appeals may attach such conditions to the
granting of variances, as it deems necessary to further the purposes of these
regulations.
      (5)   Other conditions for variances.
         A.   Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if
any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
         B.   Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one acre or less in size
contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below
the base flood level, providing items in subsections (d)(3)A. to K. of this
section have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond one acre,
the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases.
         C.   Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given
written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest
floor elevation below the base flood elevation and the cost of flood insurance
will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest
floor elevation.
   (e)   Procedure at hearings.
      (1)   All testimony shall be given under oath.
      (2)   A complete record of the proceedings shall be kept, except
confidential deliberations of the Board, but including all documents presented
and a verbatim record of the testimony of all witnesses.
      (3)   The applicant shall proceed first to present evidence and testimony
in support of the appeal or variance.
      (4)   The administrator may present evidence or testimony in opposition
to the appeal or variance.
      (5)   All witnesses shall be subject to cross-examination by the adverse
party or their counsel.
      (6)   Evidence that is not admitted may be proffered and shall become
part of the record for appeal.
      (7)   The Board shall issue subpoenas upon written request for the
attendance of witnesses. A reasonable deposit to cover the cost of issuance and
service shall be collected in advance.
      (8)   The Board shall prepare conclusions of fact supporting its
decision. The decision may be announced at the conclusion of the hearing and
thereafter issued in writing or the decision may be issued in writing.
   (f)   Appeal to the court.  Those aggrieved by the decision of the Board of
Zoning Appeals may appeal such decision to the Lake County Court of Common
Pleas, as provided in Ohio R.C. Chapter 2506.
(Ord. 09-O-55, passed 12-21-2009)
§ 1446.06  ENFORCEMENT.
   (a)   Compliance required.
      (1)   No structure or land shall hereafter be located, erected,
constructed, reconstructed, repaired, extended, converted, enlarged or altered
without full compliance with the terms of these regulations and all other
applicable regulations which apply to uses within the jurisdiction of these
regulations, unless specifically exempted from filing for a development permit
as stated in §
1446.03(i).
      (2)   Failure to obtain a floodplain development permit shall be a
violation of these regulations and shall be punishable in accordance with
subsection (c) of this section.
      (3)   Floodplain development permits issued on the basis of plans and
applications approved by the Floodplain Administrator authorize only the use,
and arrangement, set forth in such approved plans and applications or
amendments thereto. Use, arrangement, or construction contrary to that
authorized shall be deemed a violation of these regulations and punishable in
accordance with subsection (c) of this section.
   (b)   Notice of violation.  Whenever the Floodplain Administrator determines
that there has been a violation of any provision of these regulations, he or
she shall give notice of such violation to the person responsible therefore and
order compliance with these regulations as hereinafter provided. Such notice
and order shall:
      (1)   Be put in writing on an appropriate form;
      (2)   Include a list of violations, referring to the section or sections
of these regulations that have been violated, and order remedial action, which,
if taken, will effect compliance with the provisions of these regulations;
      (3)   Specify a reasonable time for performance;
      (4)   Advise the owner, operator, or occupant of the right to appeal;
      (5)   Be served on the owner, occupant, or agent in person. However, this
notice and order shall be deemed to be properly served upon the owner,
occupant, or agent if a copy thereof is sent by registered or certified mail to
the person's last known mailing address, residence, or place of business, and/
or a copy is posted in a conspicuous place in or on the dwelling affected.
   (c)   Violations and penalties.  Violation of the provisions of these
regulations or failure to comply with any of its requirements shall be deemed
to be a strict liability offense, and shall constitute a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree. Any person who violates these regulations or fails to comply
with any of its requirements shall upon conviction thereof be fined two hundred
fifty dollars ($250.00), as described in §
1262.99(a) as provided by the laws of the city.  Each day such violation
continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained
shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to
prevent or remedy any violation. The city shall prosecute any violation of
these regulations in accordance with the penalties stated herein.
(Ord. 09-O-55, passed 12-21-2009)
CHAPTER 1448:  MOVING OF BUILDINGS
Section
1448.01   Permit required; application.
1448.02   Permit issuance; fees.
1448.03   Bond.
1448.04   Liability insurance.
1448.05   Warning signs and lights; barricades; traffic direction.
1448.06   Interference with wires, cables and other property.
1448.07   Action by city to complete move.
1448.99   Penalty.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Barricades and warning lights - see GEN. OFF.
660.09
   Power to license house movers - see Ohio R.C. 715.27
   Sidewalk obstructions; damage or injury - see GEN. OFF.
660.10
   Street obstructions - see TRAF.
412.01
§ 1448.01  PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATION.
   No person shall move a building or structure on, through or over a street,
alley, sidewalk or other public place in the city without first having obtained
a permit therefor from the Zoning Inspector. Application for such a permit
shall be in writing to the Inspector and shall set forth the proposed route and
the number of days it is intended that the building will occupy a portion of a
street, alley, sidewalk or other place.
(Ord. 74-O-108, passed 11-18-1974)
§ 1448.02  PERMIT ISSUANCE; FEES.
   (a)   A permit shall be issued by the Zoning Inspector only upon:
      (1)   Compliance with all city and county zoning, building and health
codes and requirements if the building moves, originates or terminates in the
city;
      (2)   Approval of the intended route by the Director of Public Service
and the Director of Public Safety;
      (3)   Payment to the Inspector of the permit fee; and
      (4)   Compliance with all other provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 74-O-108, passed 11-18-1974)
   (b)   The fees, as stated in the Fee Schedule in §
236.07 of the City of Kirtland Codified Ordinances, are in addition to any
other required permit fee for zoning, alterations, repairs or new construction,
or any similar fee, and in addition to charges for police supervision.
(Ord. 17-O-20, passed 7-3-2017)
§ 1448.03  BOND.
   Every person applying for a permit under this chapter shall submit with his
or her application a cash bond, or a bond with a lawful corporate surety, in
the amount as stated in the Fee Schedule in §
236.07 of the City of Kirtland Codified Ordinances, conditioned upon his or her
compliance with this chapter and agreeing to pay for any damage incurred to a
street, alley, sidewalk or public place caused by the moving of a building or
structure.
(Ord. 74-O-108, passed 11-18-1974; Am. Ord. 17-O-20, passed 7-3-2017)
§ 1448.04  LIABILITY INSURANCE.
   Every person applying for a permit under this chapter shall file a
certificate of insurance, with a company acceptable to the Director of Public
Service, with limits of at least five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00)
single limit bodily injury liability and five hundred thousand dollars
($500,000.00) property damage liability, to insure the permittee and the mover,
and naming the city as an additional insured, with respect to all operations
involved in the moving of the building or structure. The permittee shall also
save and hold the city harmless from any claim which may be made against it
arising out of such moving operations. Limits of liability coverage required
may be increased by the Director of Public Service if he or she deems that the
circumstances involved in a particular move warrant greater coverage. The
increase shall be to an amount which, in the opinion of the Director of Law, is
reasonable under the circumstances.
(Ord. 74-O-108, passed 11-18-1974)
§ 1448.05  WARNING SIGNS AND LIGHTS; BARRICADES; TRAFFIC DIRECTION.
   Whenever a street or alley is blocked by a building or structure which is
being moved, warnings to that effect shall be placed by direction of the Police
Division to prevent vehicles and persons from entering that portion of the
street so blocked. A person moving a building or structure over a street,
alley, sidewalk or other public place shall keep warning signs and lights and
such other barricades, fences or safety equipment as may be appropriate so as
to prevent any person or vehicle from colliding with it. The mover shall also
provide, at his or her own expense, such other traffic control personnel and
vehicles with flashing lights as may be deemed necessary by the Chief of
Police, which personnel shall take direct orders from the Chief when necessary.
(Ord. 74-O-108, passed 11-18-1974)
§ 1448.06  INTERFERENCE WITH WIRES, CABLES AND OTHER PROPERTY.
   The mover of a building or structure shall be directly responsible for
interference with wires, cables, pipes and other property of public utility
companies, the city or other persons; shall check in advance with such utility
companies, with the city or with other persons to comply with requirements and
regulations; and shall return such property to its original condition after
completing that portion of the move.
(Ord. 74-O-108, passed 11-18-1974)
§ 1448.07  ACTION BY CITY TO COMPLETE MOVE.
   If the moving of a building or structure cannot be completed and such
building or structure cannot be safely moved further, while blocking any
portion of any street, alley, sidewalk or other public place, and it appears
after 48 hours of such stoppage that the mover is either unable or unwilling to
rectify the situation or continue the move, and if reasonable alternatives
cannot be immediately resolved with the Director of Public Service, the city
may call the bond and use the funds to either demolish and remove the building
or structure or pay for an alternate mover to complete the job.
(Ord. 74-O-108, passed 11-18-1974)
§ 1448.99  PENALTY.
   Whoever violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of this
chapter is guilty of a minor misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than one
hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) for each offense. A separate offense shall be
deemed committed each day during or on which a violation or noncompliance
occurs or continues.
(Ord. 74-O-108, passed 11-18-1974)
CHAPTER 1450:  PERMITS; CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY
Section
1450.01   Building permits.
1450.02   Certificates of occupancy.
1450.03   Structures requiring tie-ins to sewage treatment plants prohibited.
1450.99   Penalty.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Development permit required in flood hazard areas - see B. & H.
1446.03
   Grand plan fees - see B. & H.
1452.05
   Permit for excavations, filling or grading - see B. & H.
1442.03,
1442.13,
1442.14
   Permit for moving of buildings - see B. & H.
1448.01
   Registration of contractors - see B. & H.
Ch. 1460
   Site and grading plans - see B. & H.
Ch. 1452
§ 1450.01  BUILDING PERMITS.
   (a)   Construction on dedicated but unaccepted streets.
      (1)   The County Building Inspector, acting as Building Inspector for the
city, shall not issue a building permit or approve plans for any structure
unless the site is located on a dedicated street in the city which has been
accepted for maintenance by Council, except as otherwise provided in this
section.
      (2)   Council may, upon application by the owner of land located on a
dedicated street which has not been accepted for maintenance, authorize the
Building Inspector to issue a building permit on a dedicated street not
accepted for maintenance where, owing to special conditions, a literal
enforcement of this section would result in an unnecessary hardship and after
finding that the issuance of such a building permit would not be contrary to
the public interest.
      (3)   The following procedures, and/or such other procedures as Council
may deem pertinent, shall be followed when there is a request for a building
permit on a street that is dedicated but not accepted for maintenance by the
city:
         A.   The owner of the land on which the structure is to be built shall
file an application with the Clerk of Council requesting that Council consider
the owner's request for Council to authorize the issuance of a building permit
on a dedicated street not accepted for maintenance.
         B.   The application shall be in a form provided by the Clerk of
Council and shall contain, among other items, information that will clearly
show the location of the land, the owner, the size of the parcel and the kind
of structure to be built, together with a statement setting forth the reasons
that Council should authorize the issuance of a building permit.
         C.   Council shall consider the application at a regular meeting and
may require additional information from the applicant, provided, however, that
Council shall act on all applications within 60 days of the date they are
received by the Clerk of Council. An application shall be approved or
disapproved and the applicant shall be provided a copy of the resolution
setting forth such approval or disapproval.
   (b)   Sufficient water required. The Building Inspector shall not issue a
building permit to a person unless the premises on which the structure is to be
constructed is served by public water supply or unless the applicant for the
permit presents to the Inspector:
      (1)   A certification, by a registered engineer or a licensed well
driller, that there is sufficient water from natural sources to supply the
water needs, for which the structure is intended, through the drilling of a
well specifically located on the premises for which the building permit is
sought; and
      (2)   A certification from the County Health Department that the water
source indicated is suitable for the use for which it is intended.
(Am. Ord. 14-O-69, passed 1-5-2015)
   (c)   Sewage disposal facilities required. An applicant for a building
permit shall, prior to the issuance of such permit, present satisfactory proof
that he or she has obtained the following:
      (1)   For residential property, an on-site sewage disposal system permit
from the County Health Department, or proof that the applicant will be
connecting into a public or private sewer system; and
      (2)   For commercial property, an on-site sewage disposal system permit
from the County Health Department and/or Ohio EPA approval for the sewage
disposal facility, or proof that the applicant will be connecting into a public
or private sewer system.
   (d)   Zoning permit certificate required. The Building Inspector, in
addition to all other conditions precedent to the issuance of a building
permit, shall issue no such permit until he or she has notice in writing from
the Zoning Inspector that the applicant has obtained a zoning permit
certificate.
(Ord. 88-O-82, passed 12-19-1988)
§ 1450.02  CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY.
   (a)   No person shall occupy, rent, lease or cause to be occupied any newly
constructed commercial, industrial or multifamily building or unit in the city
without first obtaining a certificate of occupancy. As used in this section,
"multifamily" means a residential building containing more than two dwelling
units.
   (b)   Such certificate of occupancy shall be issued and signed after an on-
site inspection by the Public Service Administrator or his or her designee and
the Fire Chief or his or her designee.
   (c)   There shall be no fee charged for the inspection required under this
section or for the certificate of occupancy issued hereunder.
(Ord. 78-O-74, passed 7-10-1978)
§ 1450.03  STRUCTURES REQUIRING TIE-INS TO SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANTS PROHIBITED.
   (a)   The building of any structure which requires a tie-in to a new package
sewage treatment plant or to an expanded existing package sewage treatment
plant in the city in order to make such building inhabitable is hereby
prohibited.
   (b)   The Building Inspector is hereby ordered not to issue a building
permit or a certificate of occupancy and the Zoning Inspector is hereby ordered
not to issue a zoning permit for any home whose sanitary facilities depend on a
new package sewage treatment plant or an expanded package sewage treatment
plant in the city.
   (c)   This section shall remain in effect until the city has determined,
through engineering studies or other means, and until Council is advised, that
additional existing sanitary package plant facilities, or the expansion of
existing sanitary package plant facilities, will not be injurious to the public
health and welfare of the community, and that a plan has been developed by the
City Engineer for the maintenance of new and old sanitary package plants within
the city.
(Res. 75-R-47, passed 5-19-1975)
§ 1450.99  PENALTY.
   Whoever violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of this
chapter is guilty of a minor misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than one
hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) for each offense. A separate offense shall be
deemed committed each day during or on which a violation or noncompliance
occurs or continues.
(Ord. 78-O-74, passed 7-10-1978)
CHAPTER 1452:  SITE AND GRADING PLANS
Section
1452.01   Definitions. (Repealed)
1452.02   Preliminary plot plan requirements.
1452.03   Approval of preliminary plot plan; finished ground grade and grade of
foundation.
1452.04   Final plot plan.
1452.05   Deposit, costs and fees.
1452.06   Provision for drainage of surface water required.
1452.07   Conflicts.
1452.08   Violations.
1452.99   Penalty.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Drainage of lots - see GEN. OFF.
660.11
   Fee for inspection - see Ohio R.C. 3791.07
   Plans and specifications for excavations, landfills and grading - see B. &
H.
1442.05,
1442.07
   Professional consulting expenses required from permit applicants - see ADM.
236.07
   Submission of building plans - see Ohio R.C. 3791.04
§ 1452.01  DEFINITIONS.(Repealed)
Editor's note:
   Section
1452.01 was repealed by Ord. 86-0-20, passed May 5, 1986.
§ 1452.02  PRELIMINARY PLOT PLAN REQUIREMENTS.
   In addition to all other requirements of the Building and Housing Code, the
Zoning Code and ordinances or statutes of the city, the county and the state,
and before a building permit is issued by the County Building Inspection
Department for a building, a person who owns, leases or is in possession or
control of any property who desires to construct a new building or structure,
or to remodel or reconstruct an existing building or structure wherein the
existing grade of the lot or building is proposed to be changed, or a person
seeking to change the grade of any property by more than three inches, shall,
in addition to obtaining all other permits required by the city, county and
state, submit to the City Clerk an application for a permit, the required
deposit and three copies of the plot plan of the property, prepared by a
registered civil engineer or a registered surveyor, showing where such proposed
construction or reconstruction is or shall be situated and showing, as
applicable, the following:
   (a)   The existing elevation of the centerline of the street;
   (b)   The existing elevation of the top of the nearest street curb, if any;
   (c)   The existing elevation of the top of the nearest portion of the
sidewalk, if any;
   (d)   The existing elevation at each corner of the lot;
   (e)   The first or main floor elevation and the location of adjacent
buildings within 105 feet;
   (f)   The elevations of the existing grade and proposed finished grade of
the lot on a suitable contour interval;
   (g)   The proposed elevation of the first or main floor of the building or
garage and the lawn grade at the building corners;
   (h)   The foundation and/or slab elevation;
   (i)   The bearings and lot dimensions, the lot and block number or lot and
tract number, all easements of record, an arrow showing the north direction and
the street name;
   (j)   A reference bench mark established on some permanent object in the
near vicinity which shall remain undisturbed during construction and available
for elevation checks. The bench mark may be assumed to be 100 feet where a city
bench mark is not available;
   (k)   The location, elevation and size of all existing and proposed on-site
sanitary systems, sanitary sewers, water lines and storm sewers in or adjacent
to the lot;
   (l)   Building dimensions, setback and side yard dimensions;
   (m)   Size and invert elevations of driveway culverts;
   (n)   The existing elevations of the road ditch, if any, in front of the
property at 25-foot intervals;
   (o)   A certification by the registered surveyor that the property has been
surveyed and iron pins set at all lot corners; and
   (p)   Any other information that may be required by the City Engineer to
ensure that the proposed building elevations and site gradings are compatible
with adjacent property and that positive drainage is achieved.
(Ord. 86-O-20, passed 5-5-1986)
§ 1452.03  APPROVAL OF PRELIMINARY PLOT PLAN; FINISHED GROUND GRADE AND GRADE
OF FOUNDATION.
   (a)   Upon receipt of the application and plot plan, as described in §
1452.02, the City Clerk shall, if all other aspects of the application for the
permit are in order, submit a copy of the application and plot plan to the City
Engineer. The Engineer shall examine such plot plan for conformity to the
proper relation with existing or proposed sanitary sewers, water lines, storm
drainage and existing grades of adjacent lands and buildings, following the
guidelines of subsection (b) hereof. If the plan does not so conform, the
Engineer shall call the applicant's attention to the lack of conformity and
require that the plan be changed in that respect. When the Engineer finds that
the plan so conforms, he or she shall approve the same. Such approved plan
shall be a condition of any permit which may be issued pursuant to this chapter
for such construction. It shall then be the responsibility of the applicant to
perform all work in conformity with the various grades and elevations of the
final approved plot plan and to set witness markers clearly designating the lot
corners.
   (b)   The finished ground grade of a building shall be established in proper
relation to the surrounding grade, driveway and street. The parcel of land or
lot shall be graded so that water drains away from each building at a minimum
grade of two percent. Surface drainage swales shall have a minimum grade of
five percent designed so that surface water will drain onto a swale, street
gutter, storm sewer, drain inlet or natural drainageway. The grades of
driveways shall be a minimum of .4 percent and a maximum of 15 percent. Grading
shall be adjusted so there will be no abrupt grades in the front yards and
along side lot lines. The grades of earth terraces shall not exceed three to
one. If a masonry retaining wall exceeds three feet in height, a hedge, fence
or railing shall be provided.
   (c)   At such time as the permit holder has constructed the foundation or
slab referred to in §
1452.02(h), he or she shall request that the City Engineer check the grade. No
further construction shall be permitted until the Engineer has checked the
elevation of such foundation and found it to be in accordance with the plot
plan approved pursuant to subsection (a) hereof.
   (d)   At appropriate times, the City Engineer may inspect the progress of
the site work. The permit holder shall be notified of any deficiencies
discovered during such inspection, and he or she shall repair such deficiency
within the time frame acceptable to the City Engineer.
   (e)   Upon completion of construction and before a certificate of occupancy
is issued for a building by the County Building Inspection Department, the
permit holder shall schedule, with the City Engineer, a pre-final inspection of
the site work completed at that time. As soon as weather conditions allow for
an adequate inspection, the City Engineer shall inspect the site work. Any
deficiency observed during such inspection shall be brought to the attention of
the permit holder who shall correct such deficiency within a time frame
acceptable to the City Engineer. The City Engineer shall bring to the permit
holder's attention any change or addition to the site work which is to be
incorporated into the final plot plan.
(Ord. 89-O-36, passed 9-5-1989)
§ 1452.04  FINAL PLOT PLAN.
   Upon completion of the final grading and seeding of the site, the permit
holder shall file with the City Engineer a final plot plan, which shall show
the final grades of the improvement as constructed. Such plan shall be
certified, by a registered civil engineer or surveyor, as to the accuracy of
the plan in depicting the actual construction. Such civil engineer or surveyor
shall also certify that he or she has made an actual field observation of as-
built conditions and that such conditions are as shown on the plan. The form of
such certification shall be prescribed by the City Engineer.
(Ord. 89-O-36, passed 9-5-1989)
§ 1452.05  DEPOSIT, COSTS AND FEES.
   (a)   The City Clerk shall collect a deposit as stated in the Fee Schedule
in §
236.07 of the City of Kirtland Codified Ordinances at the time of application
for a permit. The City Engineer shall estimate the cost of the grade plan
review. If the estimated cost exceeds the deposit, the applicant shall be
informed of the estimated cost and shall be directed to deposit the difference
between the Engineer’s estimate and the applicant’s original deposit, which
difference shall be deposited prior to the Engineer’s examination of the plot
plan.
   (b)   The applicant shall be charged for the actual costs incurred by the
City Engineer for reviewing the plot plan, issuing the permit, inspecting the
site and setting the grade, and any and all other expenses associated with the
issuance of the permit. Such costs shall be computed on the basis and in
accordance with the legislation governing the right of compensation for the
City Engineer at the time. Any deficiency between the actual costs of the
services rendered by the City Engineer and the deposit paid by the applicant
shall be paid to the city prior to the approval of the final plot plan. Any
excess of the deposit over the actual costs of the City Engineer and the permit
fee shall be returned to the applicant.
   (c)   All costs and fees paid pursuant to this chapter shall be deposited in
the General Fund of the city.
(Ord. 89-O-36, passed 9-5-1989; Am. Ord. 17-O-20, passed 7-3-2017)
§ 1452.06  PROVISION FOR DRAINAGE OF SURFACE WATER REQUIRED.
   In addition to the requirements of this chapter or of any ordinance adopted
by the city, wherever the plot plan filed under §
1452.02 fails to indicate a method of positive draining of surface water from
the lot, the City Engineer shall notify the applicant of such failure and the
applicant shall be required to correct such deficiency before resubmission for
approval.
(Ord. 89-O-36, passed 9-5-1989)
§ 1452.07  CONFLICTS.
   This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair
Chapter 1442, but is deemed to be supplemental thereto. Wherever this chapter
and
Chapter 1442, or any other valid ordinance, building code or restriction,
conflict or overlap, the more stringent restriction shall prevail.
(Ord. 86-O-20, passed 5-5-1986)
§ 1452.08  VIOLATIONS.
   No person shall violate or cause or knowingly permit to be violated any of
the provisions of this chapter or fail to comply with any of such provisions or
with any lawful requirement of any public authority made pursuant to this
chapter or knowingly use or cause or permit the use of any lands in violation
of this chapter or in violation of any permit granted under this chapter.
(Ord. 86-O-20, passed 5-5-1986)
§ 1452.99  PENALTY.
   Whoever violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of this
chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree and shall be fined not
more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisoned not more than 60 days,
or both, for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each
day during or on which a violation or noncompliance occurs or continues.
(Ord. 86-O-20, passed 5-5-1986)
CHAPTER 1454:  EARLY WARNING FIRE DETECTION SYSTEMS
Section
1454.01   Requirements for multiple dwellings.
1454.02   Requirements for new one- and two-family residential buildings.
1454.03   Requirements for existing one-family and multifamily residential
buildings.
1454.04   Specifications, installation and maintenance.
1454.99   Penalty.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Arson - see GEN OFF.
642.09
   Burglary and fire monitoring alarm systems - see S.U. & P.S.
Ch. 1064
   False alarms - see GEN. OFF.
648.08; S.U. & P.S.
1064.03
   Smoke detector systems for apartment buildings and condominiums - see Ohio
R.C. 3781.104
§ 1454.01  REQUIREMENTS FOR MULTIPLE DWELLINGS.
   All buildings containing more than two dwelling units shall be provided with
an approved early warning fire detection system.
(Ord. 90-O-61, passed 9-4-1990)
§ 1454.02  REQUIREMENTS FOR NEW ONE AND TWO-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS.
   All one and two-family residential buildings constructed after the effective
date of this section shall be provided with an approved early warning fire
detection system.
(Ord. 90-O-61, passed 9-4-1990)
§ 1454.03  REQUIREMENTS FOR EXISTING ONE-FAMILY AND MULTIFAMILY RESIDENTIAL
BUILDINGS.
   All existing one and multifamily residential buildings, upon change of
occupancy, upon any alteration or repair requiring a building permit or when
additional rooms are created in the existing structure, shall be provided with
an approved early warning fire detection system.
(Ord. 90-O-61, passed 9-4-1990)
§ 1454.04  SPECIFICATIONS, INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE.
   The early warning fire detection system required by this chapter shall be
approved by Underwriters Laboratories, Underwriters Laboratories of Canada or
Factory Mutual. An approved detector shall be installed adjacent to the outside
of sleeping rooms or within multiple dwelling suites. The detector shall be
sensitive to visible and invisible products of combustion, except that
detectors sensitive only to heat are not acceptable. The system required by
this chapter shall be installed and maintained in conformity with
Chapter 1610 of these Codified Ordinances.
(Ord. 90-O-61, passed 9-4-1990)
§ 1454.99  PENALTY.
   Whoever violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of this
chapter is guilty of a minor misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than one
hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) for each offense. A separate offense shall be
deemed committed each day during or on which a violation or noncompliance
occurs or continues.
CHAPTER 1456:  UNSAFE BUILDINGS
Section
1456.01   Unsafe building defined.
1456.02   Order to repair or demolish.
1456.03   Noncompliance; remedy of city.
1456.04   Inspection, search warrant.
1456.99   Penalty.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Authority to require reconstruction or repair of buildings - see Ohio R.C.
717.01(B)
   Removal of unsafe structures - see Ohio R.C. 715.26(B), 715.261
§ 1456.01  UNSAFE BUILDING DEFINED.
   As used in this chapter, "unsafe building" means and includes buildings
which are unsafe or unsanitary, constitute a fire hazard or are dilapidated or
abandoned, or otherwise in a state of disrepair, so as to be dangerous to the
public health and safety.
(Ord. 69-O-16, passed 3-25-1969)
§ 1456.02  ORDER TO REPAIR OR DEMOLISH.
   When a building is found to be unsafe (upon inspection by and in the
judgment of at least two of the following individuals: the Mayor, the Fire
Chief, the Zoning Inspector, and the Building Inspector), a written order shall
be served upon the owner of the property by the Mayor, the Fire Chief, the
Zoning Inspector or the Building Inspector, stating that the building is unsafe
and that repairs must be made, or the building must be demolished, within 30
days after receipt of such notice. No person shall fail to comply with such
notice within the stipulated period.
(Ord. 69-O-16, passed 3-25-1969; Am. Ord. 13-O-56, passed 11-6-2013)
§ 1456.03  NONCOMPLIANCE; REMEDY OF CITY.
   The failure of the owner to repair or remove such building within 30 days
after service of the notice referred to in §
1456.02, and upon concurrence of at least two of the three officers mentioned
in §
1456.02, the Mayor may employ the necessary labor and cause the building to be
evacuated and removed and shall certify the cost thereof to the County Auditor
for certification as a lien upon the property, to be collected according to
law. Such remedy shall be in addition to the penalty provided in §
1456.99.
(Ord. 69-O-16, passed 3-25-1969)
§ 1456.04  INSPECTION, SEARCH WARRANT.
   (A)   In order to safeguard the safety, health, and welfare of the public,
the Mayor, Fire Chief, City Engineer, or Zoning Inspector of the city or a
Building Inspector or Health District official of Lake County, Ohio, is
authorized to gain consensual entry to any structure or premises, and any parts
thereof, at any reasonable time, for the purpose of making inspections and
performing duties under this code.
   (B)   If any owner, occupant, or other person in charge of a structure
subject to the provisions of this code refuses, impedes, inhibits, interferes
with, restricts, or obstructs entry and free access to any part of the
structure or premises where inspection authorized by this code is sought or if
the building reasonably appears to have been abandoned and the whereabouts of
the owner or person in charge is not known or readily available, the above
referred to official shall be permitted to seek, in a court of competent
jurisdiction, including but not limited to the Willoughby Municipal Court, a
warrant for administrative inspection.
   (C)   Any warrant for administrative inspection shall allow for the
inspection of the subject structure and premises, and any parts thereof,
pursuant to the provisions of this code and shall be so limited in scope.
   (D)   Nothing herein shall be construed to limit the authority of the above
referred to official to gain access to any structure or premises in emergency
circumstances or otherwise pursuant to law.
   (E)   Every occupant of a structure or premises shall give the owner or
operator thereof or agent or employee, access to any part of such structure or
its premises at reasonable times for the purpose of making such inspection,
maintenance, repairs, or alterations as are necessary to comply with the
provisions of this code. Any person that refuses to permit inspection or
otherwise obstructs, hinders, or interferes with the inspection of a premises
pursuant to the execution of an administrative warrant is guilty of a
misdemeanor as provided in §
1456.99.
(Ord. 13-O-50, passed 9-16-2013)  Penalty, see §
1456.99
§ 1456.99  PENALTY.
   (a)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than one hundred fifty dollars
($150.00) for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each
day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
   (b)   Any person that refuses to permit inspection or otherwise obstructs,
hinders, or interferes with the inspection of a premises pursuant to the
execution of an administrative warrant is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree set forth in
Chapter 698.
(Ord. 13-O-50, passed 9-16-2013)
CHAPTER 1458:  ADDRESS MARKINGS
Section
1458.01   Display of number.
1458.02   Location of number.
1458.03   Incorrect or missing numbers.
1458.99   Penalty.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Power to regulate building numbering - see Ohio R.C. 715.26
§ 1458.01  DISPLAY OF NUMBER.
   Each owner of a house or building or part of a building which has been
assigned a house or building address number shall cause such address number to
be displayed in the manner prescribed by this chapter.
(Ord. 91-O-26, passed 7-1-1991)
§ 1458.02  LOCATION OF NUMBER.
   (a)   Each house or building assigned an address number shall display such
number upon the wall facing the street, or on such other conspicuous location
in front of each house or building. In no event shall the number be located
farther than 60 feet from the front street right-of-way.
   (b)   In addition to the requirements of subsection (a) hereof, all address
numbers assigned to multi-tenant residential, commercial, and industrial
buildings with main entrances located at the side or rear of a building, and
which are not visible from the street frontage, shall be clearly displayed on
or near each such main entrance.
   (c)   Each address number mounted on the front, side or rear wall of a
building shall be located at a distance of not less than four feet nor more
than ten feet above the ground level immediately adjacent to the wall. Address
numbers displayed in locations other than on a wall of the building shall be
placed in a manner visible from the front street where they will not be hidden
by parked vehicles or other obstructions.
   (d)   All numbers installed after the effective date of this chapter shall
be at least three inches in height and have a reflective background. "Script"
or "word" numbers may be displayed, but the assigned number shall also be
displayed with numerals as prescribed by this chapter.
(Ord. 91-O-26, passed 7-1-1991)
§ 1458.03  INCORRECT OR MISSING NUMBERS.
   An incorrect or missing address number upon any house, building or part
thereof shall be removed and/or the correct number attached to the house or
building, as herein provided, within a period of 30 days after notification to
make such correction of a house number or numbers. Such notice to correct the
number or numbers shall be given by the Public Safety Director or his or her
designee.
(Ord. 91-O-26, passed 7-1-1991)
§ 1458.99  PENALTY.
   Any owner of a house or building that has been assigned an address number
who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a minor
misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than one hundred fifty dollars
($150.00) for each offense.
(Ord. 91-O-26, passed 7-1-1991)
CHAPTER 1460:  REGISTRATION OF CONTRACTORS
Section
1460.01   General provisions.
1460.02   Application for certificate of registration.
1460.03   Installations by public utility companies; exemptions.
1460.04   Installations by firms or corporations.
1460.05   Insurance required.
1460.06   Fees.
1460.07   Expiration and renewal of licenses and certificates of registration.
1460.08   Revocation and suspension of certificate of registration.
1460.09   Permits issued only to registered contractors.
1460.10   Homeowner's exception.
1460.99   Penalty.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   2006 Residential Code of Ohio - see B. & H.
Ch. 1422
   Permits; certificates of occupancy - see B. & H.
Ch. 1450
   Power of legislative authority to regulate - see Ohio R.C. 737.37
   Site and grading plans - see B. & H.
Ch. 1452
§ 1460.01  GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (a)   No person, firm or corporation shall engage in the business or act in
the capacity of a contractor, as herein defined, except pursuant to
certificates of registration or license issued by the Lake County Building
Department and by the Zoning Inspector of the city in conformity with the
provisions of this chapter, unless such person, firm or corporation is
particularly exempted by the provisions of this chapter.
   (b)   All persons, prior to engaging in or being employed as responsible for
any installation, replacement, and/or construction within the municipality,
including, but not limited to, any of the following, shall obtain the required
certificate of registration or license under this chapter or show proof of a
license issued by the Lake County Building Department:
      (1)   Contractors.
         A.   General;
         B.   Owner/limited premises general;
         C.   Fence;
         D.   Siding;
         E.   Roofing;
         F.   Signs;
         G.   Concrete/asphalt paving;
         H.   Excavation/sewers; and
         I.   Demolition.
      (2)   Electrical.
         A.   General;
         B.   Limited premises; and
         C.   Residential.
      (3)   Plumbing (includes gas piping).
      (4)   Mechanical.
         A.   Fire suppression systems; and
         B.   HVAC (Heating, ventilation and air conditioning).
      (5)   Fire protection systems.
         A.   Fire suppression systems; and
         B.   Fire alarm systems.
      NOTE: Boiler contractor registrations, permits and inspections must be
obtained from the Division of Boiler Inspection, Department of Industrial
Relations, Columbus, Ohio.
   (c)   (1)   The term "contractor", for the purposes of this section, means
any individual, firm, corporation, co-partnership, association or other
organization; or any combination thereof, who or which, by himself or herself
or by itself, or by or through others, constructs, alters, repairs, adds to,
subtracts from, reconstructs or remodels any building, structure or
appurtenance thereto, including the paving of walkways, driveways, driveway
aprons, curbs, patios and sidewalks, or who or which undertakes to submit a bid
to do so.
      (2)   The term "contractor" includes subcontractors and special
contractors whose operations, as such, are the performance of construction work
requiring special skill and whose principal contracting business involves the
use of specialized building trades or crafts.
   (d)   Every applicant for registration shall make written application
therefor on a form furnished by the Zoning Inspector.
(Ord. 99-O-11, passed 5-17-1999)
§ 1460.02  APPLICATION FOR CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION.
   (a)   Application form. Application for a certificate of registration shall
be upon a form provided by the city's Zoning Inspector. The application form
shall include space for the true name, current address and telephone number of
the contractor applying and shall designate the form of business organization,
whether a corporation, partnership, individual or other organization. When the
applicant is other than an individual, the applicant shall state the name,
address and telephone number of an individual charged with the management of
the work of the business organization to be performed within the city. The
application shall contain such other information as the Zoning Inspector deems
pertinent.
   (b)   Fire protection systems. Every applicant, to be eligible for
registration as an installer of fire protection systems, shall have and present
a valid, active certificate from the State Department of Commerce, Division of
State Fire Marshal.
   (c)   Limited premises general contractor.
      (1)   Every applicant for a limited premises general contractor
registration shall provide:
         A.   A list of properties under ownership; and
         B.   A notarized affidavit that all work authorized by the permit is
to be performed by permanent employees of the company.
      (2)   Limited premises general contractors may not obtain permits
involving an increase in building area or building height or for new buildings/
additions.
      (3)   Note: Electrical work, plumbing work and work by subcontractors
must be performed under separate permits issued to licensed/registered
contractors.
(Ord. 99-O-11, passed 5-17-1999)
§ 1460.03  INSTALLATIONS BY PUBLIC UTILITY COMPANIES; EXEMPTIONS.
   (a)   No provision of this chapter shall be interpreted to require licenses,
registration or certificates of qualification for officials or employees of
public utility organizations to engage in the installation, alteration, repair,
maintenance or utilization of any device, appliance, installation or
appurtenance forming part of the equipment for the generation, transmission or
distribution of any commodity or service which such public utility organization
is authorized by law to furnish or provide.
   (b)   Electrical utility companies holding active franchises within the
municipality shall be permitted to install outdoor illumination lights on
private property pursuant to contract or agreement with the owner or person in
charge thereof without obtaining any permits from the city and without the
necessity of having licensed electricians as defined herein, provided that such
installation is performed at all times by the utility company using its own
personnel, regularly employed on a full-time basis. No such utility company
shall be permitted to assign or subcontract all or any portion of such outdoor
installation of any light or lights which may create a nuisance to adjoining
residents or inhabitants, or any light or lights which may create a hazardous
condition in the community.
(Ord. 99-O-11, passed 5-17-1999)
§ 1460.04  INSTALLATIONS BY FIRMS OR CORPORATIONS.
   No firm or corporation shall engage in the business of making installations
for which registration is required under this chapter, unless at least one
responsible member, officer or employee of such firm or corporation has a valid
license issued by the Lake County Building Department and is registered with
the city to make such installations. All such work performed by such firm or
corporation shall be under the direct supervision of the licensed person.
Revocation or suspension of the license or registration of such person shall
prohibit the right of such firm or corporation to engage in the business
authorized by such license.
(Ord. 99-O-11, passed 5-17-1999)
§ 1460.05  INSURANCE REQUIRED.
   (a)   The applying contractor shall furnish evidence of commercial liability
insurance for bodily injury in the minimum amount of one hundred thousand
dollars ($100,000.00) per person, three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00)
per occurrence and, for property damage, in the minimum amount of one hundred
thousand dollars ($100,000.00), or a combined single limit of liability in the
amount of three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00).
   (b)   The applying contractor must furnish and file with the Zoning
Inspector a license bond in the amount of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00),
such bond to be in such form as approved by the Director of Law guaranteeing
full and faithful compliance with all of the provisions of this Building Code,
and indemnifying and holding the city free and harmless from its activities.
(Ord. 99-O-11, passed 5-17-1999)
§ 1460.06  FEES.
   The following fees shall be charged for licensing and/or registration
pursuant to this chapter:
   Application and registration fee as stated in the Fee Schedule in §
236.07 of the City of Kirtland Codified Ordinances.
(Ord. 99-O-11, passed 5-17-1999; Am. Ord. 17-O-20, passed 7-3-2017)
§ 1460.07  EXPIRATION AND RENEWAL OF LICENSES AND CERTIFICATES OF REGISTRATION.
   All licenses and registration certificates shall expire on December 31 in
the year in which such license or certificate of registration was issued and
shall be renewed within the 30 days prior to the expiration of the existing
license or registration. If such license or registration is not renewed for the
ensuing year prior to the expiration date, then such license or registration
thereafter shall not be renewed unless and until the former registrant complies
with the requirements set forth herein.
(Ord. 99-O-11, passed 5-17-1999)
§ 1460.08  REVOCATION AND SUSPENSION OF CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION.
   A certificate of registration may be suspended by the Zoning Inspector for a
prescribed period, not to exceed 90 days, whenever it has been determined that
the holder thereof:
   (a)   Has not performed the duties required of him or her by the City or
Lake County Building Code or by the rules or regulations of the State of Ohio;
   (b)   Has been negligent in the prescribed performance or in the performance
of work or the furnishing of services authorized by such certificate; or
   (c)   Has performed work in a careless or irregular manner or has
demonstrated inferior quality of workmanship, as determined by the Zoning
Inspector.
(Ord. 99-O-11, passed 5-17-1999)
§ 1460.09  PERMITS ISSUED ONLY TO REGISTERED CONTRACTORS.
   No permit required by the provisions of this Building and Housing Code shall
be issued for work to be undertaken by contract except to a registered or
licensed contractor as outlined in this chapter.
(Ord. 99-O-11, passed 5-17-1999)
§ 1460.10  HOMEOWNER'S EXCEPTION.
   No provision of this chapter, nor any regulation adopted by authority of the
city, shall be interpreted to require that the individual owner of an existing
one or two-family dwelling shall be licensed or registered personally to
perform work upon the premises. Any such work may be done by such owner with
the assistance of family members and/or by individuals without compensation,
and, further, such work shall be done in conformity with the provisions of the
Lake County Building Code and the City Zoning Code or rules or regulations
promulgated thereunder. No work shall be done unless all permits, inspections
and approvals required by these codified ordinances or state law are secured.
(Ord. 99-O-11, passed 5-17-1999)
§ 1460.99  PENALTY.
   Whoever violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of this
chapter is guilty of a minor misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than one
hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) for each offense. A separate offense shall be
deemed committed each day during which a violation or noncompliance occurs or
continues.
(Ord. 99-O-11, passed 5-17-1999)
CHAPTER 1462:  EXTERIOR PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
Section
1462.01   Title.
1462.02   Scope.
1462.03   Definitions.
1462.04   Purpose.
1462.05   Applicability.
1462.06   Conflict of laws.
1462.07   Enforcement.
1462.08   Notice of violation.
1462.09   Appeal.
1462.10   Maintenance responsibilities.
1462.11   General maintenance requirements.
1462.12   Maintenance of foundations.
1462.13   Maintenance of roofs, gutters and the like.
1462.14   Maintenance of exteriors.
1462.15   Exterior property areas.
1462.16   Rank vegetation.
1462.17   Noxious weeds.
1462.18   Dead trees and branches.
1462.19   Sidewalks and driveways.
1462.20   Grading, drainage and stagnant water.
1462.21   Parking lots.
1462.22   Buildings and structures.
1462.23   Right of entry.
1462.24   Responsibilities of owner and occupant.
1462.25   Failure to comply.
1462.26   Abatement of violations.
1462.99   Prosecution of violations.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Ohio Basic Building Code - see Ohio R.C. 3781.10
   Ohio State Building Standards - see Ohio R.C. Ch. 3781
   Safety, Sanitation and Health - see GEN. OFF.
Ch. 660
§ 1462.01  TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known as the Exterior Property Maintenance Code of the
City of Kirtland.
(Ord. 04-O-25, passed 6-7-2004)
§ 1462.02  SCOPE.
   This chapter is limited to the establishment of minimum standards for the
maintenance of exterior surfaces and exterior functioning units of all
structures, buildings and uses within the city, including yard areas contiguous
thereto. No provisions of this chapter shall, in any way, directly or
indirectly, be interpreted to interfere with, or to limit the right of, any
owner or occupant of any property to inhabit real property owned or leased by
them in such manner and form as they may determine appropriate, consistent with
other applicable provisions of law. This chapter is directed to obvious visual
problems that may occasion incipient blighting conditions within the city. All
matters of the interior use, occupancy or habitation of any structure or
building within the city are specifically excluded from the provisions of this
chapter.
(Ord. 04-O-25, passed 6-7-2004)
§ 1462.03  DEFINITIONS.
   (a)   Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms shall, for the
purpose of this code, have the meanings indicated. Words used in the present
tense include the future; words in the masculine gender include the feminine
and neuter; the singular number includes the plural and the plural the
singular.
   (b)   Where terms are not defined in this code, they shall have ascribed to
them their ordinarily accepted meanings or such as the context herein may
imply.
      (1)   Exterior of the premises. "Exterior of the premises" means the open
space of any premises outside of the building.
      (2)   Garbage. "Garbage" means animal and vegetable waste resulting from
the handling, preparation, cooking, and consumption of food.
      (3)   Infestation. "Infestation" means the presence of insects, rodents,
vermin or other pests on the premises, which constitute a health hazard.
      (4)   Junk vehicle. "Junk vehicle" means any vehicle or part of a vehicle
which is without a currently valid license plate or plates or is in either a
wrecked, dismantled, partly dismantled, inoperative or abandoned condition.
      (5)   Noxious weeds. "Noxious weeds" means ragweed, goldenrod, thistles,
milkweed, poison ivy, poison oak, phragmities within 50 feet of an occupied
dwelling and other plants capable of causing skin reactions upon contact or
producing severe allergic respiratory reactions.
      (6)   Nuisance. "Nuisance" means that which is defined by the statute of
the State of Ohio and declared thereby to be a nuisance, and also includes
conditions dangerous to human life or detrimental to the health of persons on
or near the premises where the conditions exist, and where the conditions are
perilous by active and negligent operation thereof, and unsanitary conditions
or any offensive to the sense or dangerous to health.
      (7)   Occupant. "Occupant" means any person over one year of age living
and sleeping in a dwelling unit or having actual possession of the dwelling
unit or any person who leases or rents a nonresidential building, structure or
any portion thereof.
      (8)   Owner. "Owner" means any person who, alone or jointly or severally
with others, shall have legal or equitable title to any premises, with or
without the accompanying actual possession thereof; or shall have charge, care
or control as owner or agent of the owner; or as executor, administrator,
trustee, receiver or guardian of estate or as a mortgagee in possession.
      (9)   Person. "Person" includes any individual, corporation, association,
partnership, trustee, lessee, agent or assignee.
      (10)   The premises. "The premises" means a lot, plot or parcel of land,
including the buildings or structures thereon.
      (11)   Rank vegetation. "Rank vegetation" means any growth of weeds or
grass to a height greater than 12 inches.
      (12)   Refuse. "Refuse" means all putrescible and non putrescible solid
wastes (except body wastes) including, but not limited to, garbage, rubbish,
ashes, and dead animals, and industrial wastes; an accumulation of brush,
broken glass, stumps, and roots that present a safety hazard, and includes
garbage, trash and debris which present an unsanitary and/or safety hazard.
      (13)   Responsible official. "Responsible official" means the Mayor of
the City of Kirtland or the individual duly authorized by the Mayor of the City
of Kirtland which includes, but is not limited to, the Chief of Police, the
Fire Chief, the Zoning Inspector, Lake County Building Officials or such other
agents or officials, public or private, hired, appointed or deputized by the
Mayor of the City of Kirtland to administer and enforce the provisions of this
chapter, and his or her designated agents.
      (14)   Unsafe buildings or structures. "Unsafe buildings or structures"
are those in which all or part thereof is found to be a hazard to life, health,
property or the safety of the public or its occupants because it is damaged,
decayed, dilapidated, structurally unsafe or contains defective or inoperative
electrical, plumbing or heating devices or systems or utility connections, or
is of such faulty construction or unstable foundation that it is likely to
partially or completely collapse or has been found to be an attractive nuisance
and/or a hazard to the public health, safety or welfare.
      (15)   Structures unfit for human occupancy or use. "Structures unfit for
human occupancy or use" means a structure that is either unsafe, unsanitary, in
disrepair resulting from lack of maintenance, is vermin or rat infested,
contains filth or contamination, or lacks ventilation, elimination, plumbing or
heating facilities or other essential equipment required by this code or other
codes enacted, adopted or applicable in this city, or because its location and/
or condition constitutes a hazard to its occupants or to the public.
(Ord. 04-O-25, passed 6-7-2004)
§ 1462.04  PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this code is to protect the public health, safety and welfare
by establishing minimum standards governing the maintenance, appearance and
exterior condition of all premises and uses throughout the city; to fix certain
responsibilities and duties upon owners, occupants and managers of the same as
to both separate and correlative responsibilities and duties; to authorize and
establish procedures for the exterior inspection of such premises and uses; to
fix penalties for the violations of this code; and to provide for the repair,
demolition or vacation of premises unfit for occupancy or use. This code is
hereby declared to be remedial and essential for the public interest, and it is
intended that this code be construed and interpreted to effectuate the purpose
as stated herein.
(Ord. 04-O-25, passed 6-7-2004)
§ 1462.05  APPLICABILITY.
   Every use shall comply with the provisions of this code, whether or not such
building or use shall have been constructed, altered or repaired before or
after the enactment of this code, and without regard to any permits or licenses
which shall have been issued for the use or occupancy of the building or
premises, for the construction or repair of the building or use, or for the
installation or repair of equipment or facilities prior to the effective date
of this code. This code establishes minimum standards for the initial and
continued occupancy and use of all such structures and does not replace or
modify standards otherwise established for the construction, repair, alteration
or use of the building. Where there is a mixed occupancy of residential and
nonresidential uses, the property shall be regulated by and subject to the
provisions of this code.
(Ord. 04-O-25, passed 6-7-2004)
§ 1462.06  CONFLICT OF LAWS.
   In any case where a provision of this chapter imposes a higher standard than
that set forth in any other ordinance by the city or law of the state, then the
standard set forth herein shall prevail, but if a provision of this chapter
imposes a lower standard than that imposed by any other ordinance of the city
or law of the state, then the higher standard contained in any such other
ordinance or law shall prevail.
(Ord. 04-O-25, passed 6-7-2004)
§ 1462.07  ENFORCEMENT.
   The enforcement of any and all provisions of this chapter is placed with the
Mayor, or his or her appointee, including, but not limited to, the Zoning
Inspector and additional enforcement officers including but not limited to Lake
County Building Department, Lake County Health Department, City Police
Division, and City Fire Department to carry out and effectuate all of the
provisions herein. All, or any one of the foregoing, may as indicated in the
definition sections of this chapter, constitute the responsible official. All
buildings, premises and uses within the city are subject to exterior
inspections from time to time by the Zoning Inspector or other responsible
official.
(Ord. 04-O-25, passed 6-7-2004)
§ 1462.08  NOTICE OF VIOLATION.
   (a)   Where a violation of any provision of this chapter is found to exist,
the Zoning Inspector, or other responsible official, shall cause a written
notice of such violation to be served upon the person responsible for the
correction thereof. The notice shall specify the violation committed and shall
provide for a reasonable period of time, not more than 90 days, to correct or
abate the violation. The Zoning Inspector, upon a showing of good cause, may,
only once, extend the time for compliance for an additional, but not more than,
90-day period of time.
   (b)   Notice may be served personally upon the owner and/or occupant at the
premises, or served upon some person of suitable age and discretion then
residing therein. Service may also be made upon the owner and/or occupant by
certified U.S. mail addressed to the owner and/or occupant addressed to the
last known address or the tax mailing address of the owner and/or occupant as
indicated by the records of the Lake County Treasurer. If the last known
address cannot be ascertained, the notice shall be posted on the outside front
entrance of the principal building on the premises on which structure in
alleged violation is located. If no tax mailing address or principal building
exists then notice shall be considered served by publication of a notice, one
time, in a newspaper of general circulation.
   (c)   In the absence of an appeal, as provided below, the completion of
notice, and failure to comply, shall constitute a final order as to
administrative proceeding.
(Ord. 04-O-25, passed 6-7-2004)
§ 1462.09  APPEAL.
   (a)   Within ten days of the date of service of notice, any person directly
affected by the notice may request a hearing thereon before the Board of Zoning
Appeals by filing a written request with the Zoning Inspector or other
responsible official. The Chairperson of the Board of Zoning Appeals, upon
receipt of the request, shall set the matter down for hearing at the next
regularly scheduled meeting of the Board of Zoning Appeals, allowing at least
ten days notice to the party and the Zoning Inspector or other responsible
official. The Board of Zoning Appeals may sustain, modify or dismiss, in whole
or in part, any action required to correct or abate the violation set forth in
the notice and shall issue an order incorporating its determinations. The Board
of Zoning Appeals may, as a part of its order and decision, attach conditions
and require, as part of its order and decision, the performance by the
appellant of the conditions which the Board of Zoning Appeals has determined
appropriate and reasonable, taking into account the purposes and intentions of
this chapter. Such order shall be a final order as to these administrative
proceedings from which either the applicant or the City of Kirtland may appeal
to a court of competent jurisdiction.
   (b)   The Board of Zoning Appeals shall consider the following in
determining appropriate action to be taken, to wit:
      (1)   That any modification of the original order of the Zoning Inspector
or other responsible official shall not, in any material way, alter the
standards of this chapter and shall not affect detrimentally the health or
safety of occupants, or the health, safety or welfare of the occupants or
owners of adjacent premises or of the immediate neighborhood; and
      (2)   Whether the appellant has demonstrated by clear and convincing
evidence that strict enforcement would constitute an undue and unnecessary
hardship on the owner, occupant, manager or resident, by reason of compelling
an expenditure for repair of the premises which would be substantially
disproportionate to any benefit to the health, safety or welfare of the
community that might be derived therefrom.
   (c)   No license or permit or other certification of compliance with this
code shall constitute a defense against any violation of any other local
ordinance applicable to any structure or premises, nor shall any provision
herein relieve any owner, manager or resident from complying with any such
other provision, nor any official of the city from enforcing any such other
provision.
(Ord. 04-O-25, passed 6-7-2004)
§ 1462.10  MAINTENANCE RESPONSIBILITIES.
   (a)   Owner. The owner of every structure or use and/or his or her appointed
agent shall be responsible for maintaining in a clean and sanitary condition
the shared or common areas of the premises.
   (b)   Occupant. The occupant of a structure or premises shall be responsible
for maintaining in a clean and sanitary condition that part of the structure or
premises, which he or she occupies and controls. In the case of commonly held
properties associated with condominium, or similar property arrangements in
which there is joint or common interest, ownership or control, it shall, in
addition to the collective responsibility of each and every one of the owner-
members, be the responsibility of the designated owners association or similar
organization to maintain all common areas and those items that are under its
direct ownership or control.
(Ord. 04-O-25, passed 6-7-2004)
§ 1462.11  GENERAL MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   All structures and all parts thereof shall be maintained in good
repair and shall be capable of performing the function for which such structure
or part of any feature thereof was designed or intended to be used.
   (b)   All equipment and facilities appurtenant to a structure shall be
maintained in good and safe working order.
§ 1462.12  MAINTENANCE OF FOUNDATIONS.
   (a)   All foundations of every structure shall be maintained in structurally
sound condition and in good repair.
   (b)   Where parts of structures supported on masonry piers require
substantial repair or replacement due to sagging, settling or failure of
supporting piers, the same shall be replaced with a foundation conforming to
the Building Code.
(Ord. 04-O-25, passed 6-7-2004)
§ 1462.13  MAINTENANCE OF ROOFS, GUTTERS AND THE LIKE.
   All roofs of every structure shall be maintained weather tight and roof
drainage shall be handled by suitable collectors and downspouts. Downspouts may
discharge onto splash blocks or into other devices, provided that no excess
water flows onto adjoining property or over sidewalks. Connection of any pipe
carrying roof water, yard drainage or foundation drainage to a sanitary sewer
is prohibited.
(Ord. 04-O-25, passed 6-7-2004)
§ 1462.14  MAINTENANCE OF EXTERIORS.
   (a)   All exterior walls of every (building) structure shall be maintained
weather tight and so as to resist decay or deterioration from any cause.
   (b)   Any structure as defined in the Zoning Code, whether the main use,
accessory use or any secondary or appurtenant structure whose exterior surface
is bare, deteriorated, ramshackle, tumble-down, decaying, disintegrating or in
poor repair must be repaired or removed or razed.
      (1)   All buckled, rotted or decayed walls, doors, windows, porches,
floors, steps, railings, soffits, posts, sills, trim and their missing members
must be replaced and put in good condition.
      (2)   All replacements must be approved by the Zoning Inspector or other
responsible official and must conform to and/or be compatible with the original
design.
      (3)   All exterior wood or exterior unfinished surfaces must be sealed
and painted, or the surface covered with other approved protective coating or
treated to prevent rot and decay and conform to and match the existing paint or
surface covering and original design or replacement thereof. All exterior walls
and surfaces must be properly protected against the weather.
   (c)   (1)   Any building, structure or secondary or appurtenant structure
whose exterior surface is deteriorated, decaying, disintegrating, or whose
exterior surface has weathered with dirt and grime or has been impaired through
peeling or flaking of the paint or other protective coating, shall be repaired,
repainted or resurfaced.
      (2)   All exterior surfaces shall be replaced or repaired in good
condition preparatory to painting or coating.
      (3)   All bare exterior surfaces which are flaking or crumbling shall be
replaced or sealed in good and workmanlike manner.
      (4)   All new or repaired bare surfaces shall be painted or coated.
(Ord. 04-O-25, passed 6-7-2004)
§ 1462.15  EXTERIOR PROPERTY AREAS.
   No owner, occupant or operator of any premises shall maintain or permit to
be maintained at or on the exterior areas of such premises any condition which
deteriorates or defaces the appearance of the neighborhood, adversely alters
the appearance, or which is a public nuisance or health hazard, including but
not limited to the following:
   (a)   Broken or dilapidated fences, walls or other structures;
   (b)   Improperly maintained walks, including public sidewalks and ramps, or
driveways, or driveway aprons, creating a hazardous condition;
   (c)   Out-of-use or nonusable, dilapidated appliances, boats, trailers and
motorized vehicles or parts thereof;
   (d)   Broken, dilapidated, or unusable furniture, mattresses, rugs, or other
furnishing; plastic materials, paints, miscellaneous coverings and/or any other
materials, including those described in this section placed at or on the
premises in such a manner as to be patently unsightly, grotesque or offensive
to the senses;
   (e)   Lawns, landscaping and driveways shall also be maintained so as not to
constitute a blighting or deteriorating effect in the neighborhood. The aprons
of driveways and the driveways shall be repaired and maintained in accordance
with specifications prescribed by the City of Kirtland;
   (f)   No motor vehicle shall be parked upon or within the front yard setback
of the premises except upon driveways, parking lots, in garages or on areas
improved for vehicular use, unless pursuant to a permit to sell a motor vehicle
as allowed and as set forth in §
1268.01;
   (g)   Any broken, rusted, deteriorated or decayed fence, yard enclosure or
other device or structure located in the yard area shall be repaired, removed
or replaced;
   (h)   Ground surface holes, cracks, excavations, breaks, projections and
obstructions at any place on the premises which, in the opinion of the Zoning
Inspector or other responsible official, are a hazard to persons using the
premises shall not be permitted;
   (i)   As defined in §
660.12 of the Codified Ordinances of the City of Kirtland, automobile parts;
motor vehicle or vehicles in an inoperable condition; motor vehicle or vehicles
unfit for further use; refuse; rubbish; scrap metal; or used building
materials; and
   (j)   Building or construction materials such as wood, stone, brick, cement
block, asphalt, concrete, sewer pipe and/or such similar materials ordinarily
used or useful in the erection or construction of any building, structure or
improvement, which are not being stored for the purpose of the immediate use by
the owner of the premises upon the premises for the purposes for which the
building or construction materials were manufactured, made or designed.
(Ord. 04-O-25, passed 6-7-2004; Am. Ord. 08-O-8, passed 2-20-2008)
§ 1462.16  RANK VEGETATION.
   (a)   Lawns and landscaping shall be kept from becoming overgrown and
unsightly and shall be maintained so as to not constitute a blighting or
deteriorating effect on the surrounding neighborhood.
      Rank vegetation shall not be permitted on any of the following premises:
      (1)   Within any public right-of-way;
      (2)   Developed or occupied lots within any duly recorded residential or
industrial subdivision;
      (3)   Lots within duly recorded residential subdivisions where such lots
are immediately adjacent to a developed or occupied lot;
      (4)   Within the front setback of commercially zoned property;
      (5)   Within the front setback of industrially zoned property;
      (6)   Multi-family developments; or
      (7)   Within the front setback of residentially zoned property not within
a recorded subdivision.
   (b)   No owner or occupant of any premises shall permit vegetation to
obscure or restrict vision along a public street or at an intersection so as to
create a safety hazard.
(Ord. 04-O-25, passed 6-7-2004)
§ 1462.17  NOXIOUS WEEDS.
   No owner or occupant shall cause, suffer or allow noxious weeds to grow on
any premises. It shall be the duty of the owner or occupant to cut, remove, or
destroy by lawful means all such noxious weeds as often as may be necessary to
protect the public health and safety.
(Ord. 04-O-25, passed 6-7-2004)
§ 1462.18  DEAD TREES AND BRANCHES.
   No owner or occupant of any premises shall permit a dead tree to stand so
near to a public sidewalk or roadway as to endanger users thereof, should all
or part of it fall. No such owner or occupant shall permit a dead branch to
overhang a public sidewalk or roadway.
(Ord. 04-O-25, passed 6-7-2004)
§ 1462.19  SIDEWALKS AND DRIVEWAYS.
   All sidewalks and driveways within the public right-of-way shall be kept in
a proper state of repair. If any sidewalk or driveway or portion thereof, by
virtue of its state of repair, shall constitute a danger to public health and
safety, the sidewalk or driveway or portion thereof shall be repaired or
replaced. Any sidewalk repair or improvement shall be made using concrete or
like kind material, or better, subject to the approval of the Zoning Inspector
or other responsible official. The aprons of driveways shall be maintained so
as to prevent loose stones or gravel from spilling or falling over into and
onto any public way, culvert or storm ditch. The owner, occupant or other
persons having charge, management or possession of any building or premises
shall keep the sidewalk or sidewalks adjacent to such building or premises in a
clean safe condition at all times.
(Ord. 04-O-25, passed 6-7-2004)
§ 1462.20  GRADING, DRAINAGE AND STAGNANT WATER.
   All premises shall be graded and maintained so as to prevent the
accumulation of stagnant water thereon. No owner or occupant of any premises
shall cause or permit any natural watercourse, drainage ditch, creek, brook,
culvert or drain located upon the premises to become obstructed so as to hinder
the flow of water.
(Ord. 04-O-25, passed 6-7-2004)
§ 1462.21  PARKING LOTS.
   (a)   Parking lots shall be kept in safe condition, free from chuck holes,
depressions, large cracks, and disintegrated or deteriorated areas. Parking
lots which are not hard surfaced shall also be kept free from dust. Driveway
aprons shall be kept in good repair and in safe condition. Damaged curbing
shall be repaired or replaced.
   (b)   Where necessary for traffic safety, painted striping shall be provided
and shall be visible and maintained in good condition.
(Ord. 04-O-25, passed 6-7-2004)
§ 1462.22  BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES.
   All buildings, structures, and premises shall be constructed, altered,
repaired and maintained in accordance with the various building codes adopted
by the city of Kirtland. Premises declared to be a public nuisance by the
responsible official in accordance with legally adopted building codes and
laws, are declared a public nuisance as defined and regulated in this chapter.
(Ord. 04-O-25, passed 6-7-2004)
§ 1462.23  RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   (a)   The Zoning Inspector or other responsible official is hereby
authorized to make or cause to be made inspections of the exterior of all
premises within the city. All exterior premises must be available and
accessible for such inspections, and the owner or occupant is required to
provide the necessary arrangements to facilitate such inspections.
   (b)   Where the Zoning Inspector or other responsible official or his or her
agent is refused access, or is otherwise impeded or prevented by the owner,
occupant, or any other person from conducting an inspection of the premises,
such owner, occupant, or other person preventing such inspection shall be in
violation of this code and subject to the penalties contained herein.
   (c)   In order to safeguard the safety, health, and welfare of the public,
the Mayor, Fire Chief, City Engineer, or Zoning Inspector of the city or a
Building Inspector or Health District official of Lake County, Ohio, is
authorized to gain consensual entry to any structure or premises, and any parts
thereof, at any reasonable time, for the purpose of making inspections and
performing duties under this code.
   (d)   If any owner, occupant, or other person in charge of a structure
subject to the provisions of this code refuses, impedes, inhibits, interferes
with, restricts, or obstructs entry and free access to any part of the
structure or premises where inspection authorized by this code is sought, or if
the building reasonably appears to have been abandoned and the whereabouts of
the owner or person in charge is not known or readily available, the above
referred to official shall be permitted to seek, in a court of competent
jurisdiction, including but not limited to the Willoughby Municipal Court, a
warrant for administrative inspection.
   (e)   Any warrant for administrative inspection shall allow for the
inspection of the subject structure and premises, and any parts thereof,
pursuant to the provisions of this code and shall be so limited in scope.
   (f)   Nothing herein shall be construed to limit the authority of the above
referred to official to gain access to any structure or premises in emergency
circumstances or otherwise pursuant to law.
   (g)   Every occupant of a structure or premises shall give the owner or
operator thereof or agent or employee, access to any part of such structure or
its premises at reasonable times for the purpose of making such inspection,
maintenance, repairs, or alterations as are necessary to comply with the
provisions of this code. Any person that refuses to permit inspection or
otherwise obstructs, hinders, or interferes with the inspection of a premises
pursuant to the execution of an administrative warrant is guilty of a
misdemeanor as provided in §
1462.99.
(Ord. 04-O-25, passed 6-7-2004; Am. Ord. 13-O-51, passed 9-16-2013)
§ 1462.24  RESPONSIBILITIES OF OWNER AND OCCUPANT.
   (a)   Owners shall have the duties and responsibilities as prescribed in
this code and no owner shall be relieved from any such duty and responsibility
nor be entitled to defend against any charge of violation thereof by reason of
the fact that the occupant is also responsible therefor and in violation
thereof.
   (b)   Occupants shall have all duties and responsibilities as prescribed by
this code and the occupant shall not be relieved from any such duty and
responsibility nor be entitled to defend against any charge of violation
thereof by reason of the fact that the owner is also responsible therefor and
in violation thereof.
(Ord. 04-O-25, passed 6-7-2004)
§ 1462.25  FAILURE TO COMPLY.
   Whenever the owner and/or occupant of a structure or premises fails,
neglects or refuses to comply with any notice of violation within the time
period specified in the notice, the responsible official shall proceed as
provided in §§
1462.26 and
1462.99. The remedies provided herein are cumulative and shall not be construed
to limit or exclude any remedy the City of Kirtland may have either in law and/
or equity.
(Ord. 04-O-25, passed 6-7-2004)
§ 1462.26  ABATEMENT OF VIOLATIONS.
   Where the owner and/or occupant of any premises fails to comply with the
notice of violation of any other provisions of this chapter within the time
period specified in the notice, the responsible official shall cause such
violation to be corrected, removed or abated. The responsible official may
contract with a private person or firm to accomplish the task. The actual cost
of bringing the property into compliance plus 15 percent for inspections and
administration shall be billed to the owner and/or occupant. If the bill is not
paid within 30 days after submission then the Clerk of Council shall certify
the costs together with a ten percent penalty to the Lake County Auditor for
placement on the tax duplicate to be collected as other taxes for return to the
City of Kirtland.
(Ord. 04-O-25, passed 6-7-2004)
§ 1462.99  PROSECUTION OF VIOLATIONS.
   (a)   Whenever the person responsible under this chapter with the
maintenance of a structure or premises fails to comply with any final order as
provided in this chapter, the Law Director may institute appropriate action at
law.
   (b)   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter, or fails to comply
with any final order as provided herein shall be, upon conviction of the same
as a first offense, guilty of a minor misdemeanor. Any subsequent offense shall
constitute a misdemeanor of the third degree. A separate offense shall be
deemed committed each day on which a violation occurs or continues.
   (c)   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter, or fails to comply
with any final order as provided herein, on more than one subject matter in any
two-year period separate and distinct from a conviction upon a prior subject
matter or any continued daily violation of such prior subject matter, shall be,
upon conviction of the same, guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. A
separate offense on such subsequent subject matter within two years shall be
deemed committed each day on which a violation or noncompliance occurs or
continues.
   (d)   Any person that refuses to permit inspection or otherwise obstructs,
hinders or interferes with the inspection of a premises pursuant to the
execution of an administrative warrant is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree set forth in
Chapter 698.
(Ord. 13-O-51, passed 9-16-2013)
CHAPTER 1464:  EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL
Section
1464.01   Purpose and scope.
1464.02   Definitions.
1464.03   Disclaimer of liability.
1464.04   Conflicts, severability, nuisances and responsibility.
1464.05   Development of stormwater pollution prevention plans.
1464.06   Application procedures.
1464.07   Compliance with state and federal regulations.
1464.08   Stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWP3).
1464.09   Performance standards.
1464.10   Abbreviated stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWP3).
1464.11   Fees.
1464.12   Bond.
1464.13   Enforcement.
1464.14   Violations.
1464.15   Appeals.
1464.99   Penalty.
§ 1464.01  PURPOSE AND SCOPE.
   (a)   The purpose of this regulation is to establish technically feasible
and economically reasonable standards to achieve a level of erosion and
sediment control that will minimize damage to property and degradation of water
resources, and will promote and maintain the health and safety of the citizens
of City of Kirtland.
   (b)   This regulation will:
      (1)   Allow development while minimizing increases in erosion and
sedimentation.
      (2)   Reduce water quality impacts to receiving water resources that may
be caused by new development or redevelopment activities.
   (c)   This regulation applies to all parcels used or being developed, either
wholly or partially, for new or relocated projects involving highways,
underground cables, or pipelines; subdivisions or larger common plans of
development; industrial, commercial, institutional, or residential projects;
building activities on farms; redevelopment activities; general clearing; and
all other uses that are not specifically exempted in division (d) of this
section.
   (d)   This regulation does not apply to activities regulated by, and in
compliance with, the Ohio Agricultural Sediment Pollution Abatement Rules.
(Ord. 16-O-39, passed 10-17-2016)
§ 1464.02  DEFINITIONS.
   For purpose of this regulation, the following terms shall have the meaning
herein indicated:
   (a)   Abbreviated erosion and sediment control plan (abbreviated SWP3). 
"Abbreviated erosion and sediment control plan (abbreviated SWP3)" is the
written document that sets forth the plans and practices to be used to meet the
requirements of this regulation.
   (b)   Acre.  "Acre" is a measurement of area equaling 43,560 square feet.
   (c)   Administrator.  "Administrator" is the person or entity having the
responsibility and duty of administering and ensuring compliance with this
regulation.
   (d)   Best management practices (BMPs): Also stormwater control measure
(SCM).  "Best management practices (BMPs)": Also "stormwater control measure
(SCM)" means schedule of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance
procedures, and other management practices (both structural and non-structural)
to prevent or reduce the pollution of water resources. BMPs also include
treatment requirements, operating procedures, and practices to control facility
and/or construction site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal;
or drainage from raw material storage.
   (e)   Commencement of construction.  "Commencement of construction" means
the initial disturbance of soils associated with clearing, grubbing, grading,
placement of fill, or excavating activities or other construction activities.
   (f)   Community.  "Community," throughout this regulation, this shall refer
to City of Kirtland, its designated representatives, boards, or commissions.
   (g)   Concentrated stormwater runoff.  "Concentrated stormwater runoff"
means any stormwater runoff that flows through a drainage pipe, ditch,
diversion, or other discrete conveyance channel.
   (h)   Construction entrance.  "Construction entrance" means the permitted
points of ingress and egress to development areas regulated under this
regulation.
   (i)   Critical area.  "Critical area" means any area the disturbance of
which would cause soil erosion and sediment runoff and damage to private
properties, water courses, storm sewers or public lands due to topography, soil
type, hydrology, or proximity to a water course. These areas include, but are
not limited to, riparian areas, wetlands, and highly erodible soils.
   (j)   Development area.  "Development area" means a parcel or contiguous
parcels owned by one person or persons, or operated as one development unit,
and used or being developed for commercial, industrial, residential,
institutional, or other construction or alteration that changes runoff
characteristics.
   (k)   Dewatering volume.  "Dewatering volume" see current Ohio Rainwater and
Land Development Manual.
   (l)   Discharge.  "Discharge" means the addition of any pollutant to surface
waters of the state from a point source.
   (m)   Disturbance.  "Disturbance" means any clearing, grading, excavating,
filling, or other alteration of land surface where natural or man-made cover is
destroyed in a manner that exposes the underlying soils.
   (n)   Disturbed area.  "Disturbed area" means an area of land subject to
erosion due to the removal of vegetative cover and/or soil disturbing
activities such as grading, excavating, or filling.
   (o)   Drainage.  "Drainage" means:
      (1)   The area of land contributing surface water to a specific point.
      (2)   The removal of excess surface water or groundwater from land by
surface of subsurface drains.
   (p)   Drainage watershed.  "Drainage watershed" means, for the purpose of
this regulation, the total contributing drainage area to a BMP, i.e., the
"watershed" directed to the practice. This includes offsite contributing
drainage.
   (q)   Drainage way.  "Drainage way" means a natural or manmade channel,
ditch, or waterway that conveys surface water in a concentrated manner by
gravity.
   (r)   Erosion.  "Erosion" means the process by which the land surface is
worn away by the action of wind, water, ice, gravity, or any combination of
those forces.
   (s)   Erosion and sediment control.  "Erosion and sediment control" means
the control of soil, both mineral and organic, to minimize the removal of soil
from the land surface and to prevent its transport from a disturbed area by
means of wind, water, ice, gravity, or any combination of those forces.
   (t)   Erosion and sediment control plan.  "Erosion and sediment control
plan" means the written document meeting the requirements of this regulation
which sets forth the plans and practices to be used to minimize soil erosion
and prevent off-site disposal of soil sediment by containing sediment on-site
or bypassing sediment-laden runoff through a sediment control measure during
and after land development.
   (u)   Final stabilization.  "Final stabilization" means all soil disturbing
activities at the site have been completed and a uniform perennial vegetative
cover with a density of at least 80 percent coverage for the area has been
established or equivalent stabilization measures, such as the use of mulches or
geotextiles, have been employed. In addition, all temporary erosion and
sediment control practices are removed and disposed of and all trapped sediment
is permanently stabilized to prevent further erosion. Final stabilization also
requires the installation of permanent (post-construction) stormwater control
measures (SCMs).
   (v)   Grading.  "Grading" means the excavating, filling, or stockpiling of
earth material, or any combination thereof, including the land in its excavated
or filled condition.
   (w)   Grubbing.  "Grubbing" means removing or grinding of roots, stumps and
other unwanted material below existing grade.
   (x)   Impervious.  "Impervious" is that which does not allow infiltration.
   (y)   Landscape architect.  "Landscape architect" is a professional
landscape architect registered in the State of Ohio.
   (z)   Larger common plan of development or sale.  "Larger common plan of
development or sale" means a contiguous area where multiple separate and
distinct construction activities may be taking place at different times on
different schedules under one plan.
   (aa)   Maximum extent practicable (MEP).  "Maximum extent practicable (MEP)"
means the technology-based discharge standard for municipal separate storm
sewer systems to reduce pollutants in storm water discharges that was
established by the Clean Water Act § 402(p). A discussion of MEP as it applies
to small MS4s is found in 40 CFR 122.34.
   (bb)   Municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4).  "Municipal separate
storm sewer system (MS4)" means a conveyance or system of conveyances
(including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs,
gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm drains) that are:
      (1)   Owned or operated by the federal government, state, municipality,
township, county, district, or other public body (created by or pursuant to
state or federal law) including a special district under state law such as a
sewer district, flood control district or drainage districts, or similar
entity, or a designated and approved management agency under Section 208 of the
Federal Water Pollution Control Act that discharges into surface waters of the
state; and
      (2)   Designed or used for collecting or conveying solely stormwater,
      (3)   Which is not a combined sewer, and
      (4)   Which is not a part of a publicly owned treatment works.
   (cc)   National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES).  "National
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES)" means the national program for
issuing, modifying, revoking and reissuing, termination, monitoring and
enforcing permits and enforcing pretreatment requirements, under sections 307,
402, 318, 405 under the Clean Water Act.
   (dd)   Operator.  "Operator" means any party associated with a construction
project that meets either of the following two criteria:
      (1)   The party has operational control over construction plans and
specifications, including the ability to make modifications to those plans and
specifications; or
      (2)   The party has day-to-day operational control of those activities at
a project which are necessary to ensure compliance with a stormwater pollution
prevention plan (SWP3) for the site or other permit conditions (e.g. they are
authorized to direct workers at a site to carry out activities required by the
SWP3 or comply with other permit conditions.
   (ee)   Owner or operator.  "Owner or operator" means the owner or operator
of any "facility or activity" subject to regulation under the NPDES program.
   (ff)   Subdivisions, major and minor.  "Subdivisions, major and minor" see
Ohio Administrative Code 711.001 for definition.
   (gg)   Parcel.  "Parcel" means a tract of land occupied or intended to be
occupied by a use, building or group of buildings and their accessory uses and
buildings as a unit, together with such open spaces and driveways as are
provided and required. A parcel may contain more than one contiguous lot
individually identified by a 'permanent parcel number' assigned by the Lake
County Auditor's Office.
   (hh)   Percent imperviousness.  "Percent imperviousness" means the
impervious area created divided by the total area of the project site.
   (ii)   Permanent stabilization.  "Permanent stabilization" is establishment
of permanent vegetation, decorative landscape mulching, matting, sod, rip rap,
and landscaping techniques to provide permanent erosion control on areas where
construction operations are complete or where no further disturbance is
expected for at least one year.
   (jj)   Person.  "Person" means any individual, corporation, firm, trust,
commission, board, public or private partnership, joint venture, agency,
unincorporated association, municipal corporation, county or state agency, the
federal government, other legal entity, or an agent thereof.
   (kk)   Phasing.  "Phasing" means clearing a parcel of land in distinct
sections, with the stabilization of each section before the clearing of the
next.
   (ll)   Point source.  "Point source" means any discernible, confined and
discrete conveyance, including but not limited to, any pipe, ditch, channel,
tunnel, conduit, well, discrete fissure, container, rolling stock, concentrated
animal feeding operation, landfill leachate collection system, vessel or the
floating craft from which pollutants are or may be discharged. This term does
not include return flows from irrigated agriculture or agricultural stormwater
runoff.
   (mm)   Pre-construction meeting.  "Pre-construction meeting" is a meeting
between the City of Kirtland and all principle parties, prior to the start of
any construction, at a site that requires an erosion and sediment control plan.
   (nn)   Pre-winter stabilization meeting.  "Pre-winter stabilization meeting"
is a meeting between the City of Kirtland and all principal parties, prior to
October 1, in order to plan winter erosion and sediment controls for a site
that requires an erosion and sediment control plan.
   (oo)   Professional engineer.  "Professional engineer" is a professional
engineer registered in the State of Ohio.
   (pp)   Qualified inspection personnel.  "Qualified inspection personnel" is
a person knowledgeable in the principles and practice of erosion and sediment
controls, and who possess the skills to assess all conditions at the
construction site that could impact stormwater quality and to assess the
effectiveness of any sediment and erosion control measure selected to control
the quality of stormwater discharges from the construction activity.
   (qq)   Rainwater and land development.  "Rainwater and land development"
means Ohio's standards for stormwater management, land development, and urban
stream protection. The most current edition of these standards shall be used
with this regulation.
   (rr)   Riparian area.  "Riparian area" means the transition area between
flowing water and terrestrial (land) ecosystems composed of trees, shrubs and
surrounding vegetation which serve to stabilize erodible soil, improve both
surface and ground water quality, increase stream shading and enhance wildlife
habitat.
   (ss)   Runoff.  "Runoff" means the portion of rainfall, melted snow, or
irrigation water that flows across the ground surface and is eventually
conveyed to water resources or wetlands.
   (tt)   Runoff coefficient.  "Runoff coefficient" means the fraction of
rainfall that will appear at the conveyance as runoff.
   (uu)   Sediment.  "Sediment" means the soils or other surface materials that
are transported or deposited by the action of wind, water, ice, gravity, or any
combination of those forces, as a product of erosion.
   (vv)   Sedimentation.  "Sedimentation" means the deposition or settling of
sediment.
   (ww)   Sediment settling pond.  "Sediment settling pond" means a sediment
trap, sediment basin or permanent basin that has been temporarily modified for
sediment control, as described in the latest edition of Rainwater and Land
Development.
   (xx)   Sediment storage volume.  "Sediment storage volume" see current
edition of Rainwater and Land Development.
   (yy)   Setback.  "Setback" means a designated transition area around water
resources that is left in a natural, usually vegetated, state to protect the
water resources from runoff pollution. Soil disturbing activities in this area
are restricted by this regulation.
   (zz)   Soil disturbing activity.  "Soil disturbing activity" means clearing,
grading, excavating, filling, grubbing or stump removal that occurs during
clearing or timber activities, or other alteration of the earth's surface where
natural or human made ground cover is destroyed and that may result in, or
contribute to, erosion and sediment pollution.
   (aaa)   Soil & water conservation district.  "Soil & water conservation
district" is an entity organized under R.C. Chapter 1515 referring to either
the Soil and Water Conservation District Board or its designated employee(s).
Hereafter referred to as Lake County Soil and Water Conservation District
(LCSWCD).
   (bbb)   Stabilization.  "Stabilization" means the use of BMPs, such as
seeding and mulching, that reduce or prevent soil erosion by water, wind, ice,
gravity, or a combination of those forces.
   (ccc)   Steep slopes.  "Steep slopes" are slopes that are 15 percent or
greater in grade.
   (ddd)   Stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWP3).  "Stormwater pollution
prevention plan (SWP3)" means the written document that sets forth the plans
and practices to be used to meet the requirements of this regulation. This
typically contains the erosion and sediment control plan for the site.
   (eee)   Stormwater.  "Stormwater" means stormwater runoff, snow melt and
surface runoff and drainage.
   (fff)   Surface outlet.  "Surface outlet" means a dewatering device that
only draws water from the surface of the water.
   (ggg)   Surface water of the state: also water resource or water body. 
"Surface water of the state" also "water resource or water body" means any
stream, lake, reservoir, pond, marsh, wetland, or other waterway situated
wholly or partly within the boundaries of the state, except those private
waters which do not combine or affect a junction with surface water. Waters
defined as sewerage systems, treatment works or disposal systems in R.C. §
6131.01 are not included.
   (hhh)   Temporary stabilization.  "Temporary stabilization" means the
establishment of temporary vegetation, mulching, geotextiles, sod, preservation
of existing vegetation, and other techniques capable of quickly establishing
cover over disturbed areas to provide erosion control between construction
operations.
   (iii)   Topsoil.  "Topsoil" means the upper layer of the soil that is
usually darker in color and richer in organic matter and nutrients than
subsoil.
   (jjj)   Total maximum daily load (TMDL).  "Total maximum daily load (TMDL)"
means the sum of the existing and/or projected point source, nonpoint source,
and background loads for a pollutant to a specified watershed, water resource
or wetland, or water resource or wetland segment. A TMDL sets and allocates the
maximum amount of a pollutant that may be introduced into the water and still
ensure attainment and maintenance of water quality standard.
   (kkk)   Unstable soils.  "Unstable soils" means a portion of land that is
identified by the Kirtland City Engineer as prone to slipping, sloughing, or
landslides, or is identified by the U.S. Department of Agriculture Natural
Resource Conservation Service methodology as having low soil strength.
   (lll)   Water quality volume (WQv).  "Water quality volume (WQv)" is the
volume of stormwater runoff which must be captured and treated prior to
discharge from the developed site after construction is complete. WQv is based
on the expected runoff generated by the mean storm precipitation volume from
post-construction site conditions at which rapidly diminishing returns in the
number of runoff events captured begins to occur.
   (mmm)   Water resource: also surface water of the state.  "Water resource"
also "surface water of the state" means any stream, lake, reservoir, pond,
marsh, wetland, or waterway situated wholly or partly within the boundaries of
the state, except those private waters which do not combine or affect a
junction with surface water. Waters defined as sewerage systems, treatment
works or disposal systems in R.C. § 6111.01 are not included.
   (nnn)   Watershed.  "Watershed" means the total drainage area contributing
runoff to a single point.
   (ooo)   Wetland.  "Wetland" means those areas, that are inundated or
saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to
support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of
vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, including
swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas (40 C.F.R. 232, as amended).
(Ord. 16-O-39, passed 10-17-2016)
§ 1464.03  DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   Compliance with the provisions of this regulation shall not relieve any
person from responsibility for damage to any person otherwise imposed by law.
The provisions of this regulation are promulgated to promote the health,
safety, and welfare of the public and are not designed for the benefit of any
individual or for the benefit of any particular parcel of property.
(Ord. 16-O-39, passed 10-17-2016)
§ 1464.04  CONFLICTS, SEVERABILITY, NUISANCES AND RESPONSIBILITY.
   (a)   Where this regulation is in conflict with other provisions of law or
ordinance, the most restrictive provisions shall prevail.
   (b)   If any clause, section, or provision of this regulation is declared
invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, the validity
of the remainder shall not be affected thereby.
   (c)   This regulation shall not be construed as authorizing any person to
maintain a private or public nuisance on their property, and compliance with
the provisions of this regulation shall not be a defense in any action to abate
such a nuisance.
   (d)   Failure of the city to observe or recognize hazardous or unsightly
conditions or to recommend corrective measures shall not relieve the site owner
from the responsibility for the condition or damage resulting therefrom, and
shall not result in the city, its officers, employees, or agents being
responsible for any condition or damage resulting therefrom.
(Ord. 16-O-39, passed 10-17-2016)
§ 1464.05  DEVELOPMENT OF STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLANS.
   (a)   This regulation requires that a storm water pollution prevention plan
be developed and implemented for all soil disturbing activities disturbing one
or more acres of total land, or less than one acre if part of a larger common
plan of development or sale disturbing one or more acres of total land.
   (b)   The following activities shall submit an abbreviated SWP3:
      (1)   New single-family residential construction. If such activities
disturb one acre or more, or are part of a larger common plan of development or
sale disturbing one acre or more, a full SWP3 and compliance with the Ohio EPA
Construction General Permit are required.
      (2)   Additions or accessory buildings for single-family residential
construction. If such activities disturb one acre or more, or are part of a
larger common plan of development or sale disturbing one acre or more, a full
SWP3 and compliance with the Ohio EPA Construction Site General Permit are
required.
      (3)   All non-residential construction on parcels of less than one acre.
      (4)   General clearing activities not related to construction. If such
activities disturb one acre or more, or are part of a larger common plan of
development or sale disturbing one acre or more, compliance with the Ohio EPA
Construction Site General Permit and a full SWP3 are required.
   (c)   Activities disturbing one tenth or less of an acre are not required to
submit a SWP3 or an abbreviated SWP3, unless required by the Kirtland City
Engineer. These activities must comply with all other provisions of this
regulation.
(Ord. 16-O-39, passed 10-17-2016)
§ 1464.06  APPLICATION PROCEDURES.
   (a)   Soil disturbing activities submitting a stormwater pollution
prevention plan (SWP3).  The applicant shall submit two sets of the SWP3 and
the applicable fees to the city and two sets of the SWP3 and the applicable
fees to the LCSWCD as follows:
      (1)   For subdivisions.  After the approval of the preliminary plans and
with submittal of the improvement plans.
      (2)   For other construction projects.  Before issuance of a zoning
permit by the Zoning Inspector.
      (3)   For general clearing projects.  Prior to issuance of a zoning
permit by the Zoning Inspector.
   (b)   Soil disturbing activities submitting an abbreviated stormwater
pollution prevention plan (SWP3).  The applicant shall submit two sets of the
abbreviated SWP3 and the applicable fees to the city and two sets of the
abbreviated SWP3 and the applicable fees to the LCSWCD as follows:
      (1)   For single-family home construction.  Before issuance of a zoning
permit by the Zoning Inspector.
      (2)   For other construction projects.  Before issuance of a zoning
permit by the Zoning Inspector.
      (3)   For general clearing projects.  Prior to issuance of a zoning
permit by the Zoning Inspector.
   (c)   The Kirtland City Engineer and the LCSWCD shall review the plans
submitted under division (a) or (b) of this section for conformance with this
regulation and approve, or return for revisions with comments and
recommendations for revisions. A plan rejected because of deficiencies shall
receive a narrative report stating specific problems and the procedures for
filing a revised plan.
   (d)   Soil disturbing activities shall not begin and zoning permits shall
not be issued without:
      (1)   Approved SWP3 or abbreviated SWP3;
      (2)   Installation of erosion and sediment controls;
      (3)   Physical marking in the field of protected areas or critical areas,
including wetlands and riparian areas.
   (e)   SWP3 for individual sublots in a subdivision will not be approved
unless the larger common plan of development or sale containing the sublot is
in compliance with this regulation.
   (f)   The developer, engineer and contractor, and other principal parties,
shall meet with the Kirtland Public Service Administrator for a pre-
construction meeting no less than seven days prior to soil-disturbing activity
at the site to ensure that erosion and sediment control devices are properly
installed, limits of disturbance and buffer areas are properly delineated and
construction personnel are aware of such devices and areas. Pre-construction
meetings for abbreviated SWP3s may be waived at the discretion of the Kirtland
Public Service Administrator.
   (g)   Approvals issued in accordance with this regulation shall remain valid
for one year from the date of approval.
(Ord. 16-O-39, passed 10-17-2016)
§ 1464.07  COMPLIANCE WITH STATE AND FEDERAL REGULATIONS.
   Approvals issued in accordance with this regulation do not relieve the
applicant of responsibility for obtaining all other necessary permits and/or
approvals from the Ohio EPA, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, and other
federal, state, and/or county agencies. If requirements vary, the most
restrictive requirement shall prevail. These permits may include, but are not
limited to, those listed below. All submittals that are required to show proof
of compliance with these state and federal regulations shall be submitted with
SWP3s or abbreviated SWP3s.
   (a)   Ohio EPA NPDES Permits authorizing stormwater discharges associated
with construction activity or the most current version thereof.  Proof of
compliance with these requirements shall be the applicant's Notice of Intent
(NOI) number from Ohio EPA, a copy of the Ohio EPA Director's Authorization
Letter for the NPDES Permit, or a letter from the site owner certifying and
explaining why the NPDES Permit is not applicable.
   (b)   Section 401 of the Clean Water Act.  Proof of compliance shall be a
copy of the Ohio EPA Water Quality Certification application tracking number,
public notice, project approval, or a letter from the site owner certifying
that a qualified professional has surveyed the site and determined that Section
401 of the Clean Water Act is not applicable. Wetlands, and other waters of the
United States, shall be delineated by protocols accepted by the U.S. Army Corps
of Engineers at the time an application is made under this regulation.
   (c)   Ohio EPA Isolated Wetland Permit.  Proof of compliance shall be a copy
of Ohio EPA's Isolated Wetland Permit application tracking number, public
notice, project approval, or a letter from the site owner certifying that a
qualified professional has surveyed the site and determined that Ohio EPA's
Isolated Wetlands Permit is not applicable. Isolated wetlands shall be
delineated by protocols accepted by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers at the
time an application is made under this regulation.
   (d)   Section 404 of the Clean Water Act.  Proof of compliance shall be a
copy of the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers Individual Permit application, public
notice, or project approval, if an individual permit is required for the
development project. If an individual permit is not required, the site owner
shall submit proof of compliance with the U.S. Army Corps of Engineer's
Nationwide Permit Program. This shall include one of the following:
      (1)   A letter from the site owner certifying that a qualified
professional has evaluated the site and determined that Section 404 of the
Clean Water Act is not applicable, and provide documentation.
      (2)   A site plan showing that any proposed fill of waters of the United
States conforms to the general and special conditions specified in the
applicable Nationwide Permit. Wetlands, and other waters of the United States,
shall be delineated by protocols accepted by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers
at the time an application is made under this regulation.
   (e)   Ohio Dam Safety Law.  Proof of compliance shall be a copy of the ODNR
Division of Water permit application tracking number, a copy of the project
approval letter from the ODNR Division of Water, or a letter from the site
owner certifying and explaining why the Ohio Dam Safety Law is not applicable.
(Ord. 16-O-39, passed 10-17-2016)
§ 1464.08  STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN (SWP3).
   (a)   In order to control sediment pollution of water resources, the
applicant shall submit a SWP3 in accordance with the requirements of this
regulation.
   (b)   The SWP3 shall include best management practices (BMPs) and stormwater
control measures (SCMs) adequate to prevent pollution of public waters by soil
sediment from accelerated storm water runoff from development areas.
   (c)   The SWP3 shall be certified by a professional engineer, a registered
surveyor, certified professional erosion and sediment control specialist, or a
registered landscape architect.
   (d)   The SWP3 shall be amended whenever there is a change in design,
construction, operation or maintenance, which has a significant effect on the
potential for the discharge of pollutants to surface waters of the state or if
the SWP3 proves to be ineffective in achieving the general objectives of
controlling pollutants in stormwater discharges associated with construction
activity.
   (e)   The SWP3 shall incorporate measures as recommended by the most current
online edition of Rainwater and Land Development as published by the Ohio
Environmental Protection Agency and shall include the following information:
      (1)   A cover page or title identifying the name and location of the
site, the name and contact information of all construction site operators, the
name and contact information for the person responsible for authorizing and
amending the SWP3, preparation date, and the estimated start and completion
dates for construction.
      (2)   A copy of the permit requirements (attaching a copy of the current
Ohio EPA NPDES Construction General Permit is acceptable).
      (3)   Site description. The SWP3 shall provide:
         A.   A description of the nature and type of the construction activity
(e.g. residential, shopping mall, highway, etc.).
         B.   Total area of the site and the area of the site that is expected
to be disturbed (i.e., grubbing, clearing, excavation, filling or grading,
including off-site borrow areas).
         C.   An estimate of the impervious area and percent of imperviousness
created by the land disturbance.
         D.   A calculation of the run-off coefficients for both the pre-
construction and post-construction site conditions.
         E.   Existing data describing the soil and, if available, the quality
of any known pollutant discharge from the site such as that which may result
from previous contamination caused by prior land uses.
         F.   A description of prior land uses at the site.
         G.   An implementation schedule which describes the sequence of major
soil-disturbing operations (i.e., grubbing, excavating, grading, utilities and
infrastructure installation) and the implementation of erosion and sediment
controls to be employed during each operation of the sequence.
         H.   The location and name of the immediate receiving stream or
surface water(s) and the first subsequent receiving water(s) and the aerial
extent and description of wetlands or other special aquatic sites at or near
the site which will be disturbed or which will receive discharges from
disturbed areas of the project. For discharges to a municipal separate storm
sewer system (MS4), the point of discharge to the MS4 and the location where
the MS4 ultimately discharges to a water resource shall be indicated.
         I.   List TMDLs applicable for the site and demonstrate that
appropriate BMPs or stormwater control measures (SCMs) have been selected to
address these phosphorus, nitrogen, habitat, bacteria, and TSS TMDLs.
         J.   For subdivided developments, a detail drawing of a typical
individual lot showing standard individual lot erosion and sediment control
practices. This does not remove the responsibility to designate specific
erosion and sediment control practices in the SWP3 for areas such as steep
slopes, stream banks, drainage ways, and riparian zones.
         K.   Location and description of any stormwater discharges associated
with dedicated asphalt and dedicated concrete plants associated with the
development area and the best management practices to address pollutants in
these stormwater discharges.
         L.   A log documenting grading and stabilization activities as well as
amendments to the SWP3, which occur after construction activities commence.
         M.   Each temporary and permanent stormwater practice shall be
designated with an individual identification number.
         N.   Site map showing:
            1.   Limits of soil-disturbing activity of the site, including off
site spoil and borrow areas.
            2.   Soils types should be depicted for all areas of the site,
including locations of unstable or highly erodible soils.
            3.   Existing and proposed one-foot contours. This must include a
delineation of drainage watersheds expected during and after major grading
activities as well as the size of each drainage watershed in acres.
            4.   Surface water locations including springs, wetlands, streams,
lakes, water wells, etc., on or within 200 feet of the site, including the
boundaries of wetlands or stream channels and first subsequent named receiving
water(s) the applicant intends to fill or relocate for which the applicant is
seeking approval from the Army Corps of Engineers and/or Ohio EPA.
            5.   Existing and planned locations of buildings, roads, parking
facilities, and utilities.
            6.   The location of all erosion and sediment control practices,
including the location of areas likely to require temporary stabilization
during the course of site development.
            7.   Sediment and stormwater management basins including their
sediment settling volume and the maximum expected disturbed area that will be
directed to the sediment pond during construction. The plan should include a
summary of the following:
               a.   The required sediment storage and dewatering volumes;
               b.   The provided sediment storage and dewatering volumes;
               c.   The weir length or skimmer size, as applicable;
               d.   The weir length or skimmer size provided.
            8.   Data sheets for all sediment traps, sediment basins, and SCMs
that identify contributing drainage area, disturbed area, water quality volume,
sedimentation volume, dewatering volume, practice surface area, facility
discharge and dewatering time, outlet type and dimensions, and any other
relevant parameters for each practice.
            9.   A separate plan and profile view of each individual sediment
settling pond and its outlet structure. Detail drawings of the outlet structure
shall indicate the following elevations:
               a.    Pond bottom;
               b.    Elevation required to store the required sediment storage
volume;
               c.   For sediment basins, the elevation at which the skimmer is
attached;
               d.   For sediment traps, the top and bottom of the stone outlet
section;
               e.    Elevation required to store the dewatering volume,
exclusive of the sediment storage volume;
               f.    Elevation of the top of embankment;
               g.    Crest of the emergency spillway.
            10.   Where used as a sediment-settling pond during construction,
the plan shall include a detail drawing of the temporary outlet configuration
of the permanent storm water basin with the following information specified:
               a.    Storage volume provided below the elevation at which the
skimmer or other surface dewatering device is attached;
               b.    Elevation at which the skimmer or other surface dewatering
device is attached;
               c.    Elevation at which the full dewatering zone is stored
above the skimmer invert;
               d.   Any temporary modification to permanent outlet orifices or
weirs are required to ensure no discharge below the skimmer invert and only the
skimmer controls the discharge up to the top of the dewatering volume;
               e.    Calculations of the sediment storage volume, dewatering
volume and skimmer drawdown time shall also be provided.
            11.   The location of permanent SCMs to be used to control
pollutants in stormwater after construction operations have been completed.
            12.   Areas designated for the storage or disposal of solid,
sanitary and toxic wastes, including dumpster areas, areas designated for
cement truck washout, and vehicle fueling.
            13.   Methods to minimize the exposure of building materials,
building products, construction wastes, trash, landscape materials,
fertilizers, pesticides, herbicides, detergents, and sanitary waste to
precipitation, stormwater runoff, and snow melt.
            14.   Measures to prevent and respond to chemical spills and leaks.
Applicants may also reference the existence of other plans (i.e., spill
prevention control and countermeasure (SPCC) plans, spill control programs,
safety response plans, etc.) provided that such plan addresses this requirement
and a copy of such plan is maintained on site.
            15.   Methods to minimize the discharge of pollutants from
equipment and vehicle washing, wheel wash water, and other wash waters. No
detergents may be used to wash vehicles. Wash waters shall be treated in a
sediment basin or alternative control that provides equivalent treatment prior
to discharge.
            16.   The location of designated stoned construction entrances
where the vehicles will ingress and egress the construction site.
            17.   The location of any in-stream activities including stream
crossings.
      (4)   A soils engineering report. The Kirtland City Engineer may require
the SWP3 to include a soils engineering report based upon his/her determination
that the conditions of the soils are unknown or unclear to the extent that
additional information is required to protect against erosion or other hazards.
This report shall be based on adequate and necessary test borings, and shall
contain all the information listed below. Recommendations included in the
report and approved by the Kirtland City Engineer shall be incorporated in the
grading plans and/or other specifications for site development.
         A.   Data regarding the nature, distribution, strength, and
erodibility of existing soils.
         B.   If applicable, data regarding the nature, distribution, strength,
and erodibility of the soil to be placed on the site.
         C.   Conclusions and recommendations for grading procedures.
         D.   Conclusions and recommended designs for interim soil
stabilization devices and measures, and for permanent soil stabilization after
construction is completed.
         E.   Design criteria for corrective measures when necessary.
         F.   Opinions and recommendations covering the stability of the site.
(Ord. 16-O-39, passed 10-17-2016)
§ 1464.09  PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.
   The SWP3 must contain a description of the controls appropriate for each
construction operation and the applicant must implement such controls. The SWP3
must clearly describe for each major construction activity the appropriate
control measures; the general sequence during the construction process under
which the measures will be implemented; and the contractor responsible for
implementation (e.g., contractor A will clear land and install perimeter
controls and contractor B will maintain perimeter controls until final
stabilization).
   The approved SWP3, and the sediment and erosion controls, and non-sediment
pollution controls contained therein, shall be implemented upon the
commencement of construction. Perimeter controls must be installed two working
days prior to commencement of construction. The approved plan must be
implemented until the site reaches final stabilization. All properties adjacent
to the site of soil-disturbing activity shall be protected from soil erosion
and sediment run-off and damage, including, but not limited to, private
properties, natural and artificial waterways, wetlands, storm sewers and public
lands.
   It is the owner's responsibility to maintain current records of contractor
(s) responsible for implementation of the SWP3 and providing that information
to Public Service Administrator. The SWP3 shall identify all subcontractors
engaged in activities that could impact stormwater runoff. The SWP3 shall
contain signatures from all of the identified subcontractors indicating that
they have been informed and understand their roles and responsibilities in
complying with the SWP3. The applicant shall review the SWP3 with the primary
contractor prior to commencement of construction activities and keep a SWP3
training log to demonstrate that this review had occurred.
   Erosion and sediment controls shall be designed, installed and maintained
effectively to minimize the discharge of pollutants during the course of earth
disturbing activities. The controls shall include the following minimum
components:
   (a)   Non-structural preservation measures.  The SWP3 must make use of
practices that preserve the existing natural condition to the maximum extent
practicable. Such practices may include preserving riparian areas, preserving
existing vegetation and vegetative buffer strips, phasing of construction
operations in order to minimize the amount of disturbed land at any one time,
minimizing disturbance of steep slopes, designation of tree preservation areas
or other protective clearing or grubbing practices. Soil compaction shall be
minimized and, unless infeasible, topsoil shall be preserved. Provide and
maintain a 50-foot buffer of undisturbed natural vegetation around surface
waters of the state, or riparian or wetland setbacks, if applicable, whichever
is greater, unless maintaining this buffer is infeasible (e.g., stream
crossings for roads or utilities, or for channel and floodplain rehabilitation
and restoration). Direct stormwater to vegetated areas to increase sediment
removal and maximize stormwater infiltration.
   (b)   Erosion control practices.  The SWP3 must make use of erosion controls
that are capable of providing cover over disturbed soils. The amount of soil
exposed during construction activity shall be minimized. A description of
control practices designed to restabilize disturbed areas after grading or
construction shall be included in the SWP3. The S WP3 must provide
specifications for stabilization of all disturbed areas of the site and provide
guidance as to which method of stabilization will be employed for any time of
the year. Such practices may include: temporary seeding, permanent seeding,
mulching, matting, sod stabilization, vegetative buffer strips, phasing of
construction operations, the use of construction entrances, and the use of
alternative ground cover.
   (c)   Erosion control practices must meet the following requirements:
      (1)   Stabilization.  Disturbed areas must be stabilized as specified in
Tables 1 and 2 below.
   Table 1: Permanent Stabilization
 
Area requiring permanent stabilization Time frame to apply erosion controls
Any area that will lie dormant for one Within 7 days of the most recent
year or more.                          disturbance.
Any area within 50 feet of a surface   Within 2 days of reaching final grade.
water of the state and at final grade.
Any other areas at final grade.        Within 7 days of reaching final grade
                                       within that area.
 
   Table 2: Temporary Stabilization
 
Area requiring temporary stabilization Time frame to apply erosion controls
Any disturbed area within 50 feet of a Within 2 days of the most recent
surface water of the state and not at  disturbance if that area will remain
final grade.                           idle for more than 14 days.
For all construction activities, any   Within 7 days of the most recent
disturbed area, including soil         disturbance within the area.
stockpiles that will be dormant for    For residential subdivisions, disturbed
more than 14 days but less than one    areas must be stabilized at least 7 days
year, and not within 50 feet of a      prior to transfer of ownership or
surface water of the state.            operational responsibility.
Disturbed areas that will be idle over Prior to November 1 or the onset of
winter.                                winter weather, whichever occurs first.
Note: Where vegetative stabilization techniques may cause structural
instability or are otherwise unobtainable, alternative stabilization techniques
must be employed.
 
      (2)   Permanent stabilization of conveyance channels.  Applicants shall
undertake special measures to stabilize channels and outfalls and prevent
erosive flows. Measures may include seeding, dormant seeding, mulching, erosion
control matting, sodding, riprap, natural channel design with bioengineering
techniques, or rock check dams, all as defined in the most recent edition of
Rainwater and Land Development or the Field Office Technical Guide available at
www.nrcs.usda.gov/technical/efotg/.
   (d)   Runoff control practices.  The SWP3 shall incorporate measures that
control the volume and velocity of stormwater runoff within the site to prevent
erosion. Peak flow rates and total stormwater volume shall be controlled to
minimize erosion and outlets, downstream channel and streambank erosion. Such
practices may include rock check dams, pipe slope drains, diversions to direct
flow away from exposed soils and protective grading practices. These practices
shall divert runoff away from disturbed areas and steep slopes where
practicable. Velocity dissipation devices shall be placed at discharge
locations and along the length of any outfall channel to provide non-erosive
flow velocity from the structure to a water course so that the natural physical
and biological characteristics and functions are maintained and protected.
   (e)   Sediment control practices.  The SWP3 shall include a description of,
and detailed drawings for, all structural practices that shall store runoff,
allowing sediments to settle and/or divert flows away from exposed soils or
otherwise limit runoff from exposed areas to minimize sediment discharges from
the site. Structural practices shall be used to control erosion and trap
sediment from a site remaining disturbed for more than 14 days. Such practices
may include, among others: sediment settling ponds, silt fences, storm drain
inlet protection, and earth diversion dikes or channels which direct runoff to
a sediment settling pond. The design, installation and maintenance of erosion
and sediment controls shall address factors such as the amount, frequency,
intensity and duration of precipitation, the nature of resulting stormwater
runoff, and soil characteristics, including the range of soil particle sizes
expected to be present on the site. All sediment control practices must be
capable of ponding runoff in order to be considered functional. Earth diversion
dikes or channels alone are not considered a sediment control practice unless
used in conjunction with a sediment settling pond. Sediment control practices
must meet the following requirements:
      (1)   Timing.  Sediment control structures shall be functional throughout
the course of earth disturbing activity. Sediment basins and perimeter sediment
barriers shall be implemented prior to grading and within seven days from the
start of grubbing. They shall continue to function until the up slope
development area is restabilized. As construction progresses and the topography
is altered, appropriate controls must be constructed or existing controls
altered to address the changing drainage patterns.
      (2)   Sediment settling ponds:
         A.   A sediment settling pond, or equivalent best management practice
upon approval from the Kirtland City Engineer and/or the LCSWCD, is required
for any one of the following conditions:
            1.    Concentrated stormwater runoff.
            2.   Runoff from drainage areas which exceeds the design capacity
of silt fence (see Table 3) inlet protection, or other sediment barriers.
            3.   Runoff from common drainage locations with ten or more acres
of disturbed land.
         B.   Sediment settling ponds shall be provided in the form of a
sediment trap or sediment basin as defined in the latest edition of Rainwater
and Land Development. The maximum allowable contributing drainage area to a
sediment trap shall be limited to less than five acres. Contributing-drainage
areas of five acres or more shall be treated with a sediment basin. An
equivalent best management practice may be utilized upon approval from the
city.
         C.   The sediment-settling pond shall provide both a sediment storage
zone and a dewatering zone. The volume of the dewatering zone shall be at least
1,800 cubic feet of storage per acre of total contributing drainage area. The
dewatering structure of sediment basins shall be designed to have a minimum 48-
hour drain time, and, unless infeasible, be designed to always withdraw runoff
from the surface of the pond throughout the storm cycle. As such, a skimmer
discharge device consistent with Rainwater and Land Development shall be
provided to dewater sediment basins. Sediment traps shall also provide both a
sediment storage zone and dewatering zone, but the outlet structure shall be
constructed consistent with the specifications contained in the latest edition
of Rainwater and Land Development.
         D.   When post-construction detention/water quality ponds are to be
used as temporary sediment trapping BMPs, a skimmer discharge device consistent
with Rainwater and Land Development shall be utilized during construction phase
and until the site is deemed permanently stabilized by the city.
         E.   The skimmer shall be designed per the equivalent requirements of
sediment basins and the operator must ensure that the outlet structure of the
pond provides an equivalent or better sediment storage zone and dewatering
zone. As such, temporarily while the site is under construction, there shall be
no discharge of runoff below the elevation required for the sediment storage
zone and the discharge of stormwater within the dewatering zone shall only
occur through the skimmer.
         F.   The volume of the sediment storage zone shall be calculated by
one of the following methods:
            1.   Method 1: The volume of the sediment storage zone shall be
1,000ft3 per disturbed acre within the watershed of the basin.
            2.   Method 2: The volume of the sediment storage zone shall be the
volume necessary to store the sediment as calculated with RUSLE or other
generally accepted erosion prediction model.
         G.   When determining the total contributing drainage area, off-site
areas and areas which remain undisturbed by construction activity must be
included unless runoff from these areas is diverted away from the sediment
settling pond and is not co-mingled with sediment-laden runoff. The depth of
the dewatering zone must be less than or equal to five feet. The configuration
between the inlets and the outlet of the sediment-settling pond must provide at
least two units of length for each one unit of width  2:1 length-to-width
ratio; however, a length to width ratio of  4:1 is recommended. Sediment must
be removed from the sediment-settling pond when the design capacity of the
sediment storage zone has been completely filled by sediment accumulations.
This limit is typically reached when sediment occupies one-half of the basin
depth. When designing sediment settling ponds, the applicant must consider
public safety, especially as it relates to children, as a design factor for the
sediment basin and alternative sediment controls must be used where site
limitations would preclude a safe design. The use of a combination of sediment
and erosion control measures in order to achieve maximum pollutant removal is
encouraged.
      (3)   Silt fence and diversions.  Sheet flow runoff from denuded areas
shall be intercepted by silt fence or diversions to protect adjacent properties
and water resources from sediment transported via sheet flow. Where intended to
provide sediment control, silt fence shall be placed on a level contour and
shall be capable of temporarily ponding runoff. The relationship between the
maximum drainage area to silt fence for a particular slope range is shown in
Table 3 below. Placing silt fence in a parallel series does not extend the size
of the permissible drainage area.
   Table 3: Maximum Drainage Area to Silt Fence Based on Slope
 
Maximum Drainage Area (acres) to 100 Range of slope for a drainage area (%)
linear feet of silt fence
0.5                                  <2%
0.25                                 2% but < 20%
0.125                                20% but < 50%
 
      (4)   Alternative perimeter controls for sheet flow discharges may be
considered by the city, but their use shall not exceed the limitations
indicated in Table 3 above. Detail drawings and plan notes shall specify the
diameter of filter socks, compost berms and other such alternative perimeter
controls if used instead of silt fence.
      (5)   Stormwater diversion practices shall be used to keep runoff away
from disturbed areas and steep slopes. Such devices, which include swales,
dikes or berms, may receive storm water runoff from areas up to ten acres.
      (6)   Inlet protection.  Erosion and sediment control practices, such as
boxed inlet protection, shall be installed to minimize sediment-laden water
entering active storm drain systems. All inlets receiving runoff from drainage
areas of one or more acres will require a sediment settling pond. Straw or hay
bales and filter socks around catch basins are not acceptable forms of inlet
protection.
      (7)   Off-site tracking of sediment and dust control.
         A.   Best management practices must be implemented to ensure sediment
is not tracked off-site and that dust is controlled. These best management
practices must include, but are not limited to, the following:
            1.    Construction entrances shall be built and shall serve as the
only permitted points of ingress and egress to the development area. These
entrances shall be built of a stabilized pad of aggregate stone or recycled
concrete or cement sized greater than two inches in diameter, placed over a
geotextile fabric, and constructed in conformance with specifications in the
most recent edition of Rainwater and Land Development.
            2.   Streets and catch basins adjacent to construction entrances
shall be kept free of sediment tracked off site. Streets directly adjacent to
construction entrances and receiving traffic from the development area shall be
cleaned daily to remove sediment tracked off-site. If applicable, the catch
basins on these streets nearest to the construction entrances shall also be
cleaned weekly and protected from sediment-laden runoff, if feasible without
posing a public safety hazard.
         B.   Based on site conditions, the Kirtland City Engineer and/or the
LCSWCD may require additional best management practices to control off site
tracking and dust. These additional BMPs may include:
            1.   Fencing shall be installed around the perimeter of the
development area to ensure that all vehicle traffic adheres to designated
construction entrances.
            2.   Designated vehicle and wheel-washing areas. Wash water from
these areas must be directed to a designated sediment trap, the sediment-
settling pond, or to a sump pump for dewatering in conformance with division
(g) of this section.  No surfactants or detergents may be used to wash
vehicles.
            3.   Applicants shall take all necessary measures to comply with
applicable regulations regarding fugitive dust emissions, including obtaining
necessary permits for such emissions. The Kirtland City Engineer and/or the
LCSWCD may require dust controls including the use of water trucks to wet
disturbed areas, tarping stockpiles, temporary stabilization of disturbed
areas, and regulation of the speed of vehicles on the site.
      (8)   Surface waters of the state protection.  Construction vehicles
shall avoid water resources. A 50 foot undisturbed natural buffer shall be
provided around surface waters of the state unless infeasible. If it is
infeasible to provide and maintain an undisturbed 50-foot natural buffer, the
SWP3 shall comply with the stabilization requirements in division (b)(1) of
this section for areas within 50 feet of a surface water or riparian or wetland
setbacks if applicable, whichever is greater; and minimize soil compaction and,
unless infeasible, preserve topsoil. If a riparian or wetland setback is
greater than 50 feet, no disturbance of natural vegetation shall occur within
the riparian or wetland setback unless a variance to the riparian or wetland
setback regulation has been granted. If the applicant is permitted to disturb
areas within 50 feet of a water resource, the following conditions shall be
addressed in the SWP3:
         A.   All BMPs and stream crossings shall be designed as specified in
the most recent edition of Rainwater and Land Development.
         B.   Structural practices shall be designated and implemented on site
to protect water resources from the impacts of sediment runoff.
         C.   No structural sediment controls (e.g., the installation of silt
fence or a sediment settling pond in-stream) shall be used in water resources
or wetlands.
         D.   Where stream crossings for roads or utilities are necessary and
permitted, the project shall be designed such that the number of stream
crossings and the width of the disturbance are minimized.
         E.   Temporary stream crossings shall be constructed if water
resources or wetlands will be crossed by construction vehicles during
construction.
         F.   Construction of bridges, culverts, or sediment control structures
shall not place soil, debris, or other particulate material into or close to
the water resources or wetlands in such a manner that it may slough, slip, or
erode.
         G.   Concentrated stormwater runoff from BMPs to natural wetlands
shall be converted to diffuse flow through the use of level spreaders or other
such appropriate measure before the runoff enters the wetlands. The flow should
be released such that no erosion occurs downslope. Level spreaders may need to
be placed in series to ensure non-erosive velocities.
         H.   Protected areas or critical areas, including wetlands and
riparian areas shall be physically marked in the field prior to earth
disturbing activities.
         I.   Concentrated stormwater runoff from BMPs to natural wetlands
shall be converted to diffuse flow through the use of level spreaders or other
such appropriate measures before the runoff enters the wetlands. The flow
should be released such that no erosion occurs downslope. Level spreaders may
need to be placed in series to ensure non-erosive velocities.
      (9)   Modifying controls.  If periodic inspections or other information
indicates a control has been used inappropriately or incorrectly, the applicant
shall replace or modify the control for site conditions.
   (f)   Non-sediment pollutant controls.  No solid or liquid waste, including
building materials, shall be discharged in stormwater runoff. The applicant
must implement site best management practices to prevent toxic materials,
hazardous materials, or other debris from entering water resources, wetlands or
the MS4. These practices shall include but are not limited to the following:
      (1)   Waste materials. A covered dumpster shall be made available for the
proper disposal of garbage, plaster, drywall, grout, gypsum, and other waste
materials.
      (2)   Concrete truck wash out.  The washing of concrete material into a
street, catch basin, other public facility, natural resource or water of the
state is prohibited. A designated area for concrete washout shall be made
available.
      (3)   Disposal of other wastewaters.  The discharge of washout and
cleanout of stucco, paint, form release oils, curing compounds, and other
construction materials to a street, catch basin, other public facility, natural
resource or waters of the state is prohibited. The discharge of soaps or
solvents used in vehicle and equipment washing is also prohibited. If
generated, these wastewaters must be collected and disposed of properly.
      (4)   Fuel/liquid tank storage.  All fuel/liquid tanks and drums shall be
stored in a marked storage area. A dike shall be constructed around this
storage area with a minimum capacity equal to 110 percent of the volume of the
largest containers in the storage area and/or a spill kit shall be provided to
clean up spills. The ESC Plan shall contain spill prevention and response
procedures and these procedures shall be discussed at the pre-construction
meeting.
      (5)   Toxic or hazardous waste disposal.  Any toxic or hazardous waste
shall be disposed of properly. The discharge of fuels, oils, and other
pollutants used in vehicle and equipment operation and maintenance is
prohibited.
      (6)   Contaminated soils disposal and runoff.  Discovery of previously
unknown contaminated soils onsite shall be self-reported to Ohio EPA and local
authorities. Contaminated soils from redevelopment sites shall be disposed of
properly. Runoff from contaminated soils shall not be discharged from the site.
Proper permits shall be obtained for development projects on solid waste
landfill sites or redevelopment sites. Where construction activities are to
occur on sites with contamination from previous activities, operators shall be
aware that concentrations of materials that meet other criteria (i.e. not
considered a hazardous waste, meeting Voluntary Action Program (VAP standards))
may still result in stormwater discharges in excess of Ohio Water Quality
Standards. Such discharges are not authorized by this code. Control measures
which may be utilized to meet this requirement include, but are not limited to:
         A.   Use berms, trenches, pits or tanks to collect contaminated runoff
and prevent discharge.
         B.   Pump runoff from contaminated soils to the sanitary sewer with
the prior approval of the sanitary sewer system operator, or pump into a
container for transport to an appropriate treatment or disposal facility; and
         C.   Cover areas of contamination with tarps, daily cover or other
such methods to prevent storm water from coming into contact with contaminated
materials.
      (7)   The SWP3 must include methods to minimize the exposure of building
materials, building products, construction wastes, trash, landscape materials,
fertilizers, pesticides, herbicides, detergents, and sanitary waste to
precipitation, stormwater runoff, and snow melt. The SWP3 shall include
measures to prevent and respond to chemical spills and leaks. Applicants may
also reference the existence of other plans (i.e., spill prevention control and
countermeasure (SPCC) plans, spill control programs, safety response plans,
etc.) provided that such plan addresses this requirement and a copy of such
plan is maintained on site.
   (g)   Compliance with other requirements.  The SWP3 shall be consistent with
applicable state and/or local waste disposal, sanitary sewer, or septic system
regulations, including provisions prohibiting waste disposal by open burning,
and shall provide for the proper disposal of contaminated soils located within
the development area.
   (h)   Trench and ground water control.  There shall be no sediment-laden or
turbid discharges to water resources or wetlands resulting from dewatering
activities. If trench or ground water contains sediment, it must pass through a
sediment-settling pond or other equally effective sediment control device,
prior to being discharged from the construction site. Alternatively, sediment
may be removed by settling in place or by dewatering into a sump pit, filter
bag or comparable practice. Ground water dewatering which does not contain
sediment or other pollutants is not required to be treated prior to discharge.
However, care must be taken when discharging ground water to ensure that it
does not become pollutant-laden by traversing over disturbed soils or other
pollutant sources.
   (i)   Internal inspections.
      (1)   All controls on the site shall be inspected at least once every
seven calendar days and within 24 hours after any storm event greater than one-
half inch of rain per 24 hour period. The inspection frequency may be reduced
to at least once every month if the entire site is temporarily stabilized or
runoff is unlikely due to weather conditions (e.g., site is covered with snow,
ice, or the ground is frozen). A waiver of inspection requirements is available
until one month before thawing conditions are expected to result in a discharge
if prior written approval has been attained from the Kirtland Public Service
Administrator and/or the LCSWCD and all of the following conditions are met:
         A.   The project is located in an area where frozen conditions are
anticipated to continue for extended periods of time (i.e. more than one
month).
         B.   Land disturbance activities have been suspended, and temporary
stabilization is achieved.
         C.   The beginning date and ending dates of the waiver period are
documented in the SWP3.
         D.   For sites that will not be completed by October 1, a pre-winter
stabilization meeting shall be held by the landowner and the developer,
engineer and contractor of the project, LCSWCD and the Kirtland Public Service
Administrator prior to October 1, in order to plan and approve winter erosion
and sediment controls as defined in the most current online edition of
Rainwater and Land Development.
      (2)   The applicant shall assign qualified inspection personnel to
conduct these inspections to ensure that the control practices are functional
and to evaluate whether the SWP3 is adequate, or whether additional control
measures are required. Qualified inspection personnel are individuals with
knowledge and experience in the installation and maintenance of sediment and
erosion controls. Certified inspection reports shall be submitted to the
Kirtland Public Service Administrator within seven working days from the
inspection and retained at the development site.
      (3)   These inspections shall meet the following requirements:
         A.   Disturbed areas and areas used for storage of materials that are
exposed to precipitation shall be inspected for evidence of or the potential
for, pollutants entering the drainage system.
         B.   Erosion and sediment control measures identified in the SWP3
shall be observed to ensure that they are operating correctly. The applicant
shall utilize an inspection form provided by the city or an alternate form
acceptable to the Kirtland Public Service Administrator. The inspection form
shall include:
            1.   The inspection date.
            2.   Names, titles and qualifications of personnel making the
inspection.
            3.   Weather information for the period since the last inspection,
including a best estimate of the beginning of each storm event, duration of
each storm event and approximate amount of rainfall for each storm event in
inches, and whether any discharges occurred.
            4.   Weather information and a description of any discharges
occurring at the time of inspection.
            5.   Locations of:
               a.    Discharges of sediment or other pollutants from site.
               b.    BMPs that need to be maintained.
               c.    BMPs that failed to operate as designed or proved
inadequate for a particular location.
               d.    Where additional BMPs are needed that did not exist at the
time of inspection.
            6.   Corrective action required including any necessary changes to
the SWP3 and implementation dates.
         C.   Discharge locations shall be inspected to determine whether
erosion and sediment control measures are effective in preventing significant
impacts to the receiving water resource or wetlands.
         D.   Locations where vehicles enter or exit the site shall be
inspected for evidence of off-site vehicle tracking.
         E.   The applicant shall maintain for three years following final
stabilization the results of these inspections, the names and qualifications of
personnel making the inspections, the dates of inspections, major observations
relating to the implementation of the SWP3, a certification as to whether the
facility is in compliance with the SWP3, and information on any incidents of
non-compliance determined by these inspections.
   (j)   Maintenance.
      (1)   The SWP3 shall be designed to minimize maintenance requirements.
All BMPs shall be maintained and repaired as needed to ensure continued
performance of their intended function until final stabilization. All sediment
control practices must be maintained in a functional condition until all up
slope areas they control reach final stabilization. The applicant shall provide
a description of maintenance procedures needed to ensure the continued
performance of control practices and shall ensure a responsible party and
adequate funding to conduct this maintenance, all as determined by the Kirtland
City Engineer.
      (2)   When inspections reveal the need for repair, replacement, or
installation of erosion and sediment control BMPs, the following procedures
shall be followed:
         A.   When BMPs require repair or maintenance: If an internal
inspection reveals that a BMP is in need of repair or maintenance, with the
exception of a sediment-settling pond, it must be repaired or maintained within
three days of the inspection. Sediment settling ponds must be repaired or
maintained within ten days of the inspection.
         B.   When BMPs fail to provide their intended function: If an internal
inspection reveals that a BMP fails to perform its intended function as
detailed in the SWP3 and that another, more appropriate control practice is
required, the SWP3 must be amended and the new control practice must be
installed within three to ten days of the inspection as determined by the
Kirtland City Engineer or site inspector.
         C.   When BMPs depicted on the SWP3 are not installed: If an internal
inspection reveals that a BMP has not been implemented in accordance with the
schedule, the control practice must be implemented within ten days from the
date of the inspection. If the internal inspection reveals that the planned
control practice is not needed, the record must contain a statement of
explanation as to why the control practice is not needed.
   (k)   Final stabilization.  Final stabilization shall be determined by the
Kirtland City Engineer. Once a definable area has achieved final stabilization,
the applicant may note this on the SWP3 and no further inspection requirement
applies to that portion of the site. Final stabilization also requires the
installation of permanent (post-construction) stormwater control measures
(SCMs). Obligations under this chapter shall not be completed until
installation of post-construction BMPs is verified.
(Ord. 16-O-39, passed 10-17-2016)
§ 1464.10  ABBREVIATED STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN (SWP3).
   (a)   In order to control sediment pollution of water resources, the
applicant shall submit an abbreviated SWP3 in accordance with the requirements
of this regulation.
   (b)   The abbreviated SWP3 shall be certified by a professional engineer, a
registered surveyor, certified professional erosion and sediment control
specialist, or a registered landscape architect.
   (c)   The abbreviated SWP3 shall include a minimum of the following BMPs.
City may require other BMPs as site conditions warrant.
      (1)   Construction entrances. Construction entrances shall be built and
shall serve as the only permitted points of ingress and egress to the
development area. These entrances shall be built of a stabilized pad of
aggregate stone or recycled concrete or cement sized greater than two inches in
diameter, placed over a geotextile fabric, and constructed in conformance with
specifications in the most recent edition of Rainwater and Land Development.
      (2)   Concrete truck wash out.  The washing of concrete material into a
street, catch basin, or other public facility or natural resource is
prohibited. A designated area for concrete washout shall be indicated on the
plan. Use for other waste and wastewater is prohibited.
      (3)   Street sweeping.  Streets directly adjacent to construction
entrances and receiving traffic from the development area shall be cleaned
daily to remove sediment tracked off-site. If applicable, the catch basins on
these streets nearest to the construction entrances shall be cleaned weekly.
      (4)   Stabilization.  The development area shall be stabilized as
detailed in Table 4.
   Table 4: Stabilization
 
Area requiring stabilization             Time frame to apply erosion controls
Any disturbed area within 50 feet of a   Within 2 days of the most recent
surface water of the state and not at    disturbance if that area will remain
final grade.                             idle for more than 14 days
For all construction activities, any
disturbed area, including soil           Within 7 days of the most recent
stockpiles that will be dormant for more disturbance within the area
than 14 days but less than one year, and
not within 50 feet of a stream.
Disturbed areas that will be idle over   Prior to November 1
winter
Note: Where vegetative stabilization techniques may cause structural
instability or are otherwise unobtainable, alternative stabilization
techniques must be employed. These techniques may include mulching or erosion
matting.
 
      (5)   Inlet protection.  Erosion and sediment control practices, such as
boxed inlet protection, shall be installed to minimize sediment-laden water
entering active storm drain systems, including rear yard inlets. Straw, hay
bales, and filter socks are not acceptable forms of inlet protection.
      (6)   Silt fence and other perimeter controls.  Silt fence and other
perimeter controls approved by the city shall be used to protect adjacent
properties and water resources from sediment discharged via sheet (diffused)
flow. Silt fence shall be placed along level contours and the permissible
drainage area is limited to those indicated in Table 3 in this section.
      (7)   Internal inspection and maintenance.  All controls on the
development area shall be inspected at least once every seven calendar days and
within 24 hours after any storm event greater than one-half inch of rain per 24
hour period. Maintenance shall occur as detailed below:
         A.   When BMPs require repair or maintenance. If the internal
inspection reveals that a BMP is in need of repair or maintenance, with the
exception of a sediment-settling pond, it must be repaired or maintained within
three days of the inspection. Sediment settling ponds must be repaired or
maintained within ten days of the inspection.
         B.   When BMPs fail to provide their intended function. If the
internal inspection reveals that a BMP fails to perform its intended function
and that another, more appropriate control practice is required, the
abbreviated SWP3 must be amended and the new control practice must be installed
within ten days of the inspection.
         C.   When BMPs depicted on the abbreviated SWP3 are not installed. If
the internal inspection reveals that a BMP has not been implemented in
accordance with the schedule, the control practice must be implemented within
ten days from the date of the inspection. If the inspection reveals that the
planned control practice is not needed, the record must contain a statement of
explanation as to why the control practice is not needed.
      (8)   Final stabilization. Final stabilization shall be determined by the
Kirtland City Engineer.
(Ord. 16-O-39, passed 10-17-2016)
§ 1464.11  FEES.
   The SWP3 and abbreviated SWP3 review, filing, and inspection fee is part of
a complete submittal and is required to be submitted to the city and the LCSWCD
before the review process begins. Please consult with the Kirtland City
Engineer for current fee schedule.
(Ord. 16-O-39, passed 10-17-2016)
§ 1464.12  BOND.
   (a)   If a SWP3 or abbreviated SWP3 is required by this regulation, soil
disturbing activities shall not be permitted until a cash bond has been
deposited with the Kirtland Finance Department. The amount shall be as stated
in the fee schedule in §
236.07 of the City of Kirtland Codified Ordinances for the first acre or
fraction thereof, and an additional amount as stated in the fee schedule in §
236.07 of the City of Kirtland Codified Ordinances paid for each subsequent
acre or fraction thereof or the cost of stabilizing disturbed areas based on a
fee schedule established by the city.  The bond will be used for the city to
perform the obligations otherwise to be performed by the owner of the
development area as stated in this regulation and to allow all work to be
performed as needed in the event that the applicant fails to comply with the
provisions of this regulation. The cash bond shall be returned, less city
administrative fees as detailed in Chapter 236 of the City of Kirtland Codified
Ordinances, after all work required by this regulation has been completed and
final stabilization has been reached, all as determined by the Kirtland City
Engineer.
   (b)   No project subject to this regulation shall commence without a SWP3 or
abbreviated SWP3 approved by the Kirtland City Engineer.
(Ord. 16-O-39, passed 10-17-2016; Am. Ord. 17-O-20, passed 7-3-2017)
§ 1464.13  ENFORCEMENT.
   (a)   If the city or its duly authorized representative determines that a
violation of the rules adopted under this code exist, the city or
representative may issue an immediate stop work order if the violator failed to
obtain any federal, state, or local permit necessary for sediment and erosion
control, earth movement, clearing, or cut and fill activity.
   (b)   All development areas may be subject to external inspections by
Kirtland City Engineer and/or the LCSWCD to ensure compliance with the approved
SWP3 or abbreviated SWP3.
   (c)   After each external inspection, Kirtland City Engineer and/or the
LCSWCD shall prepare and distribute a status report to the applicant.
   (d)   If an external inspection determines that operations are being
conducted in violation of the approved SWP3 or abbreviated SWP3, the Kirtland
City Engineer and/or the LCSWCD may take action as detailed in §
1464.14.
   (e)   Failure to maintain and repair erosion and sediment controls per the
approved SWP3 plan may result in the following escalation:
      (1)   First violation.  LCSWCD will issue a Notice of Deficiency to the
owner or operator. All controls are to be repaired or maintained per the SWP3
plan within three days of the notification. If controls have not been corrected
after this time, the Kirtland City Engineer may issue a Stop Work Order for all
activities until corrections have been made.
      (2)   Second violation.  LCSWCD may issue a formal Notice of Violation
which includes a two hundred fifty dollar ($250.00) administrative fee against
the SWP3 bond or site plan deposit. All controls are to be repaired or
maintained per the approved SWP3 plan within three days of the Notice of
Violation. If controls have not been corrected after this time, the Mayor may
issue a Stop Work Order for all activities until corrections have been made.
      (3)   Third and subsequent violations.  The Mayor may issue a Stop Work
Order for all construction activities and charge a two hundred fifty dollar
($250.00) administrative fee against the SWP3 bond or site plan deposit. The
Stop Work Order will be lifted once all controls are in compliance with the
approved SWP3 plan.
   (f)   The LCSWCD shall have the authority to make immediate on-site
adjustments to the ESC Plan in order to achieve compliance with these rules.
   (g)   A final inspection will be made to determine if the criteria of this
code have been satisfied and a report will be presented to the city on the
site's compliance status.
   (h)   The Kirtland Public Service Administrator will monitor soil-disturbing
activities for non-farm residential, commercial, industrial, or other non-farm
purposes on land of less than one contiguous acre to ensure compliance required
by these rules.
   (i)   The city shall not issue zoning permits for projects regulated under
this code that have not received approval for an SWP3 for said project(s).
(Ord. 16-O-39, passed 10-17-2016)
§ 1464.14  VIOLATIONS.
   (a)   No person shall violate or cause or knowingly permit to be violated
any of the provisions of this regulation, or fail to comply with any of such
provisions or with any lawful requirements of any public authority made
pursuant to this regulation, or knowingly use or cause or permit the use of any
lands in violation of this regulation or in violation of any permit granted
under this regulation.
   (b)   Upon notice, the Mayor may suspend any active soil disturbing activity
for a period not to exceed 90 days, and may require immediate erosion and
sediment control measures whenever he or she determines that such activity is
not meeting the intent of this regulation. Such notice shall be in writing,
shall be given to the applicant, and shall state the conditions under which
work may be resumed. In instances, however, where the Mayor finds that
immediate action is necessary for public safety or the public interest, he or
she may require that work be stopped upon verbal order pending issuance of the
written notice.
(Ord. 16-O-39, passed 10-17-2016)
§ 1464.15  APPEALS.
   Any person aggrieved by any order, requirement, determination, or any other
action or inaction by the city in relation to this regulation may appeal to the
court of common pleas. Such an appeal shall be made in conformity with R.C.
Chapter 2506. Written notice of appeal shall be served on the city and a copy
shall be provided to the LCSWCD.
(Ord. 16-O-39, passed 10-17-2016)
§ 1464.99  PENALTY.
   (a)   Any person, firm, entity or corporation; including but not limited to,
the owner of the property, his agents and assigns, occupant, property manager,
and any contractor or subcontractor who violates or fails to comply with any
provision of this regulation is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree and
shall be fined no more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisoned for no
more than 60 days, or both, for each offense. A separate offense shall be
deemed committed each day during or on which a violation or noncompliance
occurs or continues.
   (b)   The imposition of any other penalties provided herein shall not
preclude the city instituting an appropriate action or proceeding in a court of
proper jurisdiction to prevent an unlawful development, or to restrain,
correct, or abate a violation, or to require compliance with the provisions of
this regulation or other applicable laws, ordinances, rules, or regulations, or
the orders of the city.
(Ord. 16-O-39, passed 10-17-2016)
CHAPTER 1466:  COMPREHENSIVE STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
Section
1466.01   Purpose and scope.
1466.02   Definitions.
1466.03   Disclaimer of liability.
1466.04   Conflicts, severability, nuisances and responsibility.
1466.05   Development of comprehensive stormwater management plans.
1466.06   Application procedures.
1466.07   Compliance with state and federal regulations.
1466.08   Comprehensive stormwater management plans.
1466.09   Performance standards.
1466.10   Alternative actions.
1466.11   Easements.
1466.12   Maintenance and final inspection approval.
1466.13   On-going inspections.
1466.14   Fees.
1466.15   Bond.
1466.16   Installation of water quality stormwater control measures.
1466.17   Violations.
1466.18   Appeals.
1466.99   Penalty.
Appendix A:   Dry Extended Detention Facility Outlet Structure
Appendix B:   Wet Extended Detention Facility Outlet Structure
§ 1466.01  PURPOSE AND SCOPE.
   (a)   The purpose of this regulation is to establish technically feasible
and economically reasonable stormwater management standards to achieve a level
of stormwater quality and quantity control that will minimize damage to
property and degradation of water resources and will promote and maintain the
health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the City of Kirtland.
   (b)   This regulation requires owners who develop or redevelop their
property within the city to:
      (1)   Control stormwater runoff from their property and ensure that all
stormwater control measures (SCMs) are properly designed, constructed, and
maintained.
      (2)   Reduce water quality impacts to receiving water resources that may
be caused by new development or redevelopment activities.
      (3)   Control the volume, rate, and quality of stormwater runoff
originating from their property so that surface water and groundwater are
protected and flooding and erosion potential are not increased.
      (4)   Minimize the need to construct, repair, and replace subsurface
storm drain systems.
      (5)   Preserve natural infiltration and ground water recharge, and
maintain subsurface flow that replenishes water resources, except in slippage
prone soils.
      (6)   Incorporate stormwater quality and quantity controls into site
planning and design at the earliest possible stage in the development process.
      (7)   Reduce the expense of remedial projects needed to address problems
caused by inadequate stormwater management.
      (8)   Maximize use of SCMs that serve multiple purposes including, but
not limited to, flood control, erosion control, fire protection, water quality
protection, recreation, and habitat preservation.
      (9)   Design sites to minimize the number of stream crossings and the
width of associated disturbance in order to minimize the city's future expenses
related to the maintenance and repair of stream crossings.
      (10)   Maintain, promote, and re-establish conditions necessary for
naturally occurring stream processes that assimilate pollutants, attenuate
flood flows, and provide a healthy water resource.
   (c)   This regulation shall apply to all parcels used or being developed,
either wholly or partially, for new or relocated projects involving highways
and roads; subdivisions or larger common plans of development; industrial,
commercial, institutional, or residential projects; building activities on
farms; redevelopment activities; grading; and all other uses that are not
specifically exempted in this section.
   (d)   Public entities, including the State of Ohio, Lake County, and the
City of Kirtland shall comply with this regulation for roadway projects
initiated after March 10, 2006 and, to the maximum extent practicable, for
projects initiated before that time.
   (e)   This regulation does not apply to activities regulated by, and in
compliance with, the Ohio Agricultural Sediment Pollution Abatement Rules.
   (f)   This regulation does not require a comprehensive stormwater management
plan for linear construction projects, such as pipeline or utility line
installation, that do not result in the installation of impervious surface as
determined by the Kirtland City Engineer. Such projects must be designed to
minimize the number of stream crossings and the width of disturbance. Linear
construction projects must comply with the requirements of
Chapter 1464 Erosion and Sediment Control.
(Ord. 16-O-39, passed 10-17-2016)
§ 1466.02  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this regulation, the following terms shall have the
meaning herein indicated:
   (a)   Acre.  "Acre" is a measurement of area equaling 43,560 square feet.
   (b)   As-built survey.  "As-built survey" means a survey shown on a plan or
drawing prepared by a registered professional surveyor indicating the actual
dimensions, elevations, and locations of any structures, underground utilities,
swales, detention facilities, and sewage treatment facilities after
construction has been completed.
   (c)   Best management practices (BMPS): also stormwater control measure
(SCMs).  "Best management practices (BMPS)" also "stormwater control measure
(SCMs)" means schedule of activities, prohibitions of practices, operation and
maintenance procedures, treatment requirements, and other management practices
(both structural and non-structural) to prevent or reduce the pollution of
water resources and to control stormwater volume and rate. This includes
practices to control runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or
drainage from raw material storage. For guidance, please see U.S. EPA's
National Menu of BMPs at http://water.epa.gov/polwaste/npdes/swbmp/ind_ex.cfm.
   (d)   Clean Water Act.  "Clean Water Act" is  Pub. L. 92-500, as amended
Pub. L. 95-217, Pub. L. 95-576, Pub. L. 96-483, Pub. L. 97-117, and Pub. L.
100-4, 33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq. Referred to as the Federal Water Pollution
Control Act or the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972.
   (e)   Community.  "Community" means the City of Kirtland, its designated
representatives, boards, or commissions.
   (f)   Comprehensive stormwater management plan.  "Comprehensive stormwater
management plan" is the written document and plans meeting the requirements of
this regulation that sets forth the plans and practices to minimize stormwater
runoff from a development area, to safely convey or temporarily store and
release post-development runoff at an allowable rate to minimize flooding and
stream bank erosion, and to protect or improve stormwater quality and stream
channels.
   (g)   Critical storm.  "Critical storm" means a storm that is determined by
calculating the percentage increase in volume of runoff by a proposed
development area for the one year 24 hour event. The critical storm is used to
calculate the maximum allowable stormwater discharge rate from a developed
site.
   (h)   Development area.  "Development area" means a parcel or contiguous
parcels owned by one person or persons, or operated as one development unit,
and used or being developed for commercial, industrial, residential,
institutional, or other construction or alteration that changes runoff
characteristics.
   (i)   Development drainage area.  "Development drainage area" means a
combination of each hydraulically unique watershed with individual outlet
points on the development area.
   (j)   Disturbed area.  "Disturbed area" is an area of land subject to
erosion due to the removal of vegetative cover and/or soil disturbing
activities.
   (k)   Drainage.  "Drainage" means the removal of excess surface water or
groundwater from land by surface or subsurface drains.
   (l)   Erosion.  "Erosion" means the process by which the land surface is
worn away by the action of wind, water, ice, gravity, or any combination of
those forces.
   (m)   Extended detention facility.  "Extended detention facility" is a
stormwater control measure that replaces and/or enhances traditional detention
facilities by releasing the runoff collected during the stormwater quality
event over at least 24 to 48 hours, retarding flow and allowing pollutants to
settle within the facility.
   (n)   Final stabilization.  "Final stabilization" means all soil disturbing
activities at the site have been completed and a uniform perennial vegetative
cover with a density of at least 80 percent coverage for the area has been
established or equivalent stabilization practices, such as the use of mulches
or geotextiles, have been employed.
   (o)   Grading.  "Grading" is the process in which the topography of the land
is altered to a new slope.
   (p)   Green infrastructure.  "Green infrastructure" means wet weather
management approaches and technologies that utilize, enhance or mimic the
natural hydrologic cycle processes of infiltration, evapotranspiration and
reuse.
   (q)   Hydrologic unit code.  "Hydrologic unit code" is a cataloging system
developed by the United States Geological Survey and the Natural Resource
Conservation Service to identify watersheds in the United States.
   (r)   Impervious cover.  "Impervious cover" means any surface that cannot
effectively absorb or infiltrate water. This may include roads, streets,
parking lots, rooftops, sidewalks, and other areas not covered by vegetation.
   (s)   Infiltration control measure.  "Infiltration control measure" means a
stormwater control measure that does not discharge to a water resource during
the stormwater quality event, requiring collected runoff to either infiltrate
into the groundwater and/or be consumed by evapotranspiration, thereby
retaining stormwater pollutants in the facility.
   (t)   Larger common plan of development.  "Larger common plan of
development" means a contiguous area where multiple separate and distinct
construction activities may be taking place at different times on different
schedules under one plan.
   (u)   Low impact development (LID).  "Low-impact development (LID)" is a
site design approach, which seeks to integrate hydrologically functional design
with pollution prevention measures to compensate for land development impacts
on hydrology and water quality. LID's goal is to mimic natural hydrology and
processes by using small-scale, decentralized practices that infiltrate,
evaporate, detain, and transpire stormwater. LID stormwater control measures
(SCMs) are uniformly and strategically located throughout the site.
   (v)   Maximum extent practicable.  "Maximum extent practicable" is the level
of pollutant reduction that operators of small municipal separate storm sewer
systems regulated under 40 C.F.R. Parts 9, 122, 123, and 124, referred to as
NPDES Stormwater Phase II, must meet.
   (w)   Municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4).  "Municipal separate
storm sewer system (MS4)" means a conveyance or system of conveyances
(including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs,
gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm drains) that are:
      (1)   Owned or operated by the federal government, state, municipality,
township, county, district, or other public body (created by or pursuant to
state or federal law) including a special district under state law such as a
sewer district, flood control district or drainage districts, or similar
entity, or a designated and approved management agency under section 208 of the
Clean Water Act that discharges into water resources; and
      (2)   Designed or used for collecting or conveying solely stormwater,
      (3)   Which is not a combined sewer, and
      (4)   Which is not a part of a publicly owned treatment works.
   (x)   National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES).  "National
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES)" is a regulatory program in the
Federal Clean Water Act that prohibits the discharge of pollutants into surface
waters of the United States without a permit.
   (y)   Nonstructural stormwater control measure (SCM).  "Nonstructural
stormwater control measure (SCM)" means any technique that uses natural
processes and features to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants to
water resources and control stormwater volume and rate.
   (z)   Post-development.  "Post- development" means the conditions that exist
following the completion of soil disturbing activity in terms of topography,
vegetation, land use, and the rate, volume, quality, or direction of stormwater
runoff.
   (aa)   Pre-construction meeting.  "Pre-construction meeting" is a meeting
prior to construction between all parties associated with the construction of
the project including government agencies, contractors and owners to review
agency requirements and plans as submitted and approved.
   (bb)   Pre-development.  "Pre- development" means the conditions that exist
prior to the initiation of soil disturbing activity in terms of topography,
vegetation, land use, and the rate, volume, quality, or direction of stormwater
runoff.
   (cc)   Professional engineer.  "Professional engineer" is a professional
engineer registered in the State of Ohio with specific education and experience
in water resources engineering, acting in conformance with the Code of Ethics
of the Ohio State Board of Registration for Engineers and Surveyors.
   (dd)   Redevelopment.  "Redevelopment" means a construction project on land
that has been previously developed and where the new land use will not increase
the runoff coefficient used to calculate the water quality volume. If the new
land use will increase the runoff coefficient, then the project is considered
to be a new development project rather than a redevelopment project.
   (ee)   Riparian area.  "Riparian area" means land adjacent to any brook,
creek, river, or stream having a defined bed and bank that, if appropriately
sized, helps to stabilize streambanks, limit erosion, reduce flood size flows,
and/or filter and settle out runoff pollutants, or performs other functions
consistent with the purposes of this regulation.
   (ff)   Riparian and wetland setback.  "Riparian and wetland setback" means
the real property adjacent to a water resource on which soil disturbing
activities are limited, all as defined by
Chapter 1294 Riparian Setbacks.
   (gg)   Runoff.  "Runoff" means the portion of rainfall, melted snow, or
irrigation water that flows across the ground surface and is eventually
returned to water resources.
   (hh)   Sediment.  "Sediment" means the soils or other surface materials that
can be transported or deposited by the action of wind, water, ice, or gravity
as a product of erosion.
   (ii)   Sedimentation.  "Sedimentation" means the deposition of sediment in
water resources.
   (jj)   Site owner/operator.  "Site owner/operator" means any individual,
corporation, firm, trust, commission, board, public or private partnership,
joint venture, agency, unincorporated association, municipal corporation,
county or state agency, the federal government, other legal entity, or an agent
thereof that is responsible for the overall construction site.
   (kk)   Soil disturbing activity.  "Soil disturbing activity" means clearing,
grading, excavating, filling, or other alteration of the earth's surface where
natural or human made ground cover is destroyed that may result in, or
contribute to, increased stormwater quantity and/or decreased stormwater
quality.
   (ll)   Stabilization.  "Stabilization" means the use of best management
practices or stormwater control measures that reduce or prevent soil erosion by
stormwater runoff, trench dewatering, wind, ice, gravity, or a combination
thereof.
   (mm)   Stormwater or storm water.  "Stormwater or storm water" is defined at
40 C.F.R. 122.26 (b)(13) and means stormwater runoff, snow melt runoff and
surface runoff and drainage.
   (nn)   Stormwater control measure (SCM): also best management practice
(BMP).  "Stormwater control measure (SCM)": also "best management practice
(BMP)" means schedule of activities, prohibitions of practices, operation and
maintenance procedures, treatment requirements, and other management practices
(both structural and non-structural) to prevent or reduce the pollution of
water resources and to control stormwater volume and rate. This includes
practices to control runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or
drainage from raw material storage. For guidance, please see U.S. EPA's
National Menu of BMPs at http://water.epa.gov/polwaste/npdes/swbmp/ind ex.cfm.
   (oo)   Structural storm water management practice or stormwater control
measure (SCM).  "Structural storm water management practice or stormwater
control measure (SCM)" means any constructed facility, structure, or device
that prevents or reduces the discharge of pollutants to water resources and
controls stormwater volume and rate.
   (pp)   Surface water of the state: also water resource. "Surface water of
the state" also "water resource" means any stream, lake, reservoir, pond,
marsh, wetland, or other waterway situated wholly or partly within the
boundaries of the state, except those private waters which do not combine or
affect a junction with surface water. Waters defined as sewerage systems,
treatment works or disposal systems in R.C. § 6111.01 are not included.
   (qq)   Total maximum daily load (TMDL).  "Total maximum daily load (TMDL)"
means the sum of the existing and/or projected point source, nonpoint source,
and background loads for a pollutant to a specified watershed, water body, or
water body segment. A TMDL sets and allocates the maximum amount of a pollutant
that may be introduced into the water and still ensure attainment and
maintenance of water quality standards.
   (rr)   Water quality volume (WQv). "Water quality volume (WQv)" means the
volume of stormwater runoff which must be captured and treated prior to
discharge from the developed site after construction is complete. WQv is based
on the expected runoff generated by the mean storm precipitation volume from
post-construction site conditions at which rapidly diminishing returns in the
number of runoff events captured begins to occur.
   (ss)   Water resource: also surface water of the state.  "Water resource"
also "surface water of the state" means any stream, lake, reservoir, pond,
marsh, wetland, or waterway situated wholly or partly within the boundaries of
the state, except those private waters which do not combine or affect a
junction with surface water. Waters defined as sewerage systems, treatment
works or disposal systems in R.C. § 6111.01 are not included.
   (tt)   Water resource crossing.  "Water resource crossing" means any bridge,
box, arch, culvert, truss, or other type of structure intended to convey
people, animals, vehicles, or materials from one side of a watercourse to
another. This does not include private, non-commercial footbridges or pole
mounted aerial electric or telecommunication lines, nor does it include below
grade utility lines.
   (uu)   Watershed.  "Watershed" means the total drainage area contributing
stormwater runoff to a single point.
   (vv)   Wetland.  "Wetland" means those areas that are inundated or saturated
by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support,
and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation
typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, including swamps,
marshes, bogs, and similar areas (40 C.F.R. 232, as amended).
(Ord. 16-O-39, passed 10-17-2016)
§ 1466.03  DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   (a)   Compliance with the provisions of this regulation shall not relieve
any person from responsibility for damage to any person otherwise imposed by
law. The provisions of this regulation are promulgated to promote the health,
safety, and welfare of the public and are not designed for the benefit of any
individual or any particular parcel of property.
   (b)   By approving a comprehensive stormwater management plan under this
regulation, the city does not accept responsibility for the design,
installation, and operation and maintenance of SCMs.
(Ord. 16-O-39, passed 10-17-2016)
§ 1466.04  CONFLICTS, SEVERABILITY, NUISANCES AND RESPONSIBILITY.
   (a)   Where this regulation is in conflict with other provisions of law or
ordinance, the most restrictive provisions, as determined by the Kirtland City
Engineer, shall prevail.
   (b)   If any clause, section, or provision of this regulation is declared
invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, the validity
of the remainder shall not be affected thereby.
   (c)   This regulation shall not be construed as authorizing any person to
maintain a nuisance on their property, and compliance with the provisions of
this regulation shall not be a defense in any action to abate such a nuisance.
   (d)   Failure of the city to observe or recognize hazardous or unsightly
conditions or to recommend corrective measures shall not relieve the site owner
from the responsibility for the condition or damage resulting therefrom, and
shall not result in the city, its officers, employees, or agents being
responsible for any condition or damage resulting therefrom.
(Ord. 16-O-39, passed 10-17-2016)
2018 Replacement
§ 1466.05  DEVELOPMENT OF COMPREHENSIVE STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLANS.
   (a)   This regulation requires that a comprehensive stormwater management
plan be developed and implemented for all soil disturbing activities disturbing
one or more acres of total land, or less than one acre if part of a larger
common plan of development or sale disturbing one or more acres of total land,
and on which any regulated activity of §
1466.01(c) is proposed. The Kirtland City Engineer may require a comprehensive
stormwater management plan on sites disturbing less than one acre.
   (b)   The city shall administer this regulation, shall be responsible for
determination of compliance with this regulation, and shall issue notices and
orders as may be necessary. The city may consult with the Lake County Soil and
Water Conservation District, state agencies, private engineers, stormwater
districts, or other technical experts in reviewing the comprehensive stormwater
management plan.
(Ord. 16-O-39, passed 10-17-2016)
§ 1466.06  APPLICATION PROCEDURES.
   (a)   Pre-application meeting.  The applicant shall attend a pre-application
meeting with the Kirtland City Engineer to discuss the proposed project, review
the requirements of this regulation, identify unique aspects of the project
that must be addressed during the review process, and establish a preliminary
review and approval schedule.
   (b)   Preliminary comprehensive stormwater management plan.  The applicant
shall submit two sets of a preliminary comprehensive stormwater management plan
(preliminary plan) and the applicable fees to the Kirtland City Engineer and/or
the Public Service Administrator. The preliminary plan shall show the proposed
property boundaries, setbacks, dedicated open space, public roads, water
resources, stormwater control facilities, and easements in sufficient detail
and engineering analysis to allow the Kirtland City Engineer to determine if
the site is laid out in a manner that meets the intent of this regulation and
if the proposed SCMs are capable of controlling runoff from the site in
compliance with this regulation. The applicant shall submit two sets of the
preliminary plan and applicable fees as follows:
      (1)   For subdivisions.  In conjunction with the submission of the
preliminary subdivision plan.
      (2)   For other construction projects.  In conjunction with the
application for a zoning permit.
      (3)   For general clearing projects.  In conjunction with the application
for a zoning permit.
   (c)   Final comprehensive stormwater management plan. The applicant shall
submit two sets of a final comprehensive stormwater management plan (final
plan) and the applicable fees to the Kirtland City Engineer and/or the Public
Service Administrator in conjunction with the submittal of the final plat,
improvement plans, or application for a building or zoning permit for the site.
The final plan shall meet the requirements of §
1466.08 and shall be approved by the Kirtland City Engineer prior to approval
of the final plat and/or before issuance of a zoning permit by the Zoning
Inspector.
   (d)   Review and comment. The Kirtland City Engineer and/or the Public
Service Administrator shall review the preliminary and final plans submitted,
and shall approve or return for revisions with comments and recommendations for
revisions. A preliminary or final plan rejected because of deficiencies shall
receive a narrative report stating specific problems and the procedures for
filing a revised preliminary or final plan.
   (e)   Approval necessary.  Land clearing and soil-disturbing activities
shall not begin and zoning and/or building permits shall not be issued without
an approved comprehensive stormwater management plan.
   (f)   Valid for two years.  Approvals issued in accordance with this
regulation shall remain valid for two years from the date of approval.
(Ord. 16-O-39, passed 10-17-2016)
§ 1466.07  COMPLIANCE WITH STATE AND FEDERAL REGULATIONS.
   Approvals issued in accordance with this regulation do not relieve the
applicant of responsibility for obtaining all other necessary permits and/or
approvals from other federal, state, and/or county agencies. If requirements
vary, the most restrictive shall prevail. These permits may include, but are
not limited to, those listed below. Applicants are required to show proof of
compliance with these regulations before the city will issue a building or
zoning permit.
   (a)   Ohio Environmental Protection Agency (Ohio EPA) National Pollutant
Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Permits authorizing stormwater discharges
associated with construction activity or the most current version thereof. 
Proof of compliance with these requirements shall be the applicant's notice of
intent (NOI) number from Ohio EPA, a copy of the Ohio EPA Director's
Authorization Letter for the NPDES Permit, or a letter from the site owner
certifying and explaining why the NPDES Permit is not applicable.
   (b)   Section 401 of the Clean Water Act.  Proof of compliance shall be a
copy of the Ohio EPA Water Quality Certification application tracking number,
public notice, project approval, or a letter from the site owner certifying
that a qualified professional has surveyed the site and determined that Section
401 of the Clean Water Act is not applicable. Wetlands, and other waters of the
United States, shall be delineated by protocols accepted by the U.S. Army Corps
of Engineers at the time of application of this regulation.
   (c)   Ohio EPA Isolated Wetland Permit.  Proof of compliance shall be a copy
of Ohio EPA's Isolated Wetland Permit application tracking number, public
notice, project approval, or a letter from the site owner certifying that a
qualified professional has surveyed the site and determined that Ohio EPA's
Isolated Wetlands Permit is not applicable. Isolated wetlands shall be
delineated by protocols accepted by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers at the
time of application of this regulation.
   (d)   Section 404 of the Clean Water Act.  Proof of compliance shall be a
copy of the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers Individual Permit application, public
notice, or project approval, if an individual permit is required for the
development project. If an individual permit is not required, the site owner
shall submit proof of compliance with the U.S. Army Corps of Engineer's
Nationwide Permit Program. This shall include one of the following:
      (1)   A letter from the site owner certifying that a qualified
professional has surveyed the site and determined that Section 404 of the Clean
Water Act is not applicable.
      (2)   A site plan showing that any proposed fill of waters of the United
States conforms to the general and special conditions specified in the
applicable Nationwide Permit. Wetlands, and other waters of the United States,
shall be delineated by protocols accepted by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers
at the time of application of this regulation.
   (e)   Ohio Dam Safety Law.  Proof of compliance shall be a copy of the ODNR
Division of Soil and Water Resources permit application tracking number, a copy
of the project approval letter from the ODNR Division of Soil and Water
Resources, or a letter from the site owner certifying and explaining why the
Ohio Dam Safety Law is not applicable.
(Ord. 16-O-39, passed 10-17-2016)
§ 1466.08  COMPREHENSIVE STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN.
   (a)   Comprehensive stormwater management plan required. The applicant shall
develop a comprehensive stormwater management plan describing how the quantity
and quality of stormwater will be managed after construction is completed for
every discharge from the site and/or into a water resource or small municipal
separate storm sewer system (MS4). The plan will illustrate the type, location,
and dimensions of every structural and non-structural SCM incorporated into the
site design, and the rationale for their selection. The rationale must address
how these SCMs will address flooding within the site as well as flooding that
may be caused by the development upstream and downstream of the site. The
rationale will also describe how the SCMs minimize impacts to the physical,
chemical, and biological characteristics of on-site and downstream water
resources and, if necessary, correct current degradation of water resources
that is occurring or take measures to prevent predictable degradation of water
resources.
   (b)   Preparation by professional engineer.  The comprehensive stormwater
management plan shall be prepared by a registered professional engineer and
include supporting calculations, plan sheets, and design details. To the extent
necessary, as determined by the Kirtland City Engineer, a site survey shall be
performed by a registered professional surveyor to establish boundary lines,
measurements, or land surfaces.
   (c)   Community procedures.  The Kirtland City Engineer shall prepare and
maintain procedures providing specific criteria and guidance to be followed
when designing the stormwater management system for the site. These procedures
may be updated from time to time, at the discretion of the Kirtland City
Engineer based on improvements in engineering, science, monitoring, and local
maintenance experience. The Kirtland City Engineer shall make the final
determination of whether the practices proposed in the comprehensive stormwater
management plan meet the requirements of this regulation. The Kirtland City
Engineer may also maintain a list of acceptable SCMs that meet the criteria of
this regulation to be used in the city.
   (d)   Contents of comprehensive stormwater management plan.  The
comprehensive stormwater management plan shall contain an application,
narrative report, construction site plan sheets, a long-term inspection and
maintenance plan and inspection and maintenance agreement, and a site
description with the following information provided:
      (1)   Site description:
         A.   A description of the nature and type of the construction activity
(e.g. residential, shopping mall, highway, etc.).
         B.   Total area of the site and the area of the site that is expected
to be disturbed (i.e. grubbing, clearing, excavation, filling or grading,
including off-site borrow areas).
         C.   A description of prior land uses at the site.
         D.   An estimate of the impervious area and percent imperviousness
created by the soil-disturbing activity at the beginning and at the conclusion
of the project.
         E.   Selection (source and justification) and/or calculations of
runoff coefficients for water quality volume determination, peak discharge
control (curve number/critical storm method), and rational method.
         F.   Existing data describing the soils throughout the site, including
soil map units including series, complexes, and association, hydrologic soil
group, porosity, infiltration characteristics, depth to groundwater, depth to
bedrock, and any impermeable layers.
         G.   If available, the quality of any known pollutant discharge from
the site such as that which may result from previous contamination caused by
prior land uses.
         H.   The location and name of the immediate water resource(s) and the
first subsequent water resource(s).
         I.   The aerial (plan view) extent and description of water resources
at or near the site that will be disturbed or will receive discharges from the
project.
         J.   If applicable, identify the point of discharge to a municipal
separate storm sewer system and the location where that municipal separate
storm sewer system ultimately discharges to a stream, lake, or wetland. The
location and name of the immediate receiving stream or surface water(s) and the
first subsequent receiving water(s) and the aerial extent and description of
wetlands or other special aquatic sites at or near the site which will be
disturbed or which will receive discharges from undisturbed areas of the
project.
         K.   The TMDLs applicable for the site demonstrate that appropriate
(SCMs) have been selected to address the phosphorus, nitrogen, habitat,
bacteria, and TSS TMDLs.
         L.   If required by the Kirtland Planning and Zoning Commission, for
each SCM, identify:
            1.   A designated individual identification number,
            2.   Drainage area,
            3.   Percent impervious cover within the drainage area,
            4.   Runoff coefficient for water quality volume,
            5.   Peak discharge, and
            6.   Time of concentration for each subwatershed per Appendix 1 of
Ohio's stormwater manual, Rainwater and Land Development.  Pervious and
impervious areas should be treated as separate subwatersheds unless allowed at
the discretion of the Kirtland City Engineer,
            7.   SCM surface area,
            8.   Discharge and dewatering time,
            9.   Outlet type and dimensions.
         M.   Describe the current condition of water resources including the
vertical stability of stream channels and indications of channel incision that
may be responsible for current or future sources of high sediment loading or
loss of channel stability.
      (2)   Site map showing:
         A.   Limits of soil-disturbing activity on the site.
         B.   Soils map units for the entire site, including locations of
unstable or highly erodible soils.
         C.   Existing and proposed one-foot contours. This must include a
delineation of drainage watersheds expected before, during, and after major
grading activities as well as the size of each drainage watershed in acres.
         D.   Water resource locations including springs, wetlands, streams,
lakes, water wells, and associated setbacks on or within 200 feet of the site,
including the boundaries of wetlands or streams and first subsequent named
receiving water(s) the applicant intends to fill or relocate for which the
applicant is seeking approval from the Army Corps of Engineers and/or Ohio EPA.
         E.   Existing and planned locations of buildings, roads, parking
facilities, and utilities.
         F.   The location of any in-stream activities including stream
crossings.
      (3)   Contact information: Company name and contact information as well
as contact name, addresses, and phone numbers for the following:
         A.   The professional engineer who prepared the comprehensive
stormwater management plan.
         B.   The site owner.
      (4)   Phase, if applicable, of the overall development plan.
      (5)   List of sublot numbers if project is a subdivision.
      (6)   Ohio EPA NPDES Permit Number and other applicable state and federal
permit numbers, if available, or status of various permitting requirements if
final approvals have not been received.
      (7)   Location, including complete site address and sublot number if
applicable.
      (8)   Location of any easements or other restrictions placed on the use
of the property.
      (9)   A site plan sheet showing:
         A.   The location of each proposed post-construction SCMs.
         B.   The geographic coordinates of the site and each proposed practice
in North American Datum Ohio State Plane North.
         It is preferred that the entire site be shown on one plan sheet to
allow a complete view of the site during plan review. If a smaller scale is
used to accomplish this, separate sheets providing an enlarged view of areas on
individual sheets should also be provided.
      (10)   Inspection and maintenance agreement. The inspection and
maintenance agreement required for SCMs under this regulation as a stand-alone
document between the city and the applicant.  A copy of this agreement should
be attached to the property deed. The agreement shall contain the following
information and provisions:
         A.   Identification of the landowner(s), organization, or municipality
responsible for long-term inspection and maintenance, including repairs, of the
SCMs.
         B.   The landowner(s), organization, or municipality shall maintain
SCMs in accordance with this regulation.
         C.   The city has the authority to enter upon the property to conduct
inspections as necessary, with prior notification of the property owner, to
verify that the SCMs are being maintained and operated in accordance with this
regulation.
         D.   The Kirtland Public Service Administrator shall maintain public
records of the results of site inspections, shall inform the landowner(s),
organization, or municipality responsible for maintenance of the inspection
results, and shall specifically indicate in writing any corrective actions
required to bring the SCMs into proper working condition.
         E.   If the city notifies the landowner(s), organization, or
municipality responsible for maintenance of the maintenance problems that
require correction, the specific corrective actions shall be taken within a
reasonable time as determined by the city.
         F.   The city is authorized to enter upon the property and perform the
corrective actions identified in the inspection report if the landowner(s),
organization, or municipality responsible for maintenance does not make the
required corrections in the specified time period. The city shall be reimbursed
by the landowner(s), organization, or municipality responsible for maintenance
for all expenses incurred within ten days of receipt of invoice from the city,
or more with written approval from the Kirtland Public Service Administrator.
         G.   The method of funding long-term maintenance and inspections of
all SCMs.
         H.   A release of the city from all damages, accidents, casualties,
occurrences, or claims that might arise or be asserted against the city from
the construction, presence, existence, or maintenance of the SCMs.
      (11)   Inspection and maintenance plan. This plan will be developed by
the applicant and reviewed by the city.  Once the inspection and maintenance
plan is approved, a recorded copy of the plan must be submitted to the city as
part of the final inspection approval as described in §
1466.12. The plan will include at a minimum:
         A.   The location of each SCM and identification of the drainage area
served by each SCM.
         B.   Photographs of each SCM, including all inlets and outlets upon
completion of construction.
         C.   Schedule of inspection.
         D.   A schedule for regular maintenance for each aspect of the
stormwater management system and description of routine and non-routine
maintenance tasks to ensure continued performance of the system as is detailed
in the approved comprehensive stormwater management plan. A maintenance
inspection checklist written so the average person can understand it shall be
incorporated. The maintenance plan will include a detailed drawing of each SCM
and outlet structures with the parts of the outlet structure labeled. This
schedule may include additional standards, as required by the Kirtland City
Engineer, to ensure continued performance of SCMs permitted to be located in,
or within 50 feet of, water resources.
         E.   The location and documentation of all access and maintenance
easements on the property.
      (12)   Alteration or termination of the inspection and maintenance
agreement or the inspection and maintenance plan is prohibited.
      (13)   Required calculations. The applicant shall submit calculations for
projected stormwater runoff flows, volumes, and timing into and through all
SCMs for flood control, channel protection, water quality, and the condition of
the habitat, stability, and incision of each water resource and its floodplain,
as required in §
1466.09.  These submittals shall be completed for both pre- and post-
development land use conditions and shall include the underlying assumptions
and hydrologic and hydraulic methods and parameters used for these
calculations. The applicant shall also include critical storm determination and
demonstrate that the runoff from offsite areas have been considered in the
calculations.
      (14)   List of all contractors and subcontractors before construction.
Prior to construction or before the pre-construction meeting, provide the list
of all contractors and subcontractors and their names, addresses, and phones
involved with the implementation of the comprehensive stormwater management
plan including a written document containing signatures of all parties as proof
of acknowledgment that they have reviewed and understand the requirements and
responsibilities of the comprehensive stormwater management plan.
      (15)   Existing and proposed drainage patterns. The location and
description of existing and proposed drainage patterns and SCMs, including any
related SCMs beyond the development area and the larger common development
area.
      (16)   For each SCM to be employed on the development area, include the
following:
         A.   Location and size, including detail drawings, maintenance
requirements during and after construction, and design calculations, all where
applicable.
         B.   Final site conditions including stormwater inlets and permanent
nonstructural and structural SCMs. Details of SCMs shall be drawn to scale and
shall show volumes and sizes of contributing drainage areas.
         C.   Any other structural and/or non-structural SCMs necessary to meet
the design criteria in this regulation and any supplemental information
requested by the Kirtland City Engineer.
         D.   Each SCM shall be designated with an individual identification
number.
(Ord. 16-O-39, passed 10-17-2016)
§ 1466.09  PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.
   (a)   General.  The stormwater system, including SCMs for storage, treatment
and control, and conveyance facilities, shall be designed to prevent structure
flooding during the 100-year, 24-hour storm event; to maintain predevelopment
runoff patterns, flows, and volumes; and to meet the following criteria:
      (1)   Integrated practices that address degradation of water resources.
The SCMs shall function as an integrated system that controls flooding and
minimizes the degradation of the physical, biological, and chemical integrity
of the water resources receiving stormwater discharges from the site.
Acceptable practices shall:
         A.   Not disturb riparian areas, unless the disturbance is intended to
support a watercourse restoration project and complies with §
1294.06 of the Riparian Setbacks Chapter.
         B.   Maintain predevelopment hydrology and groundwater recharge on as
much of the site as practicable.
         C.   Only install new impervious surfaces and compact soils where
necessary to support the future land use.
         D.   Compensate for increased runoff volumes caused by new impervious
surfaces and soil compaction by reducing stormwater peak flows to less than
predevelopment levels.
         E.   Be designed according to the methodology included in the most
current edition of Rainwater and Land Development or another design manual
acceptable for use by the city and Ohio EPA.
         F.   SCMs that meet the criteria in this regulation, and additional
criteria required by the Kirtland City Engineer, shall comply with this
regulation.
      (2)   Practices designed for final use.  SCMs shall be designed to
achieve the stormwater management objectives of this regulation, to be
compatible with the proposed post-construction use of the site, to protect the
public health, safety, and welfare, and to function safely with routine
maintenance.
      (3)   Stormwater management for all lots.  Areas developed for a
subdivision, as defined in Part 12 Title Four - Subdivision Regulations, shall
provide stormwater management and water quality controls for the development of
all subdivided lots. This shall include provisions for lot grading and drainage
that prevent structure flooding during the 100-year, 24-hour storm; and
maintain, to the extent practicable, the pre-development runoff patterns,
volumes, and peaks from the subdivision.
      (4)   Stormwater facilities in water resources.  SCMs and related
activities shall not be constructed in water resources unless the applicant
shows proof of compliance with all appropriate permits from the Ohio EPA, the
U.S. Army Corps, and other applicable federal, state, and local agencies as
required in §
1466.07, and the activity is in compliance with
Chapter 1464 Erosion and Sediment Control requirements and
Chapter 1294 Riparian Setbacks requirements, all as determined by the Kirtland
City Engineer.
      (5)   Stormwater ponds and surface conveyance channels.  All stormwater
pond and surface conveyance designs must provide a minimum of one foot
freeboard above the projected peak stage within the facility during the 100-
year, 24-hour storm. When designing stormwater ponds and conveyance channels,
the applicant shall consider public safety as a design factor and alternative
designs must be implemented where site limitations would preclude a safe
design.
      (6)   Exemption.  The site where soil-disturbing activities are conducted
shall be exempt from the requirements of this section if it can be shown to the
satisfaction of the Kirtland City Engineer that the site is part of a larger
common plan of development where the stormwater management requirements for the
site are provided by an existing SCMs, or if the stormwater management
requirements for the site are provided by practices defined in a regional or
local stormwater management plan approved by the Kirtland City Engineer.
      (7)   Maintenance.  All SCMs shall be maintained in accordance with the
inspection and maintenance plan and agreements approved by the Kirtland City
Engineer as detailed in §
1466.08.
      (8)   Ownership.  Unless otherwise required by the city, SCMs serving
multiple lots in subdivisions shall be on a separate lot held and maintained by
an entity of common ownership or, if compensated by the property owners, by the
city.  SCMs serving single lots shall be placed on these lots, protected within
an easement, and maintained by the property owner.
      (9)   Preservation of existing natural drainage. Practices that preserve
and/or improve the existing natural drainage shall be used to the maximum
extent practicable. Such practices may include minimizing site grading and
compaction; protecting and/or restoring water resources, riparian areas, and
existing vegetation and vegetative buffer strips; phasing of construction
operations in order to minimize the amount of disturbed land at any one time,
and designation of tree preservation areas or other protective clearing and
grubbing practices; and maintaining unconcentrated stormwater runoff to and
through these areas. Post-construction stormwater practices shall provide
perpetual management of runoff quality and quantity so that a receiving
stream's physical, chemical and biological characteristics are protected and
ecological functions are maintained.
      (10)   Preservation of wetland hydrology:
         A.   Concentrated stormwater runoff from SCMs to wetlands shall be
converted to diffuse flow before the runoff enters the wetlands in order to
protect the natural hydrology, hydroperiod, and wetland flora. The flow shall
be released such that no erosion occurs down slope. Practices such as level
spreaders, vegetative buffers, infiltration basins, conservation of forest
covers, and the preservation of intermittent streams, depressions, and drainage
corridors may be used to maintain the wetland hydrology.
         B.   If the applicant proposes to discharge to natural wetlands, a
hydrological analysis shall be performed to demonstrate that the proposed
discharge matches the pre-development hydroperiods and hydrodynamics that
support the wetland.
      (11)   Soil preservation and post-construction soil restoration. To the
maximum extent practicable leave native soil undisturbed and protect from
compaction during construction.
   (b)   Stormwater conveyance design criteria.  All SCMs shall be designed to
convey stormwater to allow for the maximum removal of pollutants and reduction
in flow velocities. This shall include but not be limited to:
      (1)   Surface water protection.  The Kirtland City Engineer may allow
modification to streams, rivers, lakes, wetlands or other surface waters only
if the applicant shows proof of compliance with all appropriate permits from
the Ohio EPA, the U.S. Army Corps, and other applicable federal, state, and
local agencies as required in §
1466.07 of this regulation, and the activity is in compliance with Chapter 1464
Erosion and Sediment Control requirements and Chapter 1294 Riparian Setbacks
requirements, all as determined by the Kirtland City Engineer. At a minimum,
stream relocation designs must show how the project will minimize changes to
the vertical stability, floodplain form, channel form, and habitat of upstream
and downstream channels on and off the property.
      (2)   Off-site stormwater discharges.  Off-site stormwater runoff that
discharges to or across the applicant's development site shall be conveyed
through the stormwater conveyance system planned for the development site at
its existing peak flow rates during each design storm. Off-site flows shall be
diverted around stormwater quality control facilities or, if this is not
possible, the stormwater quality control facility shall be sized to treat the
off-site flow. Comprehensive stormwater management plans will not be approved
until it is demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Kirtland City Engineer that
off-site runoff will be adequately conveyed through the development site in a
manner that does not exacerbate upstream or downstream flooding and erosion.
      (3)   Sheet flow.  The site shall be graded in a manner that maintains
sheet flow over as large an area as possible. The maximum area of sheet flow
shall be determined based on the slope, the uniformity of site grading, and the
use of easements or other legally-binding mechanisms that prohibit re-grading
and/or the placement of structures within sheet flow areas. In no case shall
the sheet flow length be longer than 300 feet, nor shall a sheet flow area
exceed 1.5 acres. Flow shall be directed into an open channel, storm sewer, or
other SCMs from areas too long and/or too large to maintain sheet flow, all as
determined by the Kirtland City Engineer.
      (4)   Open channels.  Unless otherwise allowed by the Kirtland City
Engineer, drainage tributary to SCMs shall be provided by an open channel with
vegetated banks and designed to carry the ten-year, 24-hour stormwater runoff
from upstream contributory areas.
      (5)   Open drainage systems.  Open drainage systems shall be preferred on
all new development sites to convey stormwater where feasible. Storm sewer
systems shall be allowed only when the site cannot be developed at densities
allowed under city zoning or where the use of an open drainage system affects
public health or safety, all as determined by the Kirtland City Engineer. The
following criteria shall be used to design storm sewer systems when necessary:
         A.   Storm sewers shall be designed such that they do not surcharge
from runoff caused by the five-year, 24-hour storm, and that the hydraulic
grade line of the storm sewer stays below the gutter flow line of the overlying
roadway, or below the top of drainage structures outside the roadway during a
ten-year, 24-hour storm. The system shall be designed to meet these
requirements when conveying the flows from the contributing drainage area
within the proposed development and existing flows from offsite areas that are
upstream from the development.
         B.   The minimum inside diameter of pipe to be used in public storm
sewer systems is 12 inches. Smaller pipe sizes may be used subject to the
approval of the Kirtland City Engineer.
         C.   All storm sewer systems shall be designed taking into
consideration the tailwater of the receiving facility or water resource. The
tailwater elevation used shall be based on the design storm frequency. The
hydraulic grade line for the storm sewer system shall be computed with
consideration for the energy losses associated with entrance into and exit from
the system, friction through the system, and turbulence in the individual
manholes, catch basins, and junctions within the system.
         D.   The inverts of all curb inlets, manholes, yard inlets, and other
structures shall be formed and channelized to minimize the incidence of
quiescent standing water where mosquitoes may breed.
         E.   Headwalls shall be required at all storm sewer inlets or outlets
to and from open channels or lakes if required by the Kirtland City Engineer.
      (6)   Water resource crossings.  The following criteria shall be used to
design structures that cross a water resource in the city:
         A.   Water resource crossings other than bridges shall be designed to
convey the stream's flow for the minimum 25-year, 24-hour storm.
         B.   Bridges, open bottom arch or spans are the preferred crossing
technique and shall be considered in the planning phase of the development.
Bridges and open spans should be considered for all state scenic rivers,
coldwater habitat, exceptional warmwater habitat, seasonal salmonid habitat
streams, and Class III headwater streams. The footers or piers for these
bridges and open spans shall not be constructed below the ordinary high water
mark.
         C.   If a culvert or other closed bottom crossing is used, 25 percent
of the cross-sectional area or a minimum of one foot of box culverts and pipe
arches must be embedded below the channel bed. The conduit or conveyance must
be sized to carry the 25-year storm under these conditions.
         D.   The minimum inside diameter of pipes to be used for crossings
shall be 12 inches.
         E.   The maximum slope allowable shall be a slope that produces a ten-
fps velocity within the culvert barrel under design flow conditions. Erosion
protection and/or energy dissipaters shall be required to properly control
entrance and outlet velocities.
         F.   All culvert installations shall be designed with consideration
for the tailwater of the receiving facility or water resource. The tailwater
elevation used shall be based on the design storm frequency.
         G.   Headwalls shall be required at all culvert inlets or outlets to
and from open channels or lakes.
         H.   Streams with a drainage area of five square miles or larger shall
incorporate floodplain culverts at the bankfull elevation to restrict head loss
differences across the crossing so as to cause no rise in the 100-year storm
event.
         I.   Bridges shall be designed such that the hydraulic profile through
a bridge shall be below the bottom chord of the bridge for either the 100-year,
24-hour storm, or the 100-year flood elevation as determined by FEMA, whichever
is more restrictive.
      (7)   Overland flooding.  Overland flood routing paths shall be used to
convey stormwater runoff from the 100-year, 24-hour storm event to an adequate
receiving water resource or SCM such that the runoff is contained within the
drainage easement for the flood routing path and does not cause flooding of
buildings or related structures. The peak 100-year water surface elevation
along flood routing paths shall be at least one foot below the finished grade
elevation of all structures. When designing the flood routing paths, the
conveyance capacity of the site's storm sewers shall be taken into
consideration.
      (8)   Compensatory flood storage mitigation.  In order to preserve
floodplain storage volumes and thereby avoid increases in water surface
elevations, any filling within floodplains approved by the city must be
compensated by providing an equivalent storage volume. First consideration for
the location(s) of compensatory floodplain volumes should be given to areas
where the stream channel will have immediate access to the new floodplain
within the limits of the development site. Consideration will also be given to
enlarging existing or proposed retention basins to compensate for floodplain
fill if justified by a hydraulic analysis of the contributing watershed. Unless
otherwise permitted by the city, reductions in volume due to floodplain fills
must be mitigated within the legal boundaries of the development. Embankment
slopes used in compensatory storage areas must reasonably conform to the
natural slopes adjacent to the disturbed area. The use of vertical retaining
structures is specifically prohibited.
      (9)   Velocity dissipation.  Velocity dissipation devices shall be placed
at discharge locations and along the length of any outfall to provide non-
erosive flow velocity from the structure to a water resource so that the
natural physical and biological characteristics and functions of the water
resource are maintained and protected.
   (c)   Stormwater quality control.
      (1)   Direct runoff to an SCM.  The site shall be designed to direct
runoff to one or more of the following SCMs. These practices are listed in
Table 2 of this regulation and shall be designed to meet the following general
performance standards:
         A.   Extended detention facilities that detain stormwater; settle or
filter particulate pollutants as per Appendix A or B; and release the
controlled stormwater to a water resource.
         B.   Infiltration facilities that retain stormwater; promote settling,
filtering, and biodegradation of pollutants; and infiltrate captured stormwater
into the ground. The Kirtland City Engineer may require a soil engineering
report to be prepared for the site to demonstrate that any proposed
infiltration facilities meet these performance standards.
         C.   For sites less than five acres, but required to create a
comprehensive stormwater management plan, the Kirtland City Engineer may
approve other SCMs if the applicant demonstrates to the Kirtland City
Engineer's satisfaction that these SCMs meet the objectives of this regulation
as stated in division (c)(6) of this section.
         D.   For sites greater than five acres, or less than five acres but
part of a larger common plan of development or sale which will disturb five or
more acres, the Kirtland City Engineer may approve other SCMs if the applicant
demonstrates to the Kirtland City Engineer's satisfaction that these SCMs meet
the objectives of this regulation as stated in division (c)(6) of this section,
and has prior written approval from the Ohio EPA.
         E.   For the construction of new roads and roadway improvement
projects by public entities (i.e. the state, counties, townships, cities, or
villages), the Kirtland City Engineer may approve SCMs not included in Table 2
of this regulation, but must show compliance with the current version of the
Ohio Department of Transportation "Location and Design Manual, Volume Two
Drainage Design".
      (2)   Criteria applying to all SCMs.  SCMs chosen must be sized to treat
the water quality volume (WQv) and to ensure compliance with Ohio Water Quality
Standards (OAC Chapter 3745-1).
         A.   The WQv shall be equal to the volume of runoff from a 0.75 inch
rainfall event and shall be determined according to one of the following
methods:
            1.   Through a site hydrologic study approved by the Kirtland City
Engineer that uses continuous hydrologic simulation; site-specific hydrologic
parameters, including impervious area, soil infiltration characteristics,
slope, and surface routing characteristics; proposed SCMs controlling the
amount and/or timing of runoff from the site; and local long-term hourly
records, or
            2.   Using the following equation:
               WQv = C*P*A/12
            where terms have the following meanings:
            WQv = water quality volume in acre-feet
            C   = runoff coefficient appropriate for storms less than one inch
            P   = 0.75 inch precipitation depth
            A   = area draining into the stormwater practice, in acres.
            Runoff coefficients required by the Ohio Environmental Protection
Agency (Ohio EPA) for use in determining the WQv can be determined using the
list in Table 1 or using the following equation to calculate the runoff
coefficient.
            C = 0.858i3-0.78i2 + 0.774i+0.04, where:
            i = fraction of the drainage area that is impervious
 
Table 1: Runoff Coefficients Based on the Type of Land Use
Land Use Runoff Coefficient
Industrial & Commercial                            0.8
High Density Residential (>8 dwellings/acre)       0.5
Medium Density Residential (4 to 8 dwellings/acre) 0.4
Low Density Residential (<4 dwellings/acre)        0.3
Open Space and Recreational Areas                  0.2
Where land use will be mixed, the runoff coefficient should be calculated
using a weighted average. For example, if 60% of the contributing drainage
area to the stormwater treatment structure is Low Density Residential, 30% is
High Density Residential, and 10% is Open Space, the runoff coefficient is
calculated as follows (0.6)(0.3)+(0.3)(0.5)+(0.1)(0.2) = (0.35)
 
         B.   An additional volume equal to 20 percent of the WQv shall be
incorporated into the stormwater practice for sediment storage. This volume
shall be incorporated into the sections of stormwater practices where
pollutants will accumulate.
         C.   Each individual SCM must be sized to treat the WQv associated
with its entire contributing drainage area. Exceptions to this may be granted
by the Kirtland City Engineer and/or the OEPA on a case-by-case basis.
         D.   Stormwater quality management practices shall be designed such
that the drain time is long enough to provide treatment and protect against
downstream bank erosion, but short enough to provide storage available for
successive rainfall events as defined in Table 2.
         E.   Sites within watersheds of coldwater habitat streams shall
include SCMs to infiltrate the water quality volume or reduce the temperature
of discharged runoff. SCMs that reduce the temperature of discharged runoff
include bioretention, permeable pavement, underground detention, ductile iron
discharge pipes, and incorporation of shading and infiltration in parking lot
design.
         F.   Each practice shall be designed to facilitate sediment removal,
vegetation management, debris control, and other maintenance activities defined
in the inspection plan and maintenance agreement for the site.
 
Table 2: Draw Down Times for Stormwater Control Measures
Stormwater Control Measure                            Drain Time of WQv
Infiltration Basin or Trench1                         48 hours
Permeable Pavement – Infiltration1                  48 hours
Permeable Pavement – Extended Detention             24 hours
Extended Detention Facilities                         48 hours
∙   Extended Dry Detention Basins2               24 hours
∙   Wet Extended Detention Basin3                24 hours
∙   Constructed Wetlands (above permanent pool)4 24 hours
∙   Bioretention Area/Cell5,6                    24 hours
∙   Sand and other Media Filtration5             24 hours
∙   Pocket Wetland7
1  Practices designed to fully infiltrate the WQv shall empty within 48 hours.
2  The use of a forebay and micropool is required on all dry extended detention
basins. Each is to be sized at a minimum 10% of the WQv.
3  Provide both a permanent pool and an extended detention volume above the
permanent pool, each sized with at least 0.75*WQv.
4  Extended detention shall be provided for the WQv above the permanent water
pool.
5  The surface ponding area shall completely empty within 24 hours so that
there is no standing water. Shorter drawdown times are acceptable as long as
design criteria in Rainwater and Land Development have been met.
6  This includes grassed linear bioretention, which was previously titled
enhanced water quality swale.
7  Pocket wetlands must have a wet pool equal to the WQv, with 25% of the WQv
in a pool and 75% in marshes. The EDV above the permanent pool must be equal to
the WQv.
 
      (3)   Additional criteria applying to infiltration facilities:
         A.   Infiltration facilities should be designed to meet all criteria
in Rainwater and Land Development.
         B.   All runoff directed into an infiltration basin must first flow
through a pretreatment practice such as a grass channel or filter strip to
remove coarser sediments that could cause a loss of infiltration capacity.
         C.   During construction, all runoff from disturbed areas of the site
shall be diverted away from the proposed infiltration basin site. No
construction equipment shall be allowed within the infiltration basin site to
avoid soil compaction.
      (4)   Additional criteria for extended detention facilities.
         A.   The outlet shall be designed to not release more than the first
half of the water quality volume in less than one- third of the drain time. The
outlet shall be designed to minimize clogging, vandalism, maintenance, and
promote the capture of floatable pollutants.
         B.   The basin design shall incorporate the following features to
maximize multiple uses, aesthetics, safety, and maintainability:
            1.   Basin side slopes above the permanent pool shall have a run to
rise ratio of 4:1 or flatter.
            2.   The perimeter of all permanent pool areas deeper than four
feet shall be surrounded by an aquatic bench that extends at least eight feet
and no more than 15 feet outward from the normal water edge. The eight feet
wide portion of the aquatic bench closest to the shoreline shall have an
average depth of six inches below the permanent pool to promote the growth of
aquatic vegetation. The remainder of the aquatic bench shall be no more than 15
inches below the permanent pool to minimize drowning risk to individuals who
accidentally or intentionally enter the basin, and to limit growth of dense
vegetation in a manner that allows waves and mosquito predators to pass through
the vegetation. The maximum slope of the aquatic bench shall be ten (H) to one
(V). The aquatic bench shall be planted with native plant species comparable to
wetland vegetation that are able to withstand prolonged inundation. The use of
invasive plant species is prohibited.
            3.   A forebay designed to allow larger sediment particles to
settle shall be placed at basin inlets. The forebay and micropool volume shall
be equal to at least ten percent of the water quality volume (WQv).
            4.    Detention basins shall be provided with an emergency drain,
where practicable, so that the basin may be emptied if the primary outlet
becomes clogged and/or to drain the permanent pool to facilitate maintenance.
The emergency drain should be designed to drain by gravity where possible.
      (5)   Criteria for the acceptance of alternative post-construction SCMs. 
The applicant may request approval from the Kirtland City Engineer for the use
of alternative structural post-construction SCMs if the applicant shows to the
satisfaction of the Kirtland City Engineer that these SCMs are equivalent in
pollutant removal and runoff flow/volume reduction effectiveness to those
listed in Table 2. If the site is greater than five acres, or less than five
acres but part of a larger common plan of development or sale which will
disturb five or more acres, prior approval from the Ohio EPA is necessary. To
demonstrate the equivalency, the applicant must show:
         A.   The alternative SCM has a minimum total suspended solid (TSS)
removal efficiency of 80 percent, using the Level II Technology Acceptance
Reciprocity Partnership (TARP) testing protocol.
         B.   The water quality volume discharge rate from the selected SCM is
reduced to prevent stream bed erosion, unless there will be negligible
hydrologic impact to the receiving surface water of the state. The discharge
rate from the SCM will have negligible impacts if the applicant can demonstrate
one of the following conditions:
            1.   The entire water quality volume is recharged to groundwater.
            2.   The development will create less than one acre of impervious
surface.
            3.   The development project is a redevelopment project with an
ultra-urban setting, such as a downtown area, or on a site where 100 percent of
the project area is already impervious surface and the stormwater discharge is
directed into an existing storm sewer system.
            4.   The stormwater drainage system of the development discharges
directly into a large river of fourth order or greater or to a lake, and where
the development area is less than five percent of the water area upstream of
the development site, unless a TMDL has identified water quality problems in
the receiving surface water of the state.
   (d)   Stormwater quantity control.  The comprehensive stormwater management
plan shall describe how the proposed SCMs are designed to meet the following
requirements for stormwater quantity control for each watershed in the
development:
      (1)   The peak discharge rate of runoff from the critical storm and all
more frequent storms occurring under post-development conditions shall not
exceed the peak discharge rate of runoff from a one-year, 24-hour storm
occurring on the same development drainage area under pre-development
conditions.
      (2)   Storms of less frequent occurrence (longer return periods) than the
critical storm, up to the 100-year, 24-hour storm shall have peak runoff
discharge rates no greater than the peak runoff rates from equivalent size
storms under pre-development conditions. The 1, 2, 5, 10, 25, 50, and 100-year
storms shall be considered in designing a facility to meet this requirement.
      (3)   The critical storm for each specific development drainage area
shall be determined as follows:
         A.   Determine, using a curve number-based hydrologic method or other
hydrologic method approved by the Kirtland City Engineer, the total volume
(acre-feet) of runoff from a one-year, 24-hour storm occurring on the
development drainage area before and after development. These calculations
shall meet the following standards:
            1.    Calculations shall include the lot coverage assumptions used
for full build out as proposed.
            2.    Calculations shall be based on the entire contributing
watershed to the development area.
            3.   Model pervious, directly connected impervious and disconnected
impervious areas as separate subwatersheds.
            4.   Drainage area maps shall include area, curve number, time of
concentrations. Time of concentration shall also show the flow path and the
separation in flow type.
            5.   Rainfall depth - For the most accurate, up-to-date, location-
specific rainfall data for stormwater design, use the Precipitation-Frequency
Atlas of the United States, NOAA Atlas 14, Vol 2(3). available online: http://
hdsc.nws.noaa.gov/hdsc/pfds/.
            6.   Temporal distribution - Use the SCS Type II rainfall
distribution for all design events with a recurrence interval greater than one
year. Include lot coverage assumptions used for full build out of the proposed
condition.
            7.   Curve numbers for the pre-development condition shall reflect
the average type of land use over the past ten years and not only the current
land use.
               a.    Pre-development curve numbers - For wooded or brushy
areas, use listed values from TR-55 NRCS USDA Urban Hydrology for Small
Watersheds, 1986 in good hydrologic condition. For meadows, use listed values.
For all other areas (including all types of agriculture), use pasture,
grassland, or range in good hydrologic condition.
               b.    Post-development curve numbers - Open space areas shall
use post-construction HSGs from Rainwater and Land Development unless the soil
is amended after development according to the following protocol: till the
subsoil to 15-18 inches, then till using a chisel, spader, or rotary tillage
and incorporate compost through top 12 inches, replace topsoil to a minimum
depth of four inches. All undisturbed areas or open space with amended soils
shall be treated as "open space in good condition."
            8.   Time of concentration - Use velocity based methods from (TR-55
NRCS USDA Urban Hydrology in Small Watersheds, 1986) to estimate travel time
(Tt) for overland (sheet) flow, shallow concentrated flow and channel flow.
               a.    Maximum sheet flow length is 100 feet.
               b.   Use the appropriate "unpaved" velocity equation for shallow
concentrated flow from National Engineering Handbook - Section 4.
            9.   The volume reduction provided by permeable pavement,
bioretention, or other LID SCMs may be subtracted from the post development
stormwater volume. Volume reductions for these practices may be demonstrated
using methods outlined in Rainwater and Land Development or a hydrologic model
acceptable to the Kirtland City Engineer.
         B.   To account for future post-construction improvements to the site,
calculations shall assume an impervious surface such as asphalt or concrete for
all parking areas and driveways, regardless of the surface proposed in the site
description except in instances of engineered permeable pavement systems. From
the volume determined in division (d)(3)A., determine the percent increase in
volume of runoff due to development. Using the percentage, select the 24-hour
critical storm from Table 3.
 
Table 3: 24-Hour Critical Storm
If the Percentage of Increase in Volume of Runoff
is:                                               The Critical Storm will be:
Equal to or Greater Than: and Less Than:
— 10  1 year
10  20  2 year
20  50  5 year
50  100 10 year
100 250 25 year
250 500 50 year
500 — 100 year
For example, if the percent increase between the pre- and post-development
runoff volume for a 1-year storm is 35%, the critical storm is a 5-year
storm. The peak discharge rate of runoff for all storms up to this frequency
shall be controlled so as not to exceed the peak discharge rate from the 1-
year frequency storm under pre-development conditions in the development
drainage area. The post-development runoff from all less frequent storms need
only be controlled to meet pre-development peak discharge rates for each of
those same storms.
 
   (e)   Stormwater management on redevelopment projects.
      (1)   Comprehensive stormwater management plans for redevelopment
projects must accomplish one of the following options:
         A.   Reduce existing site impervious areas by at least 20 percent, a
one-for-one credit towards the 20 percent net reduction of impervious area can
be obtained through the use green roofs.
         B.   Infiltrate at least 20 percent of the WQv.
         C.   Capture, treat and release 20 percent of the WQv.
      (2)   When a combination of impervious area reduction and stormwater
quality control facilities are used, ensure a 20 percent net reduction of the
site impervious area, provide for treatment of at least 20 percent of the WQv,
or a combination of the two.
      (3)   Where projects are a combination of new development and
redevelopment, the total water quality volume required to be treated shall be
calculated by a weighted average based on acreage, with the new development at
100 percent water quality volume and redevelopment at 20 percent.
      (4)   Where conditions prevent impervious area reduction or on-site
stormwater management for redevelopment projects, practical alternatives as
detailed in §
1466.10 may be approved by the Kirtland City Engineer.
(Ord. 16-O-39, passed 10-17-2016)
§ 1466.10  ALTERNATIVE ACTIONS.
   (a)   When the city determines that site constraints compromise the intent
of this regulation, off-site alternatives may be used that result in an
improvement of water quality and a reduction of stormwater quantity. Such
alternatives shall meet the following standards:
      (1)   Shall achieve the same level of stormwater quantity and quality
control that would be achieved by the on-site controls required under this
regulation.
      (2)   Implemented in the same Hydrologic Unit Code (HUC) 12 watershed
unit as the proposed development project.
      (3)   The mitigation ratio of the water quality volume is 1.5 to 1 or the
water quality volume at the point of retrofit, whichever is greater.
      (4)   An inspection and maintenance agreement as described in §
1466.08(d)(10) is established to ensure operations and treatment in perpetuity.
      (5)   Obtain prior written approval from Ohio EPA.
   (b)   Alternative actions may include, but are not limited to the following.
All alternative actions shall be approved by the Kirtland City Engineer:
      (1)   Fees, in an amount specified by the city to be applied to
community-wide SCMs.
      (2)   Implementation of off-site SCMs and/or the retrofit of an existing
practice to increase quality and quantity control.
      (3)   Stream, floodplain, or wetland restoration.
      (4)   Acquisition or conservation easements on protected open space
significantly contributing to stormwater control such as wetland complexes.
(Ord. 16-O-39, passed 10-17-2016)
§ 1466.11  EASEMENTS.
   Access to SCMs as required by the Kirtland City Engineer for inspections and
maintenance shall be secured by easements. The following conditions shall apply
to all easements:
   (a)   Easements shall be included in the inspection and maintenance
agreement submitted with the comprehensive stormwater management plan.
   (b)   Easements shall be approved by the city prior to approval of a final
plat and shall be recorded with the Lake County Auditor and on all property
deeds.
   (c)   Unless otherwise required by the Kirtland City Engineer, access
easements between a public right-of-way and all SCMs shall be no less than 25-
feet wide. The easement shall also incorporate the entire practice plus an
additional 25-foot wide band around the perimeter of the SCM.
   (d)   The easement shall be graded and/or stabilized as necessary to allow
maintenance equipment to access and manipulate around and within each facility,
as defined in the inspection and maintenance agreement for the site.
   (e)   Easements to structural SCMs shall be restricted against the
construction therein of buildings, fences, walls, and other structures that may
obstruct the free flow of stormwater and the passage of inspectors and
maintenance equipment; and against the changing of final grade from that
described by the final grading plan approved by the city.  Any re-grading and/
or obstruction placed within a maintenance easement may be removed by the city
at the property owners' expense.
(Ord. 16-O-39, passed 10-17-2016)
§ 1466.12  MAINTENANCE AND FINAL INSPECTION APPROVAL.
   To receive final inspection and acceptance of any project, or portion
thereof, the following must be completed by the applicant and provided to the
Kirtland City Engineer:
   (a)   Final stabilization must be achieved and all permanent SCMs must be
installed and made functional, as determined by the Kirtland City Engineer and
per the approved comprehensive stormwater management plan.
   (b)   An as-built certification, including as-built survey and inspection,
must be sealed, signed and dated by a professional engineer and a professional
surveyor with a statement certifying that the stormwater control measures, as
designed and installed, meet the requirements of the comprehensive stormwater
management plan approved by the Kirtland City Engineer. In evaluating this
certification, the Kirtland City Engineer may require the submission of a new
set of stormwater practice calculations if he/she determines that the design
was altered significantly from the approved comprehensive stormwater management
plan. The as-built survey must provide the location, dimensions, and bearing of
such practices and include the entity responsible for long-term maintenance as
detailed in the inspection and maintenance agreement.
   (c)   A copy of the complete and recorded inspection and maintenance plan
and inspection and maintenance agreement as specified in §
1466.08 must be provided to the Kirtland City Engineer.
(Ord. 16-O-39, passed 10-17-2016)
§ 1466.13  ON-GOING INSPECTIONS.
   The owner shall inspect SCMs regularly as described in the inspection and
maintenance plan and inspection and maintenance agreement. The city has the
authority to enter upon the property to conduct inspections as necessary, with
prior notification of the property owner, to verify that the SCMs are being
maintained and operated in accordance with this regulation. Upon finding a
malfunction or other need for maintenance or repair, the city shall provide
written notification to the responsible party, as detailed in the inspection
and maintenance agreement, of the need for maintenance. Upon notification, the
responsible party shall have five working days, or other mutually agreed upon
time, to makes repairs or submit a plan with detailed action items and
established timelines. Should repairs not be made within this time, or a plan
approved by the Kirtland City Engineer for these repairs not in place, the city
may undertake the necessary repairs and assess the responsible party.
(Ord. 16-O-39, passed 10-17-2016)
§ 1466.14  FEES.
   The comprehensive stormwater management plan review, filing, and inspection
fee is part of a complete submittal and is required to be submitted to the city
before the review process begins. The Kirtland City Engineer shall establish a
fee schedule based upon the actual estimated cost for providing these services.
(Ord. 16-O-39, passed 10-17-2016)
§ 1466.15  BOND.
   (a)   If a comprehensive stormwater management plan is required by this
regulation, soil-disturbing activities shall not be permitted until a cash bond
of five percent of the total project cost has been deposited with the Kirtland
Finance Department. This bond shall be posted for the city to perform the
obligations otherwise to be performed by the owner of the development area as
stated in this regulation and to allow all work to be performed as needed in
the event that the applicant fails to comply with the provisions of this
regulation. The stormwater bond will be returned, less city administrative fees
as detailed in
Chapter 236 of the City of Kirtland Codified Ordinances, when the following
three criteria are met:
      (1)   After 80 percent of the lots of the project have been complete or
100 percent of the total project has been permanently stabilized or three years
from the time of permanent stabilization have passed.
      (2)   An as-built inspection of all stormwater control measures as
described in §
1466.12 is approved by the Kirtland City Engineer.
      (3)   An inspection and maintenance plan has been approved by the city
and inspection and maintenance agreement has been signed by the developer, the
contractor, the city, and the private owner or homeowners association who will
take long term responsibility for these SCMs, is accepted by the Kirtland City
Engineer.
   (b)   Once these criteria are met, the applicant shall be reimbursed all
bond monies that were not used for any part of the project. If all of these
criteria are not met after three years of permanent stabilization of the site,
the city may use the bond monies to fix any outstanding issues with all
stormwater management structures on the site and the remainder of the bond
shall be given to the private lot owner/ homeowners association for the purpose
of long term maintenance of the project.
(Ord. 16-O-39, passed 10-17-2016)
§ 1466.16  INSTALLATION OF WATER QUALITY STORMWATER CONTROL MEASURES.
   The applicant may not direct runoff through any water quality structures or
portions thereof that would be degraded by construction site sediment until the
entire area tributary to the structure has reached final stabilization as
determined by the Kirtland City Engineer. This occurs after the completion of
the final grade at the site, after all of the utilities are installed, and the
site is subsequently stabilized with vegetation or other appropriate methods.
The developer must provide documentation acceptable to the Kirtland City
Engineer to demonstrate that the site is completely stabilized. Upon this proof
of compliance, the water quality structure(s) may be completed and placed into
service.  Upon completion of installation of these practices, all disturbed
areas and/or exposed soils caused by the installation of these practices must
be stabilized within two days.
(Ord. 16-O-39, passed 10-17-2016)
§ 1466.17  VIOLATIONS.
   No person shall violate or cause or knowingly permit to be violated any of
the provisions of this regulation, or fail to comply with any of such
provisions or with any lawful requirements of any public authority made
pursuant to this regulation, or knowingly use or cause or permit the use of any
lands in violation of this regulation or in violation of any permit granted
under this regulation.
(Ord. 16-O-39, passed 10-17-2016)
§ 1466.18  APPEALS.
   Any person aggrieved by any order, requirement, determination, or any other
action or inaction by the city in relation to this regulation may appeal to the
court of common pleas. Such an appeal shall be made in conformity with R.C.
Chapter 2506. Written notice of appeal shall be served on the city.
(Ord. 16-O-39, passed 10-17-2016)
§ 1466.99  PENALTY.
   (a)   Any person, firm, entity or corporation; including but not limited to,
the owner of the property, his agents and assigns, occupant, property manager,
and any contractor or subcontractor who violates or fails to comply with any
provision of this regulation is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree and
shall be fined no more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisoned for no
more than 60 days, or both, for each offense. A separate offense shall be
deemed committed each day during or on which a violation or noncompliance
occurs or continues.
   (b)   The imposition of any other penalties provided herein shall not
preclude the city instituting an appropriate action or proceeding in a court of
proper jurisdiction to prevent an unlawful development, or to restrain,
correct, or abate a violation, or to require compliance with the provisions of
this regulation or other applicable laws, ordinances, rules, or regulations, or
the orders of the city.
(Ord. 16-O-39, passed 10-17-2016)
APPENDIX A:  Dry Extended Detention Facility Outlet Structure
City of Kirtland, Ohio
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ec7ad15d617dbba9e0ee3d1ed637d1d7d3b2411d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3798.jpg]
 
(Ord. 16-O-39, passed 10-17-2016)
APPENDIX B:  Wet Extended Detention Facility Outlet Structure
City of Kirtland, Ohio
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ec7ad15d617dbba9e0ee3d1ed637d1d7d3b2411d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3796.jpg]
 
(Ord. 16-O-39, passed 10-17-2016)
PART SIXTEEN - FIRE PREVENTION CODE
   Chapter
         
1610.   Ohio Fire Code.
CHAPTER 1610:  OHIO FIRE CODE
Section
1610.01   Adoption.
1610.02   Purpose.
1610.03   Application of Code.
1610.04   Enforcement; responsibilities of Municipal Fire Safety Inspector.
1610.05   Compliance required.
1610.06   Posting arson laws.
1610.07   Setting fires which spread.
1610.08   Responsibilities upon discovery of unfriendly fires.
1610.09   Inspections.
1610.10   Sale and use of fire equipment; standards; service and repair of
equipment.
1610.11   File and distribution copies.
1610.12   Conflicts of laws.
1610.13   Permit fees.
1610.14   Fire damage structure; transfer of insurance proceeds.
1610.99   Penalty.
   CROSS REFERENCES
   Power to regulate elevators, stairways and fire escapes - see Ohio R.C.
715.26
   Adoption of technical codes - see Ohio R.C. 731.231
   Power to regulate against fires - see Ohio R.C. 737.27
   Right to examine buildings - see Ohio R.C. 3737.14
   State Fire Marshal - see Ohio R.C. Ch. 3737
   Gasoline, oils and paint - see Ohio R.C. Ch. 3741
   Fireworks - see Ohio R.C. Ch. 3743; GEN. OFF.
672.10
   Fire Division- see ADM.
Ch. 246
   Driving over fire hoses - see TRAF.
432.26
   Fire lanes - see TRAF.
Ch. 454
   Arson - see GEN. OFF.
642.09
   Venting of heaters and burners - see GEN. OFF.
660.01
   Open burning - see GEN. OFF.
660.08
§ 1610.01  ADOPTION.
   There is hereby adopted by the municipality, the Ohio Fire Code (OFC) as
adopted and as amended from time to time by the Ohio Division of State Fire
Marshal, Department of Commerce, and as published in Division 1301:7 of the
Ohio Administrative Code (OAC)..
(Ord. 08-O-16, passed 6-16-2008)
§ 1610.02  PURPOSE.
   The purpose of the Ohio Fire Code, as adopted in §
1610.01, is to prescribe minimum standards and regulations governing conditions
hazardous to life and property from fire or explosion.
§ 1610.03  APPLICATION OF CODE.
   The Ohio Fire Code, as adopted in §
1610.01, applies to the use of all lands and properties within the municipality
and such other lands or properties owned by the municipality which are situated
outside the corporate limits thereof.
§ 1610.04  ENFORCEMENT; RESPONSIBILITIES OF MUNICIPAL FIRE SAFETY INSPECTOR.
   (a)   No person shall serve as a Municipal Fire Safety Inspector unless he
or she has received a certificate issued by the Ohio Superintendent of Public
Instruction under Ohio R.C. 3303.07 evidencing his or her satisfactory
completion of a fire safety inspection training program.
(ORC 3737.34)
   (b)   The Municipal Fire Safety Inspector, upon examination or inspection,
shall issue citations when he or she finds conditions as specified in Ohio R.C.
3737.41 which are especially dangerous to the safety of persons, buildings,
premises or property, and shall make any necessary remedial orders in
connection therewith. Citation enforcement may be by use of the procedures
established by Ohio R.C. 3737.42 for hearing on the citation or Ohio R.C.
3737.44 for injunctive relief or a temporary restraining order and oral order
for vacation of the building or premises.
   (c)   The Municipal Fire Safety Inspector, upon reasonable belief and after
inspection or investigation, shall, with reasonable promptness, issue a
citation to the responsible person for a violation of the Ohio Fire Code or any
order issued by the Ohio Fire Marshal or any Municipal Fire Safety Inspector.
The citation shall fix a reasonable time for abatement of the violation. Each
citation issued under this subsection shall be prominently posted by the
responsible person, as prescribed by the Ohio Fire Code, at or near each place
a violation referred to in the citation occurs.
   (d)    Upon request of the Municipal Fire Safety Inspector, the Law Director
shall institute and prosecute any necessary action or proceeding to enforce
this chapter or Ohio R.C. Chapter 3737.
§ 1610.05  COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly violate any provision of the Ohio Fire Code
as adopted herein or any order issued pursuant thereto.
(ORC 3737.51(A))
   (b)   No person shall fail to comply with the fire prevention measures or
fire protection activities as prescribed in the Ohio Fire Code or fail to
comply with the municipal application and plan submission and processing
requirements, including payment of the fees designated therefor.
§ 1610.06  POSTING ARSON LAWS.
   The owner, operator or lessee of any transient residential building shall
post the provisions of Ohio R.C. 2909.02 and 2909.03 in a conspicuous place in
each room occupied by guests in such building. The owner, operator or lessee of
any nontransient residential building, institution, school or place of assembly
shall post the provisions of such sections in conspicuous places upon such
premises. No person shall fail to comply with this section.
(ORC 3737.61)
§ 1610.07  SETTING FIRES WHICH SPREAD.
   No person shall set, kindle or cause to be set or kindled any fire which,
through his or her negligence, spreads beyond its immediate confines to any
structure, field or wood lot.
(ORC 3737.62)
§ 1610.08  RESPONSIBILITIES UPON DISCOVERY OF UNFRIENDLY FIRES.
   (a)   The owner, operator or lessee, an employee of any owner, operator or
lessee, an occupant and any person in direct control of any building regulated
under the Ohio Basic Building Code, upon the discovery of an unfriendly fire or
upon receiving information that there is an unfriendly fire on the premises,
shall immediately and with all reasonable dispatch and diligence call or
otherwise notify the Fire Department concerning the fire and shall spread an
alarm immediately to all occupants of the building.
   (b)   For the purposes of this section, "unfriendly fire" means a fire of a
destructive nature as distinguished from a controlled fire intended for a
beneficial purpose.
   (c)   No person shall fail to comply with this section.
(ORC 3737.63)
§ 1610.09  INSPECTIONS.
   No person who is not a certified Fire Safety Inspector shall act as such or
hold himself or herself out to be such unless prior to commencing any
inspection function he or she discloses the purpose for which he or she is
making such inspection and the fact that he or she is not employed by any state
or local fire service or agency and that he or she is not acting in an official
capacity for any governmental subdivision or agency.
(ORC 3737.64)
§ 1610.10  SALE AND USE OF FIRE EQUIPMENT; STANDARDS; SERVICE AND REPAIR OF
EQUIPMENT.
   (a)   No person shall sell, offer for sale or use any fire protection or
fire fighting equipment that does not meet the minimum standards established by
the Ohio Fire Marshal in the Ohio Fire Code.
   (b)   Except for public and private mobile fire trucks, no person shall
service, test, repair or install for profit any fire protection or fire
fighting equipment without a certificate issued by the Ohio Fire Marshal.
(ORC 3737.65)
§ 1610.11  FILE AND DISTRIBUTION COPIES.
   Copies of the Ohio Fire Code, as adopted in §
1610.01, are on file with the Clerk of Council for inspection by the public.
Copies are also on file in the County Law Library. In addition, the Clerk of
Council has copies available for distribution to the public, at cost.
§ 1610.12  CONFLICTS OF LAWS.
   (a)   The Ohio Basic Building Code shall supersede and govern any order,
standard, rule or regulation of the Ohio Fire Code or the Division of State
Fire Marshal, Department of Commerce, in all cases where any such order,
standard, rule or regulation is in conflict with the Ohio Basic Building Code,
except that rules adopted and orders issued by the Fire Marshal pursuant to
Ohio R.C. Chapter 3743 prevail in the event of a conflict.
(OAC 4101:2-1-04(B); ORC 3781.11(B))
   (b)   In all other cases of conflict between the Ohio Fire Code and any
other municipal ordinance or technical code adopted thereby, the stricter
standard shall control.
§ 1610.13  PERMIT FEES.
   The fee for all permits issued by the Fire Chief or the Municipal Fire
Safety Inspector pursuant to § 1301: 7-5-03 of the Ohio Fire Code shall be as
stated in the Fee Schedule in §
236.07 of the Kirtland Code of Ordinances.
(Ord. 88-O-36, passed 6-6-1988; Am. Ord. 17-O-20, passed 7-3-2017)
§ 1610.14  FIRE DAMAGE STRUCTURE; TRANSFER OF INSURANCE PROCEEDS.
   The city is hereby authorized to utilize the procedure described in Ohio
R.C. § 3929.86 (C) and (D) whereby no insurance company doing business in the
state shall pay a claim of a named insured for fire damage to a building or
other structure located in the city where the amount recoverable for the fire
loss to the building or other structure, under all policies, exceeds Five
Thousand Dollars ($5,000.00), unless there is compliance with the following
procedures:
   (a)   When the loss agreed to between the named insured or insureds and the
company or companies equals or exceeds 60 percent of the aggregate limits of
liability on all fire policies covering the building or other structure, the
insurance company or companies, in accordance with Ohio R.C. § 3929.86, shall
transfer from the insurance proceeds to the Director of Finance, in the
aggregate, Two Thousand Dollars ($2,000.00) for each Fifteen Thousand Dollars
($15,000.00), and each fraction of that amount, of a claim. If, at the time of
a proof of loss agreed to between the named insured or insureds and the
insurance company or companies, the named insured or insureds has submitted a
contractor’s signed estimate of the cost of removing, repairing or securing the
building or other structure, then the insurance company or companies shall
transfer from the insurance proceeds the amount specified in the estimate.
      (1)   Such transfer of proceeds shall be on a pro rata basis by all
companies insuring the building or other structure. Policy proceeds remaining
after the transfer to the city shall be disbursed in accordance with the policy
terms.
      (2)   The named insured or insureds may submit a contractor’s signed
estimate of the cost of removing, repairing, or securing the building or other
structure after the transfer, and the Director of Finance shall return the
amount of the fund in excess of the estimate to the named insured or insureds,
provided that the city has not commenced to remove, repair, or secure the
building or other structure.
   (b)   Upon receipt of proceeds by the city, as authorized by this section,
the Director of Finance shall place the proceeds in a separate fund to be used
solely as security against the total cost of removing, repairing, or securing
the structure incurred by the city, pursuant to Ohio R.C. § 715.261.
   (c)   When transferring the funds, as required in Subsection (a) hereof, an
insurance company shall provide the city with the name and address of the named
insured or insureds, whereupon the city shall contact the named insured or
insureds, certify that the proceeds have been received by the city and notify
the named insured or insureds that the following procedures will be followed:
      (1)   The fund shall be returned to the named insured or insureds when
the repair, removal, or securing of the building or other structure has been
completed and the required proof has been received by the Director of Finance,
if the city has not incurred any costs for the repair, removal, or securing.
However, the fund shall be returned to the named insured or insureds no later
than 60 days after the Director of Finance receives the required proof.
      (2)   If the city has incurred any costs for the repair, removal, or
securing of the building or other structure, the costs shall be paid from the
fund, and if excess funds remain, the city shall transfer, no later than 60
days after all such costs have been paid, the remaining funds to the named
insured or insureds.
   (d)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the ability of the
city to recover any deficiency under Ohio R.C. § 715.261 by lien or otherwise.
   (e)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the city and
the named insured or insureds from entering into an agreement that permits the
transfer of funds to the named insured or insureds if some other reasonable
disposition of the damaged property has been negotiated.
(Ord. 15-O-14, passed 5-4-2015)
§ 1610.99  PENALTY.
   (a)   Criminal penalties.
      (1)   Whoever violates §
1610.05(a) is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree and shall be fined
not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisoned not more than six
months, or both.
(ORC 3737.99(B))
      (2)   Whoever violates §§
1610.05(b) or
1610.06 is guilty of a minor misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than one
hundred fifty dollars ($150.00).
(ORC 3737.99(C))
      (3)   Whoever violates §§
1610.07 or
1610.09 is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree and shall be fined not
more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) or imprisoned not more than 30
days, or both.
(ORC 3737.99(D))
      (4)   Whoever violates §§
1610.08 or
1610.10 is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree and shall be fined not
more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisoned not more than 60 days,
or both.
(ORC 3737.99(E))
   (b)   Civil penalties.
      (1)   Any person who has received a citation for a serious violation of
the Ohio Fire Code or any order issued pursuant to it shall be assessed a civil
penalty of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each such
violation.
      (2)   Any person who has received a citation for a violation of the Ohio
Fire Code or any order issued pursuant to it, and such violation is
specifically determined not to be of a serious nature, may be assessed a civil
penalty of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each such
violation.
      (3)   Any person who fails to correct a violation for which a citation
has been issued, within the period permitted for its correction, may be
assessed a civil penalty of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for
each day during which such failure or violation continues.
      (4)   Any person who violates any of the posting requirements, as
prescribed by §
1610.04(c) shall be assessed a civil penalty of not more than one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00) for each violation.
      (5)   Due consideration to the appropriateness of the penalty with
respect to the gravity of the violation, the good faith of the person being
charged and the history of previous violations shall be given whenever a
penalty is assessed under this chapter.
      (6)   For purposes of this section, a serious violation shall be
considered to exist if there is a substantial probability that an occurrence
causing death or serious physical harm to persons could result from a condition
which exists, or from one or more practices, means, methods, operations or
processes which have been adopted or are in use, unless the person did not and
could not, with the exercise of reasonable diligence, know of the presence of
the violation.
      (7)   Civil penalties imposed under this chapter shall be paid to the
Clerk of Council for deposit into the General Fund. Such penalties may be
recovered in a civil action in the name of the municipality brought in the
Court of Common Pleas.
(ORC 3737.51(B) to (H))
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
   The Codified Ordinances of Kirtland comprises all ordinances and resolutions
of a general and permanent nature. The provisions of such general and permanent
ordinances and resolutions are set forth in full in the Codified Ordinances.
   Reference must be made frequently to many special ordinances and
resolutions, particularly those relating to property, such as easements,
vacations, dedications, plat approvals, acquisitions, disposals, leases and the
like. In the following Tables A through I, all such ordinances and resolutions
are listed. These tables list ordinances and resolutions chronologically by
subject, and include both a citation to and a brief description of each
ordinance and resolution.
   
TABLE A -  Franchises; Agreements.
   
TABLE B -  Easements.
   
TABLE C -  Vacating of Streets and Alleys.
   
TABLE D -  Dedication and Plat Approval.
   
TABLE E -  Acquisition and Disposal of Real Property.
   
TABLE F -  Lease of Real Property.
   
TABLE G -  Street Grade Levels and Change of Street Name.
   
TABLE H -  Annexation and Detachment of Territory.
   
TABLE I -  Zoning Map Changes.
TABLE A:  FRANCHISES; AGREEMENTS
 
Ord./Res. No. Date Description
70- 2-
O-9 23-  To Ohio Water Service Co. for water service for 20 yrs.
    1970
70- 10-
O-  26-  Fixes the price of natural gas from the East Ohio Gas Co.
106 1970
70- 11-
O-  16-  To the East Ohio Gas Co. for natural gas service through 1975.
116 1970
71- 10-
O-  25-  To Cleveland Electric Illuminating Co. for street lighting service.
101 1971
71- 10-
O-  25-  Amends Ord. 70-O-9.
104 1971
72- 9-
O-  11-  Fixes the price of natural gas from the East Ohio Gas Co. through 1977.
72  1972
75- 5-5-
O-  1975 Amends Ord. 70-O-9.
38
76- 10-
O-  4-   Amends Ord. 71-O-101.
96  1976
77- 8-
O-  29-  Amends Ord. 71-O-101.
85  1977
78-      Agreement to purchase certain water works facilities from Ohio Water
O-  - -  Service Co. should franchise of such company with the City terminate.
35
78- 12-  To Cleveland Electric Illuminating Co. for street lighting service for 10
O-  4-   yrs.
112 1978
80- 9-
O-  15-  To Tele-Media Co. of Lake Erie, for CATV service for 10 yrs.
90  1980
81- 7-   Assignment of the CATV franchise of Tele-Media Co. of Lake Erie to Tele-
R-  13-  Media Co. of Lake County.
64  1981
81- 10-
O-  5-   Amends Ord. 80-O-90.
79  1981
82- 4-
O-  19-  Amends Ord. 80-O-90.
39  1982
84- 4-
O-  16-  Amending Ord. 80-O-90.
16  1984
84- 9-
O-  17-  Consenting to the sale of all partnership interests of Tele-Media Co.
43  1984
95- 7-   Approving the basic cable television service tier rates of TCI Cablevision
O-  10-  of Ohio, Inc., charged since July 14, 1994.
31  1995
98- 5-   Approving transfer of cable television franchise from TCI Cablevision of
R-  18-  Ohio, Inc., to Parnassos, L.P.
39  1998
98- 1-4- Authorizing transfer of minority interest in cable television franchise
R-  1999 from TCI Adelphia Holdings, Inc., to AT&T.
84
00- 8-   Extending the current cable television franchise agreement with Adelphia
R-  21-  Cable communications until December 31, 2000.
52  2000
00- 12-  Extending the current cable television franchise agreement with Adelphia
R-  18-  Cable Communications until March 1, 2001.
101 2000
01- 3-   To Parnassos, L.P., dba Adelphia Cable Communications, for CATV service
O-  19-  for 20 yrs.
07  2001
02- 6-   Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a contract with the Ohio Patrolmen's
O-  17-  Benevolent Association.
37  2002
03- 3-3- Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a mutual agreement for technical
R-4 2003 assistance with the Lake County Soil and Water Conservation District.
03- 3-3- Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a mutual agreement for technical
R-  2003 assistance with Chagrin River Watershed Partners, Inc.
12
03- 4-7- Authorizing the Mayor to enter into Amendment No. 1 of the engineering
O-  2003 agreement with CT Consultants, Inc. for additional engineering services.
13
03- 4-   Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a contract with the Ohio Patrolmen's
O-  21-  Benevolent Association.
15  2003
03- 4-   Authorizing the city to enter into a professional services agreement for
R-  21-  traffic engineering with Traff-Pro Consultants.
16  2003
03- 6-   Authorizing the Mayor to enter into an agreement with the Ohio Department
R-  16-  of Transportation for the purchase of rock salt.
32  2003
03- 6-   Authorizing the Mayor to enter into an agreement with the Ohio Public
R-  16-  Works Commission for financial assistance to repair the Eagle Road
33  2003 Culvert.
03- 7-   Authorizing the Mayor to enter into an agreement with the Ohio Public
R-  14-  Works Commission for the SR 306 intersection/signal replacement, Phase
40  2003 III.
03- 10-  Authorizing the Mayor to nominate for sponsorship water resource
R-  6-   restoration projects with the OEPA.
46  2003
03- 11-
O-  3-   Rejecting all bids received for SR 306 road widening project.
48  2003
04- 1-   Confirming Mayor's reappointment of CT Consultants, Inc. as engineers for
R-  21-  the city.
10  2004
05- 8-   Authorizing the Mayor to enter into an agreement with Medicount
R-  22-  Management, Inc. for services necessary to collect rates.
35  2005
05- 11-  Authorizing the Mayor to enter into an agreement for architectural
R-  7-   services with the Ziska Architects and Associates, LLC, regarding the
58  2005 Community Center expansion project.
05- 11-  Authorizing the Mayor to enter into an agreement to remove and replace
R-  7-   approximately 4,200 square feet of roof on the Service Department
59  2005 building.
05- 11-  Authorizing the Mayor to enter into the first amendment to the memorandum
R-  21-  of understanding with the Lake County Board of Commissioners and
54  2005 Department of Utilities.
06- 3-   Authorizing the Mayor to retain the services of CT Consultants, Inc. as
R-  20-  engineers for the sanitary sewer project.
20  2006
06- 4-   Authorizing the Mayor and Chief of Police to enter into a memorandum of
R-  17-  understanding with the Lake County Board of Mental Retardation and
24  2006 Developmental Disabilities.
06- 6-5- Authorizing the Mayor to enter into an agreement with the Ohio Department
R-  2006 of Transportation for the purchase of rock salt.
31
06- 6-   Authorizing the Mayor to enter into the second amendment to the memorandum
R-  19-  of understanding with the Lake County Board of Commissioners and
35  2006 Department of Utilities.
06- 7-   Authorizing the Mayor to enter into an agreement with the Ohio Public
R-  10-  Works Commission for the SR 306 ast US Route 6 intersectional/signal
46  2006 replacement IV.
06- 10-  Authorizing the Mayor to enter into the third amendment to the memorandum
R-  2-   of understanding with the Lake County Board of Commissioners and the
47  2006 Department of Utilities.
06- 11-  Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a use agreement relative to the Lake
R-  20-  County solid waste facility.
57  2006
07- 1-   Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a contract with the Ohio Patrolmen's
O-3 17-  Benevolent Association.
    2007
07- 2-5- Authorizing the Mayor to file a grant application and enter into a
R-6 2007 cooperative agreement with USEPA.
07- 2-   Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a memorandum of understanding with the
R-9 21-  Lake County Board of Commissioners to facilitate initial response by the
    2007 Lake County Mobile Command Center Vehicle (COMVAN).
07- 5-7- Authorizing the Mayor and the Chief of Police to enter into a memorandum
R-  2007 of understanding with the Lake County Department of Job and Family
14       Services.
07- 7-9- Authorizing the Mayor to enter into an agreement with American Legal
R-  2007 Publishing Corporation.
19
07- 6-   Authorizing the Mayor to enter into an agreement with the Ohio Department
R-  18-  of Transportation for the purchase of rock salt.
25  2007
07- 7-   Authorizing the Mayor to enter into an agreement with the Ohio Public
R-  16-  Works Commission for the Temple View sanitary improvements, Phase II.
30  2007
08- 3-5- Confirming the Mayor's reappointment of CT Consultants, Inc., as engineers
R-5 2008 for the city.
08- 5-5-
R-  2008 Accepting the bid of Osborne Crete & Stone Company for road materials.
12
08- 7-7- Authorizing the Mayor to enter into an agreement with the Ohio Department
R-  2008 of Transportation for the purchase of sodium chloride (rock salt).
27
08- 7-   Authorizing the Mayor to enter into an agreement with the Ohio Public
R-  14-  Works Commission for the U.S. Route 6 and Sperry Road improvements project
29  2008 (OPWC Project Number CGT11).
08- 7-   Authorizing the Mayor to file an amended grant application and enter into
R-  14-  an amended cooperative agreement with the United States Environmental
30  2008 Protection Agency State and Tribal Assistance Grants Program for the
         Temple View Subdivision sanitary sewer service project.
08- 8-   Authorizing the city to participate in the Northeast Ohio Sourcing
R-  18-  Office's ("NEO/SO'S") 2008-2009 Salt Program.
31  2008
08- 9-   Authorizing the creation of franchise rights for the collection and
R-  15-  disposal of residential solid waste and/or a curbside recycling program.
32  2008
08- 9-   Accepting the bid of Waste Management of Ohio, Inc. for the solid waste
R-  15-  and recycling collection contract.
33  2008
08- 12-
R-  1-   Accepting the co-locator application of T-Mobile for 4203 State Route 306.
38  2008
08- 12-  Authorizing the city to enter into an addendum to the agreement with the
R-  1-   Village of Kirtland Hills for fire protection and emergency medical
47  2008 services.
08- 12-  Authorizing the Mayor to enter into an agreement with the Ohio Public
R-  15-  Works Commission for the State Route 306 at Lakeland Community College
49  2008 Project (OPWC Project Number CG32M/CG33M).
09- 3-   Authorizing the Mayor to enter into an agreement with the Ohio Department
R-  16-  of Transportation for the Euclid-Chardon Road Resurfacing Project.
12  2009
         Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a loan agreement on behalf of the city
09- 7-   with the Ohio Environmental Protection Agency, Division of Environmental
R-  13-  and Financial Assistance, and the Ohio Water Development Authority,
40  2009 through the Water Pollution Control Loan Fund, for planning, design and/or
         construction of the Temple View Sanitary Sewer Wastewater Facilities.
09- 9-9- Authorizing the Mayor to enter into an agreement with the Ohio Patrolmen's
O-  2009 Benevolent Association.
42
10- 3-
R-  15-  Agreement between the city and the firm of CT Consultants, Inc.
13  2010
10- 8-   Authorizing the Mayor to enter into an agreement with the Lake County
R-  23-  Council on Aging.
41  2010
10- 9-   Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a memorandum of understanding with the
R-  20-  Lake County General Health District for the distribution of Strategic
54  2010 National Stockpile or other vital health resources in a disaster or
         declared emergency.
10- 9-   Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a memorandum of understanding with the
R-  20-  Lake County General Health District and the Kirtland Local School District
55  2010 Board of Education establishing sites for providing needed public health
         services.
11- 2-   Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a memorandum of understanding for
R-3 23-  stormwater management services with the Board of Lake County
    2011 Commissioners.
11- 3-   Authorizing the Mayor to enter into an inspection and maintenance
R-  21-  agreement and declaration of covenants and deed restrictions for
11  2011 stormwater BMP's with PF Kirtland, LLC.
11- 6-   Authorizing the Mayor to enter into an agreement with the Lake County
R-  20-  Board of Commissioners to participate in the Health Insurance
36  2011 Regionalization Program.
11- 6-   Authorizing the Mayor to enter into an agreement with Employee Benefits
R-  20-  International (EBI) for management of the Lake County Board of
37  2011 Commissioners' Health Insurance Regionalization Program.
11- 6-   Authorizing the Mayor to enter into an agreement with the Lake County
R-  20-  Board of Commissioners for use of an 800/700 MHz radio system.
39  2011
11- 6-   Authorizing the Mayor to enter into an agreement with the Lake County
R-  20-  Board of Commissioners for the purchase of backbone equipment for use in
40  2011 Lake County 800/700 MHz radio system.
11- 10-  Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a sanitary sewerage capacity agreement
R-  3-   with the Board of Lake County Commissioners for Kirtland sanitary sewer
52  2011 improvement project 284-S.
11- 12-  Authorizing the Mayor to enter into an agreement with the Lake County
R-  5-   Board of Commissioners for use of an 800/700 MHz radio system.
67  2011
11- 12-  Authorizing the Mayor to enter into an agreement with the Lake County
R-  5-   Board of Commissioners for the purchase of backbone equipment for use in
68  2011 the Lake County 800/700 MHz radio system.
11- 12-  Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a professional services agreement with
R-  19-  Humanics, LLC.
59  2011
11- 12-  Authorizing the Mayor to enter into an agreement with Cawrse & Associates,
R-  19-  Inc., for the Kirtland Comprehensive Plan update.
73  2011
12- 1-   Authorizing the Mayor to enter into an agreement with the Lake County
R-4 18-  Board of Commissioners for use of an 800/700 MHz radio system.
    2012
12- 1-   Authorizing the Mayor to enter into an agreement with the Lake County
R-5 18-  Board of Commissioners for the purchase of backbone equipment for use in
    2012 the Lake County 800/700 MHz radio system.
12- 5-   Authorizing the Mayor to enter into an agreement with the Ohio Department
R-  21-  of Transportation for the purchase of rock salt.
18  2012
12- 7-9- Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a contract with the Ohio Patrolmen's
O-  2012 Benevolent Association.
38
12- 7-9- Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a development assistance agreement
R-  2012 with the Corporation of the Presiding Bishop of the Church of Jesus Christ
36       of Latter-Day Saints for design and construction of a sewer extension.
12- 8-   Authorizing the Mayor to enter into an agreement with the Cities of Mentor
R-  20-  and Willoughby for the resurfacing of a portion of SR 306 in the cities of
46  2012 Willoughby, Mentor and Kirtland.
12- 11-  Authorizing the Mayor to enter into an agreement with the Lake County
R-  19-  Board of Commissioners for the temporary operation and maintenance of the
50  2012 Temple View area sanitary sewer system.
13- 8-   Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a contract with DeGreen Construction
R-  19-  Services, Inc., for the upgrade to the Kirtland Community Center Waste
38  2013 Water Treatment Plant.
13- 9-   Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a contract with S.E.T. Inc., for sewer
R-  16-  improvement project.
44  2013
13- 9-4- Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a contract with Waste Management of
R-  2013 Ohio for solid waste and recycling collection.
47
13- 11-  Authorizing the Mayor to enter into an agreement with OPWC to secure
R-  6-   financial assistance for the Sperry Road improvements project.
55  2013
14- 2-   Authorizing the Mayor to enter into an inspection and maintenance
R-8 19-  agreement for stormwater best management prctices with the Alpenrose
    2014 Homeowners’ Association.
14- 2-   Authorizing the Mayor to enter into an assignment of easement and
R-  19-  assumption agreement between the city and the Board of Lake County
13  2014 Commissioners relating to the right-of-way easement previously granted to
         the city by Giglio Cocca and Madalena Cocca, 9327 Chillicothe Road.
14- 2-   Authorizing the Mayor to enter into an assignment of easement and
R-  19-  assumption agreement between the city and the Board of Lake County
14  2014 Commissioners relating to the right-of-way easement previously granted to
         the city by Beatrice J. Cummings, 9268 North Star Road.
14- 2-   Authorizing the Mayor to enter into an assignment of easement and
R-  19-  assumption agreement between the city and the Board of Lake County
15  2014 Commissioners relating to the right-of-way easement previously granted to
         the city by Daniel W. Ockuly, 9347 North Star Road.
14- 2-   Authorizing the Mayor to enter into an assignment of easement and
R-  19-  assumption agreement between the city and the Board of Lake County
16  2014 Commissioners relating to the right-of-way easement previously granted to
         the city by Anthony J. Hughes and Vickie M. Hughes, 9360 North Star Road.
         Authorizing the Mayor to enter into an assignment of easement and
14- 2-   assumption agreement between the city and the Board of Lake County
R-  19-  Commissioners relating to the right-of-way easement previously granted to
17  2014 the city by William A. Jaehn, Jr. and Carol Mae Appleton, 8113 Glen Park
         Road.
14- 2-   Authorizing the Mayor to enter into an assignment of easement and
R-  19-  assumption agreement between the city and the Board of Lake County
18  2014 Commissioners relating to the right-of-way easement previously granted to
         the city by Jeremiah M. Kite and Angela M. Kite, 8124 Glen Park Road.
14- 2-   Authorizing the Mayor to enter into an assignment of easement and
R-  19-  assumption agreement between the city and the Board of Lake County
19  2014 Commissioners relating to the right-of-way easement previously granted to
         the city by Troy A. Graff, 8130 Glen Park Road.
14- 2-   Authorizing the Mayor to enter into an assignment of easement and
R-  19-  assumption agreement between the city and the Board of Lake County
20  2014 Commissioners relating to the right-of-way easement previously granted to
         the city by Joni Keller and Paul Keller, 8136 Glen Park Road.
14- 3-   Authorizing the Mayor to enter into an agreement with the Ohio Department
R-  17-  of Transportation for the purchase of rock salt.
21  2014
14- 4-7- Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a contract with Osborne Concrete and
R-  2014 Stone Company for road materials.
22
14- 8-   Authorizing the Mayor to enter into an agreement with the Lake County Boar
R-  18-  of Commissioners to participate in the urban entitlement Community
50  2014 Development Block Grant program.
14- 11-  Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a memorandum of understanding with the
O-  5-   Lake County Land Reutilization Corporation relating to vacant, abandoned,
56  2014 tax- foreclosed or other real property.
15- 1-5- Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a contract with the Ohio Patrolmen’s
O-5 2015 Benevolent Association.
15- 3-   Authorizing the Mayor to enter into an agreement with the Ohio Department
R-  16-  of Transportation for the purchase of rock salt.
10  2015
15- 4-6- Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a contract with Osborne Concrete and
R-  2015 Stone Company for the purchase of road materials.
11
15-      Approving the terms and conditions of an interlocal agreement between the
R-  5-4- Region 4 Education Service Center, Lead Agency for the Cooperative
19  2015 Purchasing Network, providing for a cooperative purchasing program for
         goods and services.
15- 5-4- Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a contract with the Kirtland
O-  2015 Professional Firefighters Local 3735.
23
16- 1-4-
R-  2017 Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a contract with Badger Transfer, LLC.
55
16- 12-  Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a mutual agreement with the Lake
R-  19-  County Soil & Water Conservation District.
59  2016
17- 4-3- Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a contract with Osborne Concrete &
R-  2017 Stone Company.
11
17- 4-   Authorizing the Mayor to enter into an agreement with the Ohio Department
R-  17-  of Transportation.
16  2017
17- 4-
R-  17-  Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a contract with Timperio Roofing.
17  2017
17- 6-   Authorizing the Mayor to enter into an agreement with the Board of Lake
R-  19-  County Commissioners.
24  2017
17- 10-
R-  2-   Authorizing the Mayor to enter into an agreement with the Ohio EPA.
31  2017
17- 10-  Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a contract with the Kirtland
O-  16-  Professional Firefighters Local 3735.
34  2017
17- 11-  Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a contract with the Ohio Patrolmen’s
O-  8-   Benevolent Association.
38  2017
18- 4-2- Authorizing the implementation of an agreement between the city and the
O-  2018 Board of Lake County Commissioners.
16
18- 4-   Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a contract with Osborne Concrete &
R-  16-  Stone Company.
13  2018
18- 4-
R-  16-  Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a contract with Arms Trucking Company.
14  2018
18- 5-9- Authorizing the Mayor to enter into an agreement with Hall Industrial
R-  2018 Insulation.
15
18- 6-4- Authorizing the Mayor to enter into an agreement with the Lake County Ohio
R-  2018 Port and Economic Development Authority and the City of Wickliffe, Ohio
21       and the City of Willowick, Ohio.
18- 5-9- Authorizing the Mayor to enter into an agreement with the Ohio Department
R-  2018 of Transportation.
22
18- 6-
R-  18-  Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a contract with Badger Transfer LLC.
34  2018
        
 
 
TABLE B:  EASEMENTS
 
Ord./Res. No. Date Description
70-O-69 6-8-1970   To the Village, from Mr. and Mrs. Andrew T. Sekely, for
                   underground utilities.
88-R-42 6-20-1988  Appropriates easements for Hickory Hill Colony waste water
                   treatment facility.
92-R-9  1-21-1992  Authorizes the Mayor to convey a utility easement to the
                   Ohio Water Service Co.
93-R-31 6-7-1993   To the Village, from the Holden Arboretum, for maintenance
                   of Sperry Rd.
                   Authorizes relocation of a 20-ft. access and utility
94-R-38 7-11-1994  easement in connection with land lease agreement with GTE
                   Mobilnet.
                   Authorizes the Mayor to enter into an agreement creating an
95-O-41 8-28-1995  ingress/egress easement through the Kirtland Recreation
                   Park.
05-R-34 7-6-2005   Accepting a perpetual easement from the reorganized Church
                   of Jesus Christ of the Latter Day Saints to the city.
                   Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a temporary easement
06-R-55 12-4-2006  with Sylvester and Patricia A. Lazuka to facilitate
                   replacement of the Worrell Road Bridge.
                   Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a permanent easement and
07-R-15 4-16-2007  a temporary construction easement with the Lake County Board
                   of Commissioners to facilitate the sanitary sewer project.
                   Authorizing the Mayor to enter into an underground easement
09-R-48 10-19-2009 to the Ohio Bell Tel. Co. d.b.a. AT&T Ohio, across city
                   property.
                   Authorizing the Mayor to enter into an underground easement
09-R-49 10-19-2009 to the Cleveland Electric Illuminating Co. and the Ohio Bell
                   Tel. Co. d.b.a. AT&T Ohio, across city property.
                   Accepting temporary and perpetual easements from the
13-R-39 9-4-2013   Corporation of the Presiding Bishop of the Church of Jesus
                   Christ of Latter-Day Saints, to the city, to construct and
                   repair for highway and road purposes.
                   Accepting temporary and perpetual easements from the
13-R-40 9-4-2013   Corporation of the Presiding Bishop of the Church of Jesus
                   Christ of Latter-Day Saints, to the city, to construct and
                   repair for highway and road purposes.
                   Accepting temporary and perpetural easements from William E.
13-R-41 9-4-2013   Arwood and Carolyn B. Arwood to the city to construct and
                   repair for public highway and road purposes.
                   Accepting temporary and perpetural easements from Kelly
13-R-42 9-4-2013   Faber and Kveodosia Faber to the city to construct and
                   repair for public highway and road purposes.
                   Accepting temporary and perpetural easements from William E.
13-R-43 9-4-2013   Arwood and Carolyn B. Arwood to the city to construct and
                   repair for public highway and road purposes.
                   Accepting temporary and perpetural easements from David A.
13-R-43 9-4-2013   Hamilton to the city to construct and repair for public
                   highway and road purposes.
                   Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a permanent easement
14-R-11 2-19-2014  with the Lake County Board of Commissioners for sanitary
                   sewer ingress and egress for the Temple View Pump Station.
                   Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a permanent easement
14-R-12 2-19-2014  with the Lake County Board of Commissioners for sanitary
                   sewer ingress and egress for the Temple View Pump Station.
                  
 
TABLE C:  VACATING OF STREETS AND ALLEYS
 
Ord./Res. No. Date Description
73-O-77 9-10-1973 Riverstone Farm Estates Subdivision No. 1.
89-O-21 7-3-1989  Sperry Rd. from Kirtland-Chardon Rd. to southerly right-of-
                  way line of Mitchells Mill Rd.
97-O-39 7-14-1997 Shaw Ave. between Thorne Ave. and the southerly cul-de-sac
                  boundary.
97-O-52 8-25-1997 Clayton and Grayce Drs.
97-O-55 9-3-1997  Portion of Misty Hollow Ln.
03-O-18 4-21-2003 Vacating portions of Kirtland-Chardon and Chillicothe Roads.
 
TABLE D:  DEDICATION AND PLAT APPROVAL
 
Ord./Res. No. Date Description
70-O-58  6-8-1970   Plat and improvement plans of Rockwood Ledges Estates
                    Subdivision.
72-O-51  4-24-1972  Plat of Rockwood Ledges Estates Subdivision.
73-O-42  5-29-1973  Plat of Hickory Hills Colony Subdivision No. 2.
76-O-21  2-2-1976   Dedication of Fox Hill Dr.
76-O-45  4-5-1976   Accepts streets in Rockwood Ledges Estates Subdivision.
76-R-59  5-19-1976  Plats of Bridlehurst Subdivisions Nos. 1 and 2.
77-O-72  6-20-1977  Plat of Silver Fox Subdivision.
77-O-76  6-20-1977  Accepts Bridlehurst, Appaloosa and Palomino Trails.
77-O-82  7-11-1977  Plat of re-subdivision of Silver Fox Subdivision.
77-R-86  8-29-1977  Plat of Arborhurst Subdivision No. 1.
77-R-106 12-5-1977  Plat of Silver Pine Subdivision.
78-O-48  5-1-1978   Plat of Silver Pine Subdivision.
78-O-82  7-10-1978  Plat of Bridlehurst Estates Subdivision No. 3.
78-O-107 11-6-1978  Accepts Singlefoot Tr. and Aborhurst Ln.
78-O-110 11-6-1978  Accepts Pheasant Ln., Partridge Tr., Quail Circle and
                    Ptarmigan Ct.
79-O-8   2-20-1979  Plat of Kirtland Woods Subdivision.
79-O-71  11-19-1979 Accepts Springer Dr. and N. Springer Ct.
83-O-52  7-12-1983  Plat of Kirtridge Subdivision.
84-O-58  12-17-1984 Plat of Wolf Pass Subdivision.
86-R-24  5-19-1986  Plat of Ledgewood Dr. Extension Subdivision for record
                    purposes only.
86-R-61  12-1-1986  Dedicates Ledgewood Dr. Extension.
87-R-20  5-18-1987  Accepting the Ledgewood Dr. Extension for maintenance
                    purposes.
87-R-37  7-6-1987   Approving the plat of Phase I of the Regency Woods
                    Subdivision.
88-R-35  6-6-1988   Approving the plat of Phase II of the Regency Woods
                    Subdivision.
88-R-70  11-7-1988  Approving the plat of Woodglen Subdivision No. 1.
89-R-7   3-6-1989   Approving the plat of Woodglen Subdivision No. 2 for record
                    purposes only.
89-R-14  4-17-1989  Approving the plat of Phase III of the Regency Woods
                    Subdivision for record purposes only.
89-R-58  1-2-1990   Accepting the plat of Phase I of the Kirtland Lakes Estates
                    Subdivision for record purposes only.
90-R-32  4-16-1990  Accepting the plat of Phase II of the Kirtland Lakes
                    Estates Subdivision for record purposes only.
90-R-34  4-16-1990  Accepting the revised plat of Phase III of the Regency
                    Woods Subdivision for record purposes only.
90-R-41  6-18-1990  Accepting the plat of the Loreto Ridge Estates Subdivision
                    for record purposes only.
90-R-66  10-1-1990  Accepting the plat of Phase III of the Kirtland Lakes
                    Estates Subdivision for record purposes only.
91-R-24  6-17-1991  Accepting the plat of Emerald Glen Subdivision for record
                    purposes only.
                    Accepting the plats of Phases II, III and IV of the
91-R-45  7-8-1991   Kirtland Lakes Estates Subdivision for record purposes
                    only. Repeals Res. 90-R-32 and Res. 90-R-66.
92-R-66  9-21-1992  Accepting the plat of Phase IIIA of the River Oaks Estates
                    Subdivision for record purposes only.
93-R-25  6-7-1993   Accepting the plat of Kelsey Subdivision for record
                    purposes only.
93-R-40  9-7-1993   Accepting the plat of Phase IIIB of the River Oaks Estates
                    Subdivision for record purposes only.
94-R-19  4-18-1994  Accepting the revised plat of Phase IIIB of the River Oaks
                    Estates Subdivision for record purposes only.
94-R-39 9-6-1994   Accepting the plat of Christina Estates Subdivision for
                    record purposes only.
94-R-54  11-7-1994  Accepting the plat of Misty Hollow Subdivision for record
                    purposes only.
94-R-77  1-16-1995  Accepting the plat of Phase IIIC of the River Oaks Estates
                    Subdivision for record purposes only.
95-R-1   2-6-1995   Dedicating the street in the Kelsey Subdivision.
95-R-5   6-19-1995  Dedicating the streets in the Regency Woods Subdivision,
                    Phase III.
95-R-35  8-28-1995  Dedicating the streets in the Woodglen Subdivision, Phases
                    I and II.
95-R-34  10-16-1995 Dedicating the street in the Emerald Glen Subdivision,
                    which plat was already accepted for record purposes only.
95-R-48  10-16-1995 Accepting the plat of Phase II of Misty Hollow Subdivision
                    for record purposes only.
96-R-36  7-8-1996   Dedicating Loreto Ridge Dr.
96-R-34  11-4-1996  Accepting the plat of Greenbrier Estates Subdivision for
                    record purposes only.
96-R-44  12-16-1996 Accepting the plat of Pinehurst Subdivision for record
                    purposes only.
97-R-49  9-3-1997   Accepting the plat of Rocking Horse Farms Subdivision,
                    Phase I, for record purposes only.
97-R-79  1-21-1998  Dedicating the streets in the River Oaks Estates
                    Subdivision, Phases III-A and III-B.
98-R-82  1-4-1999   Accepting the plat of Blueberry Hill Estates Subdivision
                    for record purposes only.
99-R-24  4-19-1999  Dedicating the street in the Misty Hollow Subdivision,
                    Phase I.
99-R-25  4-19-1999  Dedicating the streets in the Rocking Horse Farms
                    Subdivision, Phase I.
99-R-48  7-7-1999   Accepting the plat of Rocking Horse Subdivision Phase II,
                    for record purposes only.
99-R-68  12-20-1999 Dedicating the streets in the Kirtland Lakes Estates
                    Subdivision.
99-R-69  12-20-1999 Dedicating the streets in the Misty Hollow II Subdivision.
99-R-70  12-20-1999 Dedicating the streets in the Pinehurst Subdivision.
00-R-13  3-20-2000  Accepting the plat of relocated Chillicothe.
00-R-14  3-20-2000  Accepting the plat of relocated Kirtland-Chardon Rd.
00-R-36  7-10-2000  Accepting the plat of Rocking Horse Farms Subdivision,
                    Phase III, for record purposes only.
00-R-37  7-10-2000  Accepting the plat of Foxwood Forest Subdivision for record
                    purposes only.
00-R-80  11-20-2000 Accepting the plat of Greenbriar Estates Subdivision, Phase
                    2, for record purposes only.
01-R-40  9-5-2001   Dedicating the streets in the River Oaks Estates
                    Subdivision, Phase III-C.
02-R-25  6-3-2002   Accepting the play of Barrister's Court Subdivision, for
                    record purposes only.
03-R-21  6-2-2003   Dedicating the street in the Greenbrier Estates
                    Subdivision, Phases 1 and 2, for record purposes only.
03-R-24  6-2-2003   Accepting the play of Lazio's Ridge Subdivision, for record
                    purposes only.
03-R-23  6-16-2003  Accepting the preliminary plat of Rocking Horse Farms
                    Subdivision, Phase IV.
03-R-42  9-3-2003   Accepting the plat of Rocking Horse Farms Subdivision No.
                    4, for record purposes only.
04-R-26  7-6-2004   Dedicating the street in Blueberry Hill Estates
                    Subdivision.
04-R-45  8-23-2004  Dedicating a portion of Cardinal Drive in Regency Woods
                    Subdivision, Phase 3C.
04-R-37  9-8-2004   Accepting the preliminary plat of The Reserve at Stone
                    Creek Subdivision.
04-R-54  12-6-2004  Accepting the preliminary plan of Foxwood Forest
                    Subdivision, Phase II.
04-R-68  1-3-2005   Accepting the preliminary plan of Courtney Lane
                    Subdivision.
05-R-5   4-4-2005   Accepting the plat at The Reserve at Stone Creek
                    Subdivision, for record purposes only.
05-R-13  6-6-2005   Accepting the play of Courtney Lane Subdivision, for record
                    purposes only.
05-R-40  9-7-2005   Accepting the plat of Foxwood Forest Subdivision Phase II,
                    for record purposes only.
05-R-50  11-21-2005 Accepting the preliminary plat of Chapin Ledges
                    Subdivision.
06-R-13  3-20-2006  Accepting the plat of Chapin Ledges Subdivision, for record
                    purposes only.
06-R-28  6-19-2006  Dedicating the street in Christina Estates Subdivision,
                    which plat was accepted for record purposes only.
                    Dedicating the streets in the Rocking Horse Farms
06-R-29  6-19-2006  Subdivision, Phases II and III, which was previously
                    accepted for record purposes only.
06-R-30  6-19-2006  Dedicating the street in the Barrister's Court Subdivision,
                    which was previously accepted for record purposes only.
06-R-54  10-16-2006 Accepting the revised plat of Chapin Ledges Subdivision,
                    for record purposes only.
09-R-6   2-2-2009   Dedicating the streets in the Courtney Lane Subdivision.
09-R-17  5-18-2009  Dedicating the streets in the Reserve at Stone Creek
                    Subdivision.
09-R-18  5-18-2009  Dedicating the streets in Chapin Ledges Subdivision.
10-R-68  1-3-2011   Dedicating the streets in Foxwood Forest Subdivision and
                    Foxwood Forest Subdivision Phase II.
13-R-23  5-8-2013   Accepting the preliminary plan of Alpenrose Subdivision.
14-R-7   2-19-2014  Accepting the plat of Alpenrose Subdivision.
14-R-54  10-20-2014 Dedicating the street in the Rocking Horse Farms
                    Subdivision.
15-R-47  9-21-2015  Dedicating the street in the Alpenrose Subdivision.
15-R-62  12-21-2015 Dedicating the streets in the Lazio’s Ridge Subdivision.
                   
 
TABLE E:  ACQUISITION AND DISPOSAL OF REAL PROPERTY
 
Ord./Res. No. Date Description
70-O-68  5-25-1970  Purchase of .031 acres of Original Kirtland Twp. Lot 14,
                    Tract 2, from Arlene and Roy A. Wolf.
70-O-95  8-31-1970  Giving title to South Kirtland Cemetery Lot 262, Sublots 5-
                    8, to Alverna Smith.
70-O-96  8-31-1970  Purchase of South Kirtland Cemetery Lot 439 from William
                    Snell.
70-O-127 12-14-1970 Purchase of a lot north of the Temple Cemetery from Mr.
                    Davies.
71-O-53  4-12-1971  Option to purchase 8-10 acres of land for recreational 
                    purposes.
74-O-136 1-6-1975   Purchase of 37.9876 acres from First Federal Savings & Loan
                    Assoc. of Willoughby.
75-R-94  10-6-1975  Purchase of the Masek property.
                    Agreement to purchase certain water works facilities from
78-O-35  - -        Ohio Water Service Co. should franchise of such company
                    with the city terminate.
79-O-38  6-4-1979   Sale of 2.541 acres in Original Kirtland Twp. Lot 82, Tract
                    3.
79-R-47  6-4-1979   Option to purchase 2 parcels in Lot 30, Tract 1, Kirtland
                    Twp.
80-O-77  8-18-1980  Purchase of .506 acres from Charles T. Williams.
                    Accepts gift of 7.655 acres adjacent to the City
80-R-108 12-15-1980 Recreational Park from Carl Thorne, Vern E. Helm and J.
                    Leonard Johnston.
                    Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a contract with the
91-R-14  5-20-1991  Estate of Augusta Dirks, deceased, for the purchase of 15
                    acres of land on Chillicothe Rd.
93-R-35  7-6-1993   Authorizing the sale of the old Kirtland City Bldg.
94-O-59  4-3-1995   Authorizing the sale of the old Kirtland City Hall and
                    adjacent real property to the Board of Education.
96-O-75  12-16-1996 Authorizing the purchase of Gildersleeve School and
                    adjacent real property from the Board of Education.
03-O-17  4-21-2003  Declaring certain Fire Department property as surplus.
04-R-31  6-21-2004  Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a mutual agreement for
                    real estate for athletic and recreational purposes.
                    Amendment; authorizing the Mayor to enter into a mutual
04-R-36  7-6-2004   agreement for real estate for athletic and recreational
                    purposes.
05-R-1   1-19-2005  Authorizing the Mayor to negotiate a mutual agreement for
                    real estate for athletic and recreational purposes.
                    Authorizing the Mayor to negotiate the acquisition of
05-R-2   1-19-2005  certain real estate for the use of athletic and
                    recreational purposes.
05-R-31  7-6-2005   Declaring certain Fire Department property as surplus.
05-R-57  11-7-2005  Authorizing the Mayor to enter into an agreement to
                    purchase real estate located on Euclid-Chardon Road.
06-R-2   2-22-2006  Authorizing the Mayor to exercise the option to purchase
                    real estate located on Euclid-Chardon Road.
06-R-21  3-20-2006  Declaring certain Fire Department property as surplus.
07-R-31  8-27-2007  Authorizing the Mayor to enter into an agreement to
                    purchase real estate located on Monterey Drive.
07-R-35  9-17-2007  Authorizing the Mayor to enter into an agreement to
                    purchase real estate locate on Chillicothe Road.
08-R-39  11-5-2008  Supporting the purchase of the Orchard Hills property in
                    the city by Geauga Park District.
09-R-8   3-16-2009  Accepting the donation of two parcels of real estate on
                    Charlesderry Road.
                    Authorizing the City Law Director to file a petition to
14-R-55  9-22-2014  receive property through forfeiture in the city, property
                    address 7155 Euclind Chardon Road.
 
TABLE F:  LEASE OF REAL PROPERTY
 
Ord./Res. No. Date Description
71-O-118 12-27-1971 Lease, by the city, of several parcels from Cleveland
                    Electric Illuminating Co.
87-R-47  10-5-1987  Lease with GTE Mobilnet for erection of cellular mobile
                    radio tower on city property.
91-R-40  7-8-1991   Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a lease with The Holden
                    Arboretum for land on Kirtland-Chardon Rd.
96-R-93  12-16-1996 Authorizing agreement with the Board of Education for use
                    of Kirtland Recreation Park.
97-R-21  5-19-1997  Authorizing rental agreement with the Mentor Board of
                    Education for use of the Gildersleeve School Bldg.
97-R-62  11-3-1997  Authorizing rental agreement with the Mentor Board of
                    Education for use of the Kirtland Community Center.
00-R-33  6-19-2000  Authorizing rental agreement with the Mentor Board of
                    Education for the use of the Kirtland Community Center.
03-R-38  7-7-2003   Authorizing the rental agreement with the East Shore
                    Special Education Services Center (SERRC).
06-R-18  3-6-2006   Authorizing the first amendment to the ground lease
                    agreement with New Cingular Wireless PCS, LLC.
06-R-32  7-3-2006   Authorizing the rental agreement with the East Shore
                    Special Education Services Center (SERRC).
06-R-62  1-17-2007  Authorizing the Mayor to enter into the first amendment to
                    land lease agreement with Crown Castle GT Company, LLC.
18-R-4   4-16-2018  Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a lease agreement with
                    Northstar Towers, LLC.
                   
 
TABLE G:  STREET GRADE LEVELS AND CHANGE OF STREET NAME
 
Ord./Res. No. Date      Description
69-O-13       2-11-1969 Changing the name of Monterey Ave. to Monterey Dr.
73-O-32       3-26-1973 Changing the name of Briar Hill Ct. to Hickory Hill Ct.
                       
 
TABLE H:  ANNEXATION AND DETACHMENT OF TERRITORY
 
Ord./Res. No. Date      Description
                        Authorizes the Mayor to negotiate with Willoughby Hills
69-O-47       6-10-1969 for annexation and detachment of certain lands along
                        the Willoughby Hills-Kirtland border.
                       
 
TABLE I:  ZONING MAP CHANGES
 
Ord./Res. No. Date Description
83- 8-1- Property north of Willoughby-Kirtland Rd., from R-2 Residential to B-
O-  1983 5 Institutional and Office.
55
05- 7-   Creating a new zoning classification of Historic Town Center District (HTC) 
O-  11-  and rezoning certain parcels of land.
27  2005
         Eliminates the uses of filling, gasoline or service station, garage, body shop
07- 11-  or public or storage warehouse in the B-5 Institutional and Office Zoning
O-  19-  Districts; and adds retail of goods and services, entirely within enclosed
40  2007 buildings, as a conditional use, in the B-5 Institutional and Office Zoning
         Districts.
            (1)  The zoning classification of certain real property identified on
         Exhibit "A" to Ord. No. 10-O-35 and incorporated herein by this reference as
         though fully rewritten herein, is hereby reclassified from B-4 General and
10- 7-   Industrial District to Limited Industrial District (LI); from R-2A Residential
O-  12-  District to Institutional and Office District (IO); from B-1 Business District
35  2010 to Historic Town Center District (HTC); from B-4 General and Industrial
         District to Historic Town Center District (HTC); and from B-4 General and
         Industrial District to R-3B Residential District; all as specified on Exhibit
         "A";
            (2)  The zoning classification of certain real property identified on
         Exhibit "B" to Ord. No. 10-O-35 and incorporated herein by this reference as
         though fully rewritten herein, is hereby reclassified from R-5 Multifamily
         Dwelling District to R-2A Residential District; from R-1 Residential District
         to R-2A Residential District; and from B-4 General and Industrial District to
         R-3B Residential District; all as specified on Exhibit "B";
            (3)  The zoning classification of certain real property identified on
         Exhibit "C" to Ord. No. 10-O-35 and incorporated herein by this reference as
         though fully rewritten herein, is hereby reclassified from B-2 Business
         District to R-5 Multifamily Dwelling District; from R-3B Residential District
         to Retail Business District (RB); from B-2 Business District to Retail
         Business District (RB); from R-2A Residential District to R-5 Multifamily
         Dwelling District; and from B-2 Business District to R-3B Residential
         District; all as specified on Exhibit "C";
            (4)  The zoning classification of certain real property identified on
         Exhibit "D" to Ord. No. 10-O-35 and incorporated herein by this reference as
         though fully rewritten herein, is hereby reclassified from R-3A Residential
         District to Retail Business District (RB); from B-3 Public and Commercial
         District to R-3A Residential District; from B-3 Public and Commercial District
         to R-3B Residential District; from R-3B Residential District to Retail
         Business District (RB); and from B-3 Public and Commercial District to Retail
         Business District (RB); all as specified on Exhibit "D";
            (5)  The zoning classification of certain real property identified on
         Exhibit "E" to Ord. No. 10-O-35 and incorporated herein by this reference as
         though fully rewritten herein, is hereby reclassified from B-3 Public and
         Commercial District to Limited Industrial District (LI); from R-3A Residential
         District to Limited Industrial District (LI); from B-3 Public and Commercial
         District to R-3A Residential District; from R-3B Residential District to
         Limited Industrial District (LI); from B-3 Public and Commercial District to
         R-3B Residential District; from B-3 Public and Commercial District to R-3D
         Residential District; all as specified on Exhibit "E";
            (6)  The zoning classification of certain real property identified on
         Exhibit "F" to Ord. No. 10-O-35 and incorporated herein by this reference as
         though fully rewritten herein, is hereby reclassified from R-3A Residential
         District to Retail Business District (RB); from R-3B Residential District to
         Retail Business District (RB); from B-1 Business District to Retail Business
         District (RB); and from B-1 Business District to R-3A Residential District;
         all as specified on Exhibit "F";
            (7)  The zoning classification of certain real property identified on
         Exhibit "G" to Ord. No. 10-O-35 and incorporated herein by this reference as
         though fully rewritten herein, is hereby reclassified from B-3 Public and
         Commercial District to Limited Industrial District (LI); as specified on
         Exhibit "G";
            (8)  The zoning classification of certain real property identified on
         Exhibit "H" to Ord. No. 10-O-35 and incorporated herein by this reference as
         though fully rewritten herein, is hereby reclassified from B-3 Public and
         Commercial District to R-3D Residential District; and from B-3 Public and
         Commercial District to R-3A Residential District; all as specified on Exhibit
         "H";
            (9)  The Zoning Map of the City of Kirtland, dated November 2, 2010 and
         attached hereto and incorporated herein by reference and marked Exhibit "I" to
         Ord. No. 10- O-35, on which certain property in the City of Kirtland is
         rezoned from its current zoning, is hereby adopted.
         Authorizing the City Engineer to correct a drafting error on the proposed
10- 10-  zoning map reflecting the amendments set forth by Ordinance No. 10-O-35,
O-  18-  removing Permanent Parcel Numbers 20-A-006-I-00-006-0, 20-A-006-I-00-007- 0
57  2010 and 20-A-006-I-00-008-0 from any color coding that would indicate that these
         parcels are zoned or are to be rezoned HTC and they remain R-1 as currently
         zoned.
 
PARALLEL REFERENCES
Historical References to Ohio Revised Code
References to Resolutions
References to Ordinances
HISTORICAL REFERENCES TO OHIO REVISED CODE
 
ORC Cites Code Section
1.01                            202.01
1.02                            202.02
1.05                            202.02
1.14                            202.03
1.15                            202.03
1.23                            202.05
1.42                            202.03
1.43                            202.03
1.44                            202.02
1.45                            202.03
1.50                            202.06
1.55                            202.03
1.57                            202.04
1.58                            202.04
1.59                            202.02
128.01(A)                       606.30
128.32(E) - (G)                 606.30
128.99(A), (B)                  606.30
701.01                          202.02
723.011                         660.05
901.51                          642.06
901.99(A)                       642.06
1349.17                         642.155
1349.99                         642.155
2901.01                         606.01
2901.02                         606.03
2901.03                         606.04
2901.04                         606.05
2901.11                         606.055
2901.13                         606.06
2901.21                         606.07
2901.22                         606.02
2901.23                         606.08
2901.24                         606.09
2903.05                         636.001
2903.06                         434.08
2903.09                         636.001
2903.10                         636.23
2903.13                         636.02
2903.14                         636.03
2903.16                         636.23
2903.21                         636.04
2903.211                        636.045
2903.22                         636.05
2903.31                         636.19
2905.03                         636.06
2905.05                         636.075
2905.12                         636.08
2907.01                         666.01
2907.04                         666.02
2907.06                         666.03
2907.08                         666.05
2907.09                         666.04
2907.10                         666.06
2907.23                         666.07
2907.24                         666.08
2907.241                        666.085
2907.25                         666.09
2907.26                         666.10
2907.31                         666.11
2907.311                        666.15
2907.33                         666.13
2907.35                         666.14
2907.36                         666.15
2907.37                         666.16
2907.38                         666.17
2907.39                         666.18
2907.40                         666.19
2909.01                         642.01
2909.03                         642.09
2909.06                         642.10
2909.07                         642.11
2909.08(A) - (E)                672.13
2909.09                         642.10
2909.11(B) - (D)                642.25
2909.31                         606.29
2911.21                         642.12
2911.211                        642.25
2911.23                         642.12
2911.32                         642.13
2913.01                         642.01
2913.02                         642.015
2913.03                         642.04
2913.04                         642.05
2913.07                         642.33
2913.11                         642.14
2913.21                         642.15
2913.31(B), (C)(2)              642.14
2913.32                         642.146
2913.33                         642.16
2913.40                         642.32
2913.401                        642.32
2913.41                         642.17
2913.42                         642.18
2913.43                         642.19
2913.44                         642.20
2913.441                        606.26
2913.45                         642.21
2913.47                         642.28
2913.48                         642.31
2913.49                         642.205
2913.51                         642.22
2913.61(B) - (E)                642.24
2913.71                         642.03
2913.72                         642.035
2915.01                         630.01
2915.02                         630.02
2915.03                         630.03
2915.04                         630.04
2915.05                         630.05
2915.06                         630.14
2915.09                         630.06
2915.091                        630.10
2915.092                        630.11
2915.093                        630.12
2915.094                        630.13
2915.10                         630.07
2915.11                         630.08
2915.12                         630.09
2915.13                         630.12
2917.01                         648.09
2917.03                         648.01
2917.031                        648.01
2917.04                         648.02
2917.05                         648.03
2917.11                         648.04
2917.12                         648.05
2917.13                         648.06
2917.21                         636.15
2917.31                         648.01
2917.32                         648.08
2917.40                         636.18
2917.41                         642.30
2919.18                         636.24
2919.21                         636.09
2919.22(A) - (E), (H)           636.11
2919.23                         636.12
2919.24                         636.125
2919.25                         636.17
2919.27                         636.045
2921.01                         606.01
2921.13                         606.10
2921.14                         606.105
2921.21                         606.11
2921.22                         606.12
2921.23                         606.13
2921.29                         606.29
2921.31                         606.14
2921.32                         606.15
2921.321                        642.08
2921.33                         606.16
2921.331(A) - (C), (E), (F)     606.165
2921.36                         612.10
2921.42                         606.17
2921.43                         606.18
2921.44                         606.19
2921.45                         606.20
2921.51                         606.25
2921.52(A) - (D)                606.28
2923.02                         606.21
2923.03                         606.22
2923.11                         672.01,
                                672.10
2923.12                         672.02
2923.1211(B), (C)               672.16
2923.1212                       672.16
2923.122(C) - (G)               672.15
2923.126                        672.16
2923.131                        672.025
2923.15                         672.03
2923.16                         672.04
2923.162                        672.095
2923.18                         672.05
2923.19                         672.06
2923.20                         672.07
2923.201                        672.17
2923.211                        672.085
2923.24                         672.14
2925.01                         624.01
2925.03                         624.02
2925.04                         624.025
2925.11                         624.03
2925.12                         624.04
2925.13                         624.05
2925.14                         624.14
2925.141                        624.14
2925.31                         624.07
2925.32(B)(4), (D)(2), (F), (G) 624.073
2925.33                         624.076
2925.36                         624.08
2925.37(A), (G), (M)            624.15
2925.50                         624.11
2925.51                         624.10
2925.511                        624.10
2925.55                         624.16
2925.56                         624.16
2925.57                         624.16
2925.58                         624.16
2927.02                         636.20
2927.021                        636.20
2927.022                        636.20
2927.023                        636.20
2927.03                         636.22
2927.11                         642.07
2927.12                         636.21
2927.15                         636.25
2929.21                         698.02
2929.22                         698.03
2929.23                         666.99
2929.24                         698.02
2929.25                         698.02
2929.26                         698.02
2929.27                         698.02
2929.28                         698.02
2929.31                         698.04
2929.41                         698.05
2935.36(E)                      698.01
2935.041                        606.23
2981.07                         642.34
2981.11                         606.24
2981.12                         606.24
2981.13(A)                      606.24
3701.81                         660.02
3701.82                         660.01
3701.99(B)                      660.01
3701.99(C)                      660.02
3715.05                         624.16
3715.06                         624.16
3716.11                         636.16
3716.99(C)                      636.16
3719.01                         624.01
3719.011                        624.01
3719.08(A), (E)                 624.13
3719.172(A), (B)                624.09
3719.19                         624.11
3719.99(C)                      624.13
3719.99(E)                      624.09
3737.34                         1610.04
3737.51(A)                      1610.04
3737.51(B) to (H)               1610.99
3737.61                         1610.06
3737.62                         1610.07
3737.63                         1610.08
3737.64                         1610.09
3737.65                         1610.10
3737.99(B)                      1610.99
3737.99(C)                      1610.99
3737.99(D)                      1610.99
3737.99(E)                      1610.99
3743.01                         672.10
3743.54                         672.10
3743.60(E) - (J)                672.10
3743.61(E) - (J)                672.10
3743.63                         672.10
3743.65(A) - (F)                672.10
3743.66                         672.10
3743.68(B)                      672.10
3743.80                         672.10
3743.99(C), (D)                 672.10
3767.13                         660.04
3767.29                         660.06
3767.32                         660.03
3767.99(B)                      660.06
3767.99(C)                      660.04
3781.55                         666.04
3781.11(B)                      1610.12
3791.031                        660.13
4510.12                         436.01
4301.01                         612.01
4301.22(A)(2)                   612.11
4301.22(B)                      612.03
4301.244                        612.01
4301.62                         612.07
4301.63                         612.02
4301.631                        612.11
4301.633                        612.02
4301.634                        612.02
4301.637                        612.06
4301.64                         612.04
4301.65                         612.12
4301.69                         612.02
4301.70                         612.06
4301.99(A)                      612.07,
                                612.12
4301.99(B)                      612.04,
                                612.11
4301.99(C)                      612.02
4301.99(D), (H)                 612.03
4301.99(E)                      612.02,
                                612.11
4301.99(F)                      612.02
4301.99(I)                      612.02
4301.99(J)                      612.12
4303.202(B)                     612.08
4303.208(C)                     612.08
4303.25                         612.05
4303.99(D)                      612.08
4501.01(LL)                     402.075
4501.01(TT)                     416.12
4503.11(A)                      436.09
4503.11(D)                      436.09
4503.21                         436.09
4505.18                         436.08
4506.01                         442.01
4506.011                        442.02
4506.04(A), (B)                 442.03
4506.04(C)                      442.03
4506.10(A), (E)                 442.04
4506.12(I)                      442.03
4506.12(J)                      442.03
4506.15                         442.03
4506.19                         442.06
4506.20                         442.07
4506.23                         442.08
4507.02(A)(2)                   436.02
4507.05(F), (I)                 436.03
4507.071(B) - (J)               436.035
4507.30                         436.04
4507.35                         436.06
4507.99                         436.02
4509.102                        606.10
4510.037(J)                     436.071
                                436.071,
4510.04                         436.073,
                                436.074
4510.05                         408.03,
                                698.07
4510.11                         436.071
4510.111                        436.071
4510.12                         436.072
4510.14                         436.073
4510.16                         436.074
4510.21                         436.075
4510.44                         434.011
4511.01(A)                      402.53
4511.01(B)                      402.20
4511.01(C)                      402.01
4511.01(D)                      402.12
4511.01(E)                      402.29
4511.01(F)                      402.37
4511.01(G)                      402.05
4511.01(H)                      402.22
4511.01(I)                      402.08
4511.01(J)                      402.02
4511.01(K)                      402.51
4511.01(L)                      402.06
4511.01(M)                      402.50
4511.01(N)                      402.38
4511.01(O)                      402.26
4511.01(P)                      402.30
4511.01(Q)                      402.32
4511.01(T)                      402.47
4511.01(U)                      402.15
4511.01(V)                      402.17
4511.01(W)                      402.25
4511.01(X)                      402.24
4511.01(Y)                      402.11
4511.01(Z)                      402.27
4511.01(AA)                     402.195
4511.01(BB)                     402.44
4511.01(CC)                     402.09
4511.01(DD)                     402.28
4511.01(EE)                     402.35
4511.01(FF)                     402.39
4511.01(GG)                     402.19
4511.01(II)                     402.395
4511.01(JJ)                     402.40
4511.01(KK)                     402.18
4511.01(LL)                     402.10
4511.01(MM)                     402.36
4511.01(NN)                     402.07
4511.01(OO)                     402.33
4511.01(PP)                     402.52
4511.01(SS)                     402.31
4511.01(UU)                     402.34
4511.01(VV)                     402.355
4511.01(WW)                     402.165
4511.01(AAA)                    402.46
4511.01(BBB)                    402.42
4511.01(DDD)                    402.35
4511.01(HH)                     402.45
4511.01(QQ)                     402.48
4511.01(RR)                     402.49
4511.01(TT)                     402.47
4511.01(YY)                     402.16
4511.01(XX)                     402.03
4511.01(ZZ)                     402.14
4511.01(CCC)                    402.04
4511.01(EEE)                    402.225
4511.01(FFF)                    402.077
4511.01(GGG)                    402.02
4511.01(HHH)                    402.227
4511.01(III)                    402.275
4511.01(JJJ)                    402.345
4511.01(KKK)                    402.045
4511.01(MMM)                    402.175
4511.01(NNN)                    402.197
4511.01(OOO)                    402.277
4511.01(PPP)                    402.385
4511.03                         432.18
4511.031                        414.10
4511.04                         404.03
4511.041                        404.035
4511.042                        404.035
4511.05                         404.04
4511.051                        412.05
4511.094                        414.11
4511.12(A)                      414.01
4511.12(B)                      414.01
4511.121(A)-(C), (E)            414.01
4511.121(D)                     414.01
4511.13                         414.03
4511.131                        414.04
4511.132                        432.155
4511.14                         414.05
4511.16                         414.07
4511.17                         414.08
4511.18                         414.09
4511.181                        434.01
4511.19                         434.01
4511.191                        434.01
4511.192                        434.01
4511.194                        434.01
4511.20                         434.02
4511.201                        434.02
4511.202                        434.025
4511.203                        436.05
4511.204                        432.42
4511.205                        432.43
4511.21(A) - (G)                434.03
4511.21(O)                      434.03
4511.21(P)                      434.03
4511.211                        434.035
4511.213                        432.195
4511.214                        434.09
4511.215                        434.09
4511.22                         434.04
4511.23                         434.05
4511.24                         434.06
4511.25                         432.01
4511.251                        434.07
4511.26                         432.02
4511.27                         432.03
4511.28                         432.04
4511.29                         432.05
4511.30                         432.06
4511.31                         432.07
4511.32                         432.28
4511.33                         432.08
4511.34                         432.09
4511.35                         432.09
4511.36                         432.10
4511.37                         432.11
4511.38                         432.12
4511.39                         432.13
4511.40                         432.14
4511.41                         432.15
4511.42                         432.16
4511.43                         432.17
4511.431(A)                     432.20
4511.431(B)                     432.20
4511.432                        432.205
4511.44                         432.20
4511.441                        416.09
4511.45                         432.19
4511.451                        432.21
4511.452                        416.08
4511.454                        432.19
4511.46                         416.01
4511.47                         416.02
4511.48                         416.03
4511.481                        416.10
4511.49                         416.04
4511.491                        416.11
4511.50                         416.05
4511.51                         416.06
4511.511                        416.07
4511.512                        416.12
4511.513                        416.13
4511.52                         474.01
4511.521                        474.11
4511.53                         474.02
4511.54                         474.03
4511.55                         474.04
4511.56                         474.05
4511.60                         432.27
4511.62                         432.41
4511.65                         414.02
4511.661                        452.06
4511.67                         452.02
4511.69                         452.04
4511.70                         432.23,
                                452.04
4511.701                        440.08
4511.71(A)                      432.24
4511.71(B)                      432.24
4511.711                        432.22
4511.712                        432.34
4511.713(A), (B)                432.39
4511.714(A), (B)                432.24
4511.714(C)                     432.24
4511.714(D)                     432.24
4511.72                         432.25
4511.73                         432.26
4511.74                         412.01
4511.75                         432.30
4511.79                         442.09
4511.81(A)-(H), (K), (L)        438.28
4511.82                         432.40
4511.84                         432.31
4511.85                         440.12
4511.99                         408.01
4513.02(A), (H)                 438.01
4513.021                        438.26
4513.03                         438.02
4513.04                         438.03
4513.05                         438.04
4513.06                         438.05
4513.07                         438.06
4513.071                        438.25
4513.08                         438.07
4513.09                         438.08
4513.10                         438.09
4513.11                         438.10
4513.111                        438.10
4513.12                         438.11
4513.13                         438.12
4513.14                         438.13
4513.15                         438.14
4513.16                         438.15
4513.17                         438.16
4513.171                        438.165
4513.182                        438.17
4513.20                         438.19
4513.21                         438.20
4513.22                         438.21
4513.23                         438.22
4513.24                         438.23
4513.241(C) - (I)               438.235
4513.241(J)                     438.235
4513.263                        438.285
4513.29                         440.04
4513.30                         438.24
4513.31                         440.06
4513.32                         440.05
4513.36                         404.02
4513.361                        404.08
4513.60                         452.055
4513.601                        452.055
4513.61                         452.05
4513.64                         452.05
4513.66                         436.14
4513.68                         436.14
                                438.09,
                                438.17,
                                438.19,
4513.99                         438.235,
                                438.24,
                                438.25,
                                440.04—
                                440.06
4519.02                         476.08
4519.401                        434.09
4519.20                         476.02
4519.41                         476.04
4519.44                         476.05
4519.46                         476.06
4519.48                         476.07
4519.66                         476.09
4549.02                         436.11
4549.021                        436.12
4549.03                         436.13
4549.05                         444.01
4549.08                         436.10
4549.081(B)                     414.01
4549.081(C)                     414.01
4549.11(A)                      436.11
4549.11(B)                      436.09
4549.12(A)                      436.09
4549.12(B)                      436.09
4549.20                         438.30
4729.01                         624.01
4933.18                         642.26
4933.19                         642.26
5577.05                         440.02
5577.06                         440.02
5577.11                         440.03
5577.15                         440.05
5577.99(C)                      440.02
5577.99(E)                      440.03
5589.08                         440.07
5589.081                        440.07
5589.12                         642.02
5589.99(B)                      440.07,
                                642.02
                                
 
REFERENCES TO RESOLUTIONS
 
Res. No. Date Passed Code Section
68-O-23  12-30-1968 242.02
69-O-20  2-25-1969  242.01
72-O-71  7-31-1972  268.01
74-O-24  1-7-1974   236.04
74-O-103 8-26-1974  266.01
75-R-47  5-19-1975  1450.03
75-R-94  10-6-1975  TSO Table E
76-R-14  1-5-1976   230.01
76-R-59  5-19-1976  TSO Table D
77-R-86  8-29-1977  TSO Table D
77-R-87  9-6-1977   238.01
77-R-106 12-5-1977  TSO Table D
78-R-96  8-21-1978  1060.01
79-R-33  5-7-1979   1240.06
79-R-47  6-4-1979   TSO Table E
80-R-64  6-2-1980   254.19
80-R-108 12-15-1980 TSO Table E
                    220.02—
81-R-31  4-6-1981   220.10,
                    220.12—
                    220.31
81-R-64  7-13-1981  TSO Table A
85-R-45  7-1-1985   406.09
86-R-24  5-19-1986  TSO Table D
86-R-61  12-1-1986  TSO Table D
87-R-20  5-18-1987  TSO Table D
87-R-37  7-6-1987   TSO Table D
87-R-36  8-24-1987  254.25
87-R-47  10-5-1987  TSO Table F
88-R-5   1-4-1988   220.11
88-R-11  2-16-1988  236.06
88-R-35  6-6-1988   TSO Table D
88-R-42  6-20-1988  TSO Table B
88-R-74  10-17-1988 236.06
88-R-70  11-7-1988  TSO Table D
89-R-7   3-6-1989   TSO Table D
89-R-14  4-17-1989  TSO Table D
89-R-58  1-2-1990   TSO Table D
90-R-32  4-16-1990  TSO Table D
90-R-34  4-16-1990  TSO Table D
90-R-41  6-18-1990  TSO Table D
90-R-66  10-1-1990  TSO Table D
91-R-14  5-20-1991  TSO Table E
91-R-24  6-17-1991  TSO Table D
91-R-45  7-8-1991   TSO Table D
91-R-40  7-8-1991   TSO Table F
92-R-9   1-21-1992  TSO Table B
92-R-66  9-21-1992  TSO Table D
93-R-25  6-7-1993   TSO Table D
93-R-31  6-7-1993   TSO Table B
93-R-35  7-6-1993   TSO Table E
93-R-40  9-7-1993   TSO Table D
93-R-80  12-20-1993 254.27
93-R-81  12-20-1993 254.28
94-R-19  4-18-1994  TSO Table D
94-R-38  7-11-1994  TSO Table B
94-R-39 9-6-1994   TSO Table D
94-R-54  11-7-1994  TSO Table D
94-R-77  1-16-1995  TSO Table D
95-R-1   2-6-1995   TSO Table D
95-R-5   6-19-1995  TSO Table D
95-R-35  8-28-1995  TSO Table D
95-R-48  10-16-1995 TSO Table D
95-R-34  10-16-1995 TSO Table D
96-R-36  7-8-1996   TSO Table D
96-R-34  11-4-1996  TSO Table D
96-R-70  12-2-1996  1042.045
96-R-93  12-16-1996 TSO Table F
96-R-44  12-16-1996 TSO Table D
97-R-21  5-19-1997  TSO Table F
97-R-49  9-3-1997   TSO Table D
97-R-62  11-3-1997  TSO Table F
97-R-73  12-1-1997  220.01
97-R-79  1-21-1998  TSO Table D
98-R-39  5-18-1998  TSO Table A
98-R-77  12-7-1998  220.01
98-R-82  1-4-1999   TSO Table D
98-R-84  1-4-1999   TSO Table A
                    246.03,
99-R-18  3-15-1999  246.07,
                    246.08
99-R-24  4-19-1999  TSO Table D
99-R-25  4-19-1999  TSO Table D
99-R-48  7-7-1999   TSO Table D
99-R-68  12-20-1999 TSO Table D
99-R-69  12-20-1999 TSO Table D
99-R-70  12-20-1999 TSO Table D
00-R-13  3-20-2000  TSO Table D
00-R-14  3-20-2000  TSO Table D
00-R-32  6-19-2000  236.06
00-R-33  6-19-2000  TSO Table F
00-R-36  7-10-2000  TSO Table D
00-R-37  7-10-2000  TSO Table D
                    246.03,
00-R-45  7-10-2000  246.08,
                    254.04
00-R-52  8-21-2000  TSO Table A
00-R-80  11-20-2000 TSO Table D
00-R-87  12-4-2000  220.01
00-R-101 12-18-2000 TSO Table A
01-R-40  9-5-2001   TSO Table D
01-R-55  12-3-2001  220.01
02-R-25  6-3-2002   TSO Table D
02-O-37  6-17-2002  TSO Table A
03-R-12  3-3-2003   TSO Table A
03-R-4   3-3-2003   TSO Table A
03-R-16  4-21-2003  TSO Table A
03-R-21  6-2-2003   TSO Table D
03-R-24  6-2-2003   TSO Table D
03-R-23  6-16-2003  TSO Table D
03-R-32  6-16-2003  TSO Table A
03-R-33  6-16-2003  TSO Table A
03-R-38  7-7-2003   TSO Table F
03-R-40  7-14-2003  TSO Table A
03-R-42  9-3-2003   TSO Table D
03-R-46  10-6-2003  TSO Table A
03-R-52  12-1-2003  220.01
04-R-10  1-21-2004  TSO Table A
04-R-14  3-15-2004  254.26
04-R-24  5-3-2004   254.26
04-R-23  5-3-2004   254.26
04-R-31  6-21-2004  TSO Table E
04-R-33  6-21-2004  220.01
04-R-26  7-6-2004   TSO Table D
04-R-36  7-6-2004   TSO Table E
04-R-45  8-23-2004  TSO Table D
04-R-37  9-8-2004   TSO Table D
04-R-54  12-6-2004  TSO Table D
04-R-61  12-6-2004  220.01
04-R-68  1-3-2005   TSO Table D
05-R-1   1-19-2005  TSO Table E
05-R-2   1-19-2005  TSO Table E
05-R-5   4-4-2005   TSO Table D
05-R-13  6-6-2005   TSO Table D
05-R-34  7-6-2005   TSO Table B
05-R-31  7-6-2005   TSO Table E
05-R-35  8-22-2005  TSO Table A
05-R-40  9-7-2005   TSO Table D
05-R-43  9-26-2005  252.01
05-R-57  11-7-2005  TSO Table E
05-R-58  11-7-2005  TSO Table A
05-R-59  11-7-2005  TSO Table A
05-R-50  11-21-2005 TSO Table D
05-R-54  11-21-2005 TSO Table A
05-R-70  12-1-2005  220.01
06-R-2   2-22-2006  TSO Table E
06-R-18  3-6-2006   TSO Table F
06-R-21  3-20-2006  TSO Table E
06-R-20  3-20-2006  TSO Table A
06-R-13  3-20-2006  TSO Table D
06-R-24  4-17-2006  TSO Table A
06-R-31  6-5-2006   TSO Table A
06-R-28  6-19-2006  TSO Table D
06-R-29  6-19-2006  TSO Table D
06-R-30  6-19-2006  TSO Table D
06-R-35  6-19-2006  TSO Table A
06-R-32  7-3-2006   TSO Table F
06-R-46  7-10-2006  TSO Table A
06-R-47  10-2-2006  TSO Table A
06-R-54  10-16-2006 TSO Table D
06-R-59  11-6-2006  TSO Table E
06-R-57  11-20-2006 TSO Table A
06-R-55  12-4-2006  TSO Table B
06-R-66  12-4-2006  220.01
06-R-67  1-3-2007   204.02
06-R-62  1-17-2007  TSO Table F
07-R-6   2-5-2007   TSO Table A
07-R-9   2-21-2007  TSO Table A
07-R-15  4-16-2007  TSO Table B
07-R-14  5-7-2007   TSO Table A
07-R-25  6-18-2007  TSO Table A
07-R-19  7-9-2007   TSO Table A
07-R-30  7-16-2007  TSO Table A
07-R-31  8-27-2007  TSO Table E
07-R-33  9-5-2007   220.01
07-R-35  9-17-2007  TSO Table E
07-R-37  9-17-2007  208.02
07-R-50  12-3-2007  220.01
08-R-5   3-5-2008   TSO Table A
08-R-12  5-5-2008   TSO Table A
08-R-27  7-7-2008   TSO Table A
08-R-29  7-14-2008  TSO Table A
08-R-30  7-14-2008  TSO Table A
08-R-31  8-18-2008  TSO Table A
08-R-32  9-15-2008  TSO Table A
08-R-33  9-15-2008  TSO Table A
08-R-38  12-1-2008  TSO Table A
08-R-39  11-5-2008  TSO Table E
08-R-44  12-1-2008  220.01
08-R-47  12-1-2008  TSO Table A
08-R-49  12-15-2008 TSO Table A
09-R-6   2-2-2009   TSO Table D
09-R-8   3-16-2009  TSO Table E
09-R-12  3-16-2009  TSO Table A
09-R-13  3-16-2009  220.01
09-R-17  5-18-2009  TSO Table D
09-R-18  5-18-2009  TSO Table D
09-R-40  7-13-2009  TSO Table A
09-R-48  10-19-2009 TSO Table B
09-R-49  10-19-2009 TSO Table B
09-R-59  12-1-2009  220.01
10-R-13  3-15-2010  TSO Table A
10-R-41  8-23-2010  TSO Table A
10-R-54  9-20-2010  TSO Table A
10-R-55  9-20-2010  TSO Table A
10-R-65  12-6-2010  220.01
10-R-68  1-3-2011   TSO Table D
11-R-3   2-23-2011  TSO Table A
11-R-11  3-21-2011  TSO Table A
11-R-36  6-20-2011  TSO Table A
11-R-37  6-20-2011  TSO Table A
11-R-39  6-20-2011  TSO Table A
11-R-40  6-20-2011  TSO Table A
11-R-52  10-3-2011  TSO Table A
11-R-59  12-19-2011 TSO Table A
11-R-64  12-1-2011  220.01
11-R-67  12-5-2011  TSO Table A
11-R-68  12-5-2011  TSO Table A
11-R-73  12-19-2011 TSO Table A
12-R-4   1-18-2012  TSO Table A
12-R-5   1-18-2012  TSO Table A
12-R-18  5-21-2012  TSO Table A
12-R-36  7-9-2012   TSO Table A
12-R-46  8-20-2012  TSO Table A
12-R-50  11-19-2012 TSO Table A
12-R-63  12-3-2012  220.01
13-R-12  3-4-2013   220.01
13-R-14  5-20-2013  254.26
13-R-15  5-20-2013  254.26
13-R-23  5-8-2013   TSO Table D
13-R-38  8-19-2013  TSO Table A
13-R-39  9-4-2013   TSO Table B
13-R-40  9-4-2013   TSO Table B
13-R-41  9-4-2013   TSO Table B
13-R-42  9-4-2013   TSO Table B
13-R-43  9-4-2013   TSO Table B
13-R-44  9-16-2013  TSO Table A
13-R-47  9-4-2013   TSO Table A
13-R-55  11-6-2013  TSO Table A
13-R-64  12-2-2013  220.01
14-R-7   2-19-2014  TSO Table D
14-R-8   2-19-2014  TSO Table A
14-R-11  2-19-2014  TSO Table B
14-R-12  2-19-2014  TSO Table B
14-R-13  2-19-2014  TSO Table A
14-R-14  2-19-2014  TSO Table A
14-R-15  2-19-2014  TSO Table A
14-R-16  2-19-2014  TSO Table A
14-R-17  2-19-2014  TSO Table A
14-R-18  2-19-2014  TSO Table A
14-R-19  2-19-2014  TSO Table A
14-R-20  2-19-2014  TSO Table A
14-R-21  3-17-2014  TSO Table A
14-R-22  4-7-2014   TSO Table A
14-R-50  8-18-2014  TSO Table A
14-R-54  10-20-2014 TSO Table D
14-R-55  9-22-2014  TSO Table E
14-R-68  12-1-2014  220.01
15-R-10  3-16-2015  TSO Table A
15-R-11  4-6-2015   TSO Table A
15-R-19  5-4-2015   TSO Table A
15-R-47  9-21-2015  TSO Table D
15-R-62  12-21-2015 TSO Table D
15-R-66  12-1-2015  220.01
16-R-53  12-5-2016  220.01
16-R-55  1-4-2017   TSO Table A
16-R-59  12-19-2016 TSO Table A
17-R-5   2-22-2017  220.01
17-R-11  4-3-2017   TSO Table A
17-R-16  4-17-2017  TSO Table A
17-R-17  4-17-2017  TSO Table A
17-R-24  6-19-2017  TSO Table A
17-R-31  10-2-2017  TSO Table A
17-R-44  12-1-2017  220.01
18-R-3   2-5-2018   220.01
18-R-4   4-16-2018  TSO Table F
18-R-13  4-16-2018  TSO Table A
18-R-14  4-16-2018  TSO Table A
18-R-15  5-9-2018   TSO Table A
18-R-21  6-4-2018   TSO Table A
18-R-22  5-9-2018   TSO Table A
18-R-34  6-18-18    TSO Table A
                   
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
                    TSO Tables
78-O-35  - -        A,
                    E
68-O-17  12-10-1968 1020.02
68-O-21  12-30-1968 1020.01
68-O-22  12-30-1968 1020.03
69-O-13  2-11-1969  TSO Table G
69-O-28  4-8-1969   1062.03
69-O-47  6-10-1969  TSO Table H
70-O-9   2-23-1970  TSO Table A
70-O-68  5-25-1970  TSO Table E
70-O-58  6-8-1970   TSO Table D
70-O-69  6-8-1970   TSO Table B
70-O-95  8-31-1970  TSO Table E
70-O-96  8-31-1970  TSO Table E
70-O-106 10-26-1970 TSO Table A
70-O-116 11-16-1970 TSO Table A
70-O-127 12-14-1970 TSO Table E
71-O-53  4-12-1971  TSO Table E
71-O-79  8-30-1971  618.17
71-O-83  9-13-1971  270.01
71-01-05 10-11-1971 446.01—
                    446.03
71-O-101 10-25-1971 TSO Table A
71-O-104 10-25-1971 TSO Table A
                    882.01—
                    882.09,
                    882.13—
                    882.16,
                    882.18—
                    882.20,
71-O-11  12-20-1971 882.23—
                    882.26,
                    882.28—
                    882.38,
                    882.41,
                    882.42,
                    882.44
71-O-118 12-27-1971 TSO Table F
72-O-51  4-24-1972  TSO Table D
72-O-72  9-11-1972  TSO Table A
72-O-82  11-13-1972 246.01
72-O-84  11-27-1972 606.175
73-O-32  3-26-1973  TSO Table G
73-O-38  4-30-1973  236.01
73-O-42  5-29-1973  TSO Table D
73-O-56  9-4-1973   254.17
73-O-77  9-10-1973  TSO Table C
73-O-78  10-29-1973 244.01
74-O-36  1-21-1974  236.01
74-O-29  2-18-1974  254.16
74-O-44  3-4-1974   246.02
74-O-38  3-18-1974  826.01—
                    826.05
74-O-136 1-6-1975   TSO Table E
75-O-38  5-5-1975   TSO Table A
75-O-53  6-2-1975   1282.02—
                    1282.05
75-O-121 12-1-1975  244.03
76-O-21  2-2-1976   TSO Table D
                    1022.02,
76-O-39  3-15-1976  1022.03,
                    1022.99
76-O-45  4-5-1976   TSO Table D
76-O-63  6-7-1976   1022.01
76-O-43  7-6-1976   1222.01—
                    1222.11
76-O-68  7-19-1976  238.02
76-O-90  9-7-1976   236.01
76-O-96  10-4-1976  TSO Table A
77-O-44  4-4-1977   440.01
77-O-72  6-20-1977  TSO Table D
77-O-76  6-20-1977  TSO Table D
77-O-82  7-11-1977  TSO Table D
77-O-85  8-29-1977  TSO Table A
77-O-94  11-7-1977  238.01
                    1240.01—
                    1240.07,
                    1242.01—
78-O-31  3-6-1978   1242.07,
                    1246.07,
                    1246.08,
                    1246.12,
                    1246.13
78-O-48  5-1-1978   TSO Table D
78-O-82  7-10-1978  TSO Table D
78-O-110 11-6-1978  TSO Table D
78-O-107 11-6-1978  TSO Table D
78-O-112 12-4-1978  TSO Table A
79-O-8   2-20-1979  TSO Table D
79-O-38  6-4-1979   TSO Table E
79-O-71  11-19-1979 TSO Table D
80-O-68  6-2-1980   882.22,
                    882.39
80-O-77  8-18-1980  TSO Table E
80-O-90  9-15-1980  TSO Table A
81-O-9   1-5-1981   432.38
81-O-23  1-19-1981  254.15
                    836.01—
                    836.04,
80-O-104 2-17-1981  836.08,
                    836.10—
                    836.15
81-O-55  8-31-1981  250.01,
                    250.02
81-O-79  10-5-1981  TSO Table A
                    244.04,
82-O-24  3-1-1982   254.02,
                    254.13
82-O-30  3-15-1982  264.01,
                    264.02
82-O-39  4-19-1982  TSO Table A
                    834.01—
82-O-48  6-21-1982  834.09,
                    834.99
82-O-63  8-23-1982  882.17
83-O-52  7-12-1983  TSO Table D
83-O-55  8-1-1983   TSO Table I
83-O-51  8-22-1983  660.12
83-O-32  11-18-1983 452.055
83-O-72  11-21-1983 220.11
                    1040.01—
                    1040.05,
83-O-71  12-5-1983  1040.07,
                    1040.10—
                    1040.17
83-O-73  12-19-1983 280.01,
                    280.02
83-O-74  12-19-1983 1042.02
83-O-89  1-16-1984  1042.01
                    254.05,
84-O-14  4-16-1984  254.07,
                    254.10
84-O-16  4-16-1984  TSO Table A
84-O-43  9-17-1984  TSO Table A
84-O-58  12-17-1984 TSO Table D
85-O-32  5-6-1985   1040.09
                    1068.01,
85-O-38  5-20-1985  1068.02,
                    1068.99
85-O-42  6-3-1985   1042.03
                    254.08,
86-O-37  8-18-1986  254.09,
                    254.21—
                    254.24
86-O-36  9-2-1986   882.27
87-O-30  4-6-1987   1040.08
87-O-10  4-6-1987   1040.08
87-O-25  6-1-1987   612.09
                    1026.01,
87-O-22  6-1-1987   1026.05,
                    1026.99
87-O-33  8-24-1987  836.09,
                    836.16
87-O-44  8-31-1987  884.01—
                    884.06
87-O-49  10-19-1987 204.01
                    802.01—
87-O-52  10-19-1987 802.08,
                    802.99
87-O-53  10-19-1987 836.18
88-O-37  5-2-1988   1040.06
                    1024.03—
88-O-32  5-16-1988  1024.05,
                    1024.99
88-O-36  6-6-1988   1610.13
88-O-75  10-17-1988 254.26
89-O-3   2-21-1989  660.14
89-O-21  7-3-1989   TSO Table C
                    1028.01,
89-O-29  8-21-1989  1028.03—
                    1028.06,
                    1028.99
89-O-46  12-18-1989 836.05—
                    836.07
90-O-8   2-20-1990  210.01
90-O-20  3-19-1990  236.02
90-O-45  8-20-1990  836.17
                    1064.01—
90-O-60  9-4-1990   1064.05,
                    1064.99
90-O-81  12-3-1990  448.01—
                    448.03
91-O-4   2-19-1991  244.05
                    454.01—
91-O-27  6-17-1991  454.07,
                    454.99
91-O-42  7-8-1991   244.04
91-O-43  7-8-1991   246.05
92-O-27  5-4-1992   412.06
92-O-40  5-18-1992  254.06,
                    254.11
93-O-36  7-6-1993   882.21
93-O-44  8-30-1993  818.04
93-O-53  10-18-1993 818.01—
                    818.03
94-O-17  3-21-1994  236.08
                    1240.07,
                    1246.01,
94-O-28  7-5-1994   1246.03,
                    1246.09,
                    1246.11
94-O-51  10-3-1994  246.06
                    822.01—
94-O-81  1-16-1995  822.05,
                    822.99
94-O-59  4-3-1995   TSO Table E
95-O-31  7-10-1995  TSO Table A
95-O-41  8-28-1995  TSO Table B
95-O-71  1-15-1996  1024.02
95-O-72  1-15-1996  1026.02—
                    1026.04
96-O-21  3-18-1996  1242.05
96-O-43  8-19-1996  440.01
96-O-42  9-4-1996   254.03
                    882.02,
96-O-63  11-4-1996  882.10—
                    882.12
96-O-75  12-16-1996 TSO Table E
97-O-20  3-3-1997   254.065
97-O-18  3-17-1997  1028.02
97-O-16  3-17-1997  1062.01
97-O-31  6-2-1997   1042.05
97-O-39  7-14-1997  TSO Table C
97-0-43  7-14-1997  1292.01—
                    1292.09
97-O-52  8-25-1997  TSO Table C
97-O-55  9-3-1997   TSO Table C
97-O-60  10-6-1997  606.27
98-O-10  2-18-1998  246.03
98-O-11  2-18-1998  254.01
                    1244.01—
                    1244.03,
                    1244.035,
97-O-63  3-2-1998   1244.04,
                    1244.07,
                    1244.09—
                    1244.13,
                    1246.10
                    870.01—
98-O-24  4-6-1998   870.19,
                    870.99
98-O-25  4-6-1998   1024.01
98-O-33  4-20-1998  1062.02
98-O-52  8-31-1998  1040.08
98-O-57  9-9-1998   440.11
98-O-58  9-9-1998   1066.01
98-O-83  1-4-1999   254.06
99-O-1   2-1-1999   236.02,
                    236.03
                    1246.02,
99-O-10  4-19-1999  1246.04—
                    1246.06,
                    1246.10
99-O-19  4-19-1999  254.14
99-O-42  5-17-1999  1042.06
00-O-73  12-4-2000  648.10
00-O-99  12-18-2000 648.10
01-O-6   3-5-2001   882.17
01-O-07  3-19-2001  TSO Table A
01-O-22  6-18-2001  452.99
01-O-23  6-18-2001  454.99
01-O-29  7-2-2001   882.27
01-O-42  9-17-2001  1282.01—
                    1282.06
01-O-50  11-19-2001 882.03
                    1294.01—
02-O-33  7-8-2002   1294.11,
                    1294.99
02-O-48  9-4-2002   618.12
02-O-53  10-7-2002  452.03
02-O-52  11-4-2002  476.01,
                    476.03
                    824.01—
02-O-51  11-4-2002  824.16,
                    824.99
02-O-55  12-2-2002  206.01
03-O-3   3-3-2003   1224.01
03-O-01  3-3-2003   1226.01
03-O-13  4-7-2003   TSO Table A
03-O-18  4-21-2003  TSO Table C
03-O-15  4-21-2003  TSO Table A
03-O-17  4-21-2003  TSO Table E
                    452.01,
03-O-37  7-7-2003   452.11,
                    452.13,
                    452.15
03-O-43  9-3-2003   618.12
                    404.05,
03-O-47  10-20-2003 452.16,
                    452.99
03-O-48  11-3-2003  TSO Table A
04-O-20  3-15-2004  1066.01
                    1462.01—
04-O-25  6-7-2004   1462.26,
                    1462.99
04-O-46  8-23-2004  222.01
                    1286.01—
04-O-28  8-23-2004  1286.14,
                    1286.99
                    1240.07,
04-O-43  8-30-2004  1244.14,
                    1246.14,
                    1246.15
04-O-51  10-4-2004  436.01
04-O-50  10-18-2004 220.20,
                    220.31
04-O-57  12-20-2004 1264.03
04-O-55  3-7-2005   476.01,
                    476.03
05-O-10  3-21-2005  1286.09
05-O-11  3-21-2005  1286.11
05-O-27  7-11-2005  TSO Table I
05-O-26  7-11-2005  1285.01—
                    1285.11
05-O-36  8-22-2005  1066.01
05-O-55  12-5-2005  885.01—
                    885.16
                    880.01—
05-O-56  12-5-2005  880.04,
                    880.99
05-O-63  12-5-2005  1240.07,
                    1246.10
06-O-12  3-20-2006  1292.09
06-O-51  10-2-2006  1066.01
06-O-49  10-16-2006 1292.07
07-O-3   1-17-2007  TSO Table A
07-O-16  7-16-2007  1299.01—
                    1299.05
07-O-40  11-19-2007 TSO Table I
07-O-54  12-3-2007  872.01
08-O-8   2-20-2008  1462.15
08-O-11  4-21-2008  440.11
08-O-15  7-7-2008   220.05
08-O-16  6-16-2008  1610.01
08-O-34  10-6-2008  1422.01—
                    1422.03
08-O-35  10-6-2008  1424.01—
                    1424.03
08-O-37  12-1-2008  1264.01—
                    1264.11
09-O-5   5-18-2009  1288.01—
                    1288.15
09-O-37  9-21-2009  1290.01—
                    1290.06
09-O-42  9-9-2009   TSO Table A
09-O-50  10-19-2009 660.15
09-O-55  12-21-2009 1446.01—
                    1446.06
10-O-1   2-1-2010   1244.02
10-O-4   2-17-2010  1042.07
                    1263.01—
                    1263.05,
                    1268.01—
                    1268.17,
                    1270.01—
                    1270.10,
                    1273.01—
10-O-35  7-12-2010  1273.12,
                    1275.01—
                    1275.15,
                    1277.01—
                    1277.12,
                    1279.01—
                    1279.12,
                    TSO Table I
10-O-56  11-3-2010  236.08
10-O-57  10-18-2010 TSO Table I
10-O-59  12-20-2010 1246.10
                    1260.01—
                    1260.04,
                    1261.01—
                    1261.10,
                    1262.01—
11-O-1   2-23-2011  1262.08,
                    1262.99,
                    1284.01—
                    1284.04,
                    1296.01—
                    1296.05,
                    1296.99
                    1043.01—
11-O-2   2-23-2011  1043.10,
                    1043.99
11-O-10  3-21-2011  236.09
11-O-13  4-18-2011  1286.08
                    1246.07,
                    1262.03,
                    1268.04,
                    1285.06,
11-O-38  7-11-2011  1286.09,
                    1286.11,
                    1288.09,
                    1288.12,
                    1290.02
11-O-60  12-19-2011 204.02
12-O-37  7-2-2012   204.02
12-O-38  7-9-2012   TSO Table A
12-O-44  9-17-2012  1270.06
12-O-45  9-17-2012  1268.03
12-O-56  12-17-2012 1226.01
12-O-57  12-17-2012 204.02
12-O-70  1-24-2013  1042.08
13-O-7   3-4-2013   1422.01,
                    1422.02
13-O-8   3-4-2013   1424.01,
                    1424.02
13-O-37  7-24-2013  236.02
13-O-46  9-16-2013  1292.05
13-O-50  9-16-2013  1456.04,
                    1456.99
13-O-51  9-16-2013  1462.23,
                    1462.99
13-O-56  11-6-2013  1456.02
                    1240.07,
                    1242.06,
                    1244.035,
                    1244.04,
                    1244.10,
13-O-59  12-16-2013 1244.14,
                    1246.01 -
                    1246.06,
                    1246.10,
                    1246.11,
                    1246.14
                    1261.02,
                    1261.07,
13-O-60  12-16-2013 1261.08,
                    1268.07,
                    1268.15
14-O-28  6-2-2014   206.01
14-O-45  7-28-2014  236.10
14-O-56  11-5-2014  TSO Table A
14-O-58  11-17-2014 1262.04
14-O-59  11-17-2014 1268.07
14-O-69  1-5-2015   1450.01
14-O-70  1-5-2015   1228.01
15-O-5   1-5-2015   TSO Table A
15-O-6   2-18-2015  236.11
15-O-14  5-4-2015   1610.14
15-O-21  5-18-2015  1262.03
                    1062.01,
15-O-22  5-18-2015  1062.02,
                    1062.99
15-O-23  5-4-2015   TSO Table A
                    883.01 -
15-O-60  11-16-2015 883.26,
                    883.99
16-O-6   2-1-2016   266.01
                    1464.01 -
                    1464.15,
                    1464.99,
16-O-39  10-17-2016 1466.01 -
                    1466.18,
                    1466.99,
                    Ch. 1466, Appendix A,
                    Ch. 1466, Appendix B
16-O-42  11-21-2016 624.17,
                    624.18
16-O-49  12-19-2016 204.02
16-O-60  5-3-2017   618.01 -
                    618.27
                    208.02,
                    236.07,
                    440.01,
                    452.05,
                    630.02,
                    672.05,
                    802.02,
                    824.05,
                    826.02,
                    834.04,
                    836.01,
                    870.06,
                    1022.02,
                    1024.01,
                    1026.02,
                    1028.02,
                    1040.06,
                    1040.08,
17-O-20  7-3-2017   1042.03,
                    1062.02,
                    1064.03,
                    1064.05,
                    1240.06,
                    1242.05,
                    1262.08,
                    1264.11,
                    1268.04,
                    1292.04,
                    1292.05,
                    1294.10,
                    1442.12,
                    1446.03,
                    1448.02,
                    1448.03,
                    1452.05,
                    1460.06,
                    1464.12,
                    1610.13
17-O-34  10-16-2017 TSO Table A
17-O-35  11-20-2017 1248.01 -
                    1248.16
17-O-36  7-9-2018   1268.04
17-O-38  11-8-2017  TSO Table A
17-O-57  12-18-2017 1292.01 -
                    1292.09
18-O-16  4-2-2018   TSO Table A
18-O-18  8-20-2018  236.12
                   
 
