PREAMBLE
A RESOLUTION OF THE TOWNSHIP OF MILAN, ERIE COUNTY, OHIO,
ENACTED IN ACCORDANCE WITH A COMPREHENSIVE PLAN AND THE
PROVISIONS OF CHAPTER 519, OHIO REVISED CODE, DIVIDING THE
UNINCORPORATED PORTION OF THE TOWNSHIP INTO ZONES AND
DISTRICTS, ENCOURAGING, REGULATING AND RESTRICTING THEREIN THE
LOCATION, CONSTRUCTION, RECONSTRUCTION, ALTERATION AND USE OF
STRUCTURES AND LAND; PROMOTING THE ORDERLY DEVELOPMENT OF
RESIDENTIAL, BUSINESS, INDUSTRIAL, RECREATIONAL AND PUBLIC
AREAS; PROVIDING FOR ADEQUATE LIGHT, AIR AND CONVENIENCE OF
ACCESS TO PROPERTY BY REGULATING THE USE OF LAND AND BUILDINGS
AND THE BULK OF STRUCTURES IN RELATIONSHIP TO SURROUNDING
PROPERTIES; LIMITING CONGESTION IN THE PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAYS;
PROVIDING THE COMPATIBILITY OF DIFFERENT LAND USES AND THE
MOST APPROPRIATE USE OF LAND; PROVIDING FOR THE ADMINISTRATION
OF THIS RESOLUTION DEFINING THE POWERS AND DUTIES PRESCRIBING
PENALTIES FOR THE VIOLATION OF THE PROVISIONS IN THIS RESOLUTION
OR ANY AMENDMENT THERETO, ALL FOR THE PURPOSE OF PROTECTING
THE PUBLIC HEALTH, SAFETY AND MORALS, AND FOR THE REPEAL
THEREOF.
THEREFORE BE IT RESOLVED BY THE BOARD OF TOWNSHIP TRUSTEES OF
MILAN TOWNSHIP, ERIE COUNTY, STATE OF OHIO.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
This zoning resolution applies to all land and to every structure or use of any land
or structure or use of any land or structure lying within the unincorporated boundaries of
Milan Township, Erie County, Ohio, as those boundaries now exist or may hereafter be
changed except land owned by the township. Land owned by the United States of
America, the State of Ohio, Erie County, and any and all other political subdivisions,
agencies, departments, boards or commissions thereof shall be subject to this resolution
except and only to the extent expressly exempted by law.
ARTICLE 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1.0 Title
This Resolution shall be known and may be cited to as the “Zoning Resolution
of the Township of Milan”, except as referred to herein, where it shall be known as “this
Resolution”.
1.1 Interpretation
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this Resolution shall be
held to be minimum requirements, adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety,
and general welfare. Whenever the requirements of this Resolution conflict with the
requirements of any other lawfully adopted rules, regulations, ordinances, or resolutions,
the most restrictive, or that imposing the higher standards, shall govern.
1.2 Separability
Should any section or provision of this Resolution be declared by the courts to be
unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the Resolution as a
whole, or any part thereof other than the part so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid.
1.3 Repeal of Conflicting Resolutions
All Resolutions in conflict with this Zoning Resolution or inconsistent with the provisions of
this Resolution are hereby repealed to the extent necessary to give this Resolution full
force and effect.
1.4 Effective Date
This Resolution shall become effective from and after the date of its approval and
adoption, as provided by law.
1.5 Incorporation of Maps
The boundaries of districts established by this Resolution are shown on the official zoning
map which is hereby incorporated into the provisions of this resolution. The zoning map in
its entirety, including all amendments shall be as much a part of this resolution as if fully
set forth and described herein.
1.6 Incorporation and Alteration of the Official Zoning Map
The official zoning map shall be identified by the signature of the Township Trustees and
the Township Clerk and bearing the seal of the township under the following words: “This
is to certify that this is the Official Zoning Map referred to in Article 10 of Resolution
No.____ of the Township of Milan, together with the date of the adoption of this resolution.
If, in accordance with the provisions of this resolution changes are made in district
boundaries or other matter portrayed on the official zoning map, such changes shall be
entered on the official zoning map promptly after the amendment has been approved by
the Board of Trustees.
No amendment to this resolution which involves a matter portrayed on the official zoning
map shall become effective until after such changes and entry has been made on said
map.
No changes of any nature shall be made in the official zoning map or matter shown
thereon except in conformity with the procedures set forth in this resolution. Any
unauthorized change of whatever kind by any person or persons shall be considered a
violation of this resolution and punishable as provided under Article 5.
Regardless of the existence of purported copies of the official zoning map which may from
time to time be made or published, the official zoning map which shall be located in the
Office of the Zoning Inspector shall be the final authority as to the current zoning status of
the land and water areas, buildings and other structures in the planning region.
1.7 Replacement of Official Zoning Map
In the event that the official zoning map becomes damaged, destroyed, lost or difficult to
interpret because of the nature of number of changes and additions, the Board of Trustees
may by resolution adopt a new official zoning map which shall supersede the prior official
zoning map. The new official zoning map may correct drafting or other errors or omissions
in the prior official zoning map, but no such correction shall have the effect of amending
the original official zoning map or any subsequent amendment thereof. The new official
zoning map shall be identified by the signature of the Township Trustees and the
Township Clerk bearing the seal of the township under the following words: “This is to
certify that this official zoning map supersedes and replaces the official zoning map
adopted by the Township”.
All prior official zoning maps or any significant parts thereof shall be preserved, together
with all available records pertaining to their adoption or amendments.
ARTICLE 2
INTENT AND PURPOSES
2.0 Intent and Purposes
The purpose of this resolution is to promote the public health, safety and morals, comfort,
property and general welfare. This Board of Township Trustees, in accordance with a
comprehensive plan and by this resolution, hereby regulate the location, height, bulk,
number of stories and size of buildings and other structures, including tents, cabins and
trailer coaches; percentages of lot areas which may be occupied; setback building lines;
sizes of yards, courts and other open spaces; the density of population; the uses of
buildings and other structures, including tents, cabins and trailer coaches; and the uses of
land for trade, industry, residence, recreation, or other purposes in the unincorporated
territory of the Township and for such purpose hereby divides the entire unincorporated
territory of this Township into districts and
and zones as hereinafter described.
2.1 Uniformity of Regulations
All such regulations shall be uniform for each class or kind of building or other structure or
use throughout any district or zone, but the regulations in one district or zone may differ
from those in other districts or zones.
2.2 Comprehensive Plan
The comprehensive plan referred to herein means the Comprehensive Development Plan
for Erie County, Ohio or subsequent refinements of said Plan which may include greater
detailing of land use categories, development goals and policies more relevant to the
development of Milan Township.
ARTICLE 3
CONSTRUCTION OF LANGUAGE AND DEFINITIONS
3.0 Construction of Language
The following rules of construction apply to the text of this Resolution:
3.1 "Shall"
The word “shall” is always mandatory and not discretionary. The word “may” is
permissive.
3.2 Word Tense
Words used in the present tense shall include the future; and words used in the singular
number shall include the plural, and the plural the singular, unless the context clearly
indicates the contrary.
3.3 "Used For"
The phrase “used for” includes “arranged for”, “designed for”, “intended for”, “maintained
for”, or “occupied for”.
3.4 "Person"
The word “person” includes an individual, or corporation, a partnership, an incorporated
association, or any other similar entity.
3.5 "And" & "Or"
Unless the context clearly indicates the contrary, where a regulation involves two or more
items, conditions, provisions, or events connected by the conjunction “and”, “or”, “either ...
or”, the conjunction shall be interpreted as follows:
“And” indicates that all the connected items, conditions, provisions, or events shall apply.
“Or” indicates that the connected items, conditions, or provisions, or events may apply
singly or in any combination.
3.6 Definitions
For the purpose of this Resolution, certain words and terms are defined as follows:
3.7 Accessory Building
Means a building located on property under common ownership with the principal building
which is secondary in importance to the main building, including but not limited to
detached garages, storage buildings, barns, shelters and decorative structures. A
swimming pool shall be deemed an accessory building for the purpose of the Resolution.
3.8 Accessory Use
Means any activities which are incidental, subordinate and customarily carried on in
addition to the primary use of the premises. In residential districts this shall include
activities which are in the nature of a hobby or recreation and not carried on with the intent
to make a profit for the land occupant. It shall also include activities related to the
occupant’s employment off premises that are occasionally carried on in the premises.
Such activities shall not be deemed a home occupation. Accessory uses may include
satellite television reception equipment, or electricity producing windmills provided these
shall be located only in rear yard areas and shall meet the minimum rear and side yard
setback requirements for the district in which they are located. (See also Temporary
Use of a Building.)
Accessory uses shall also include:
1) Residential accommodations for servants, caretakers or night watchmen
must be located in the primary residence in any use district.
2) Swimming pools, tennis courts and other personal recreational facilities.
3) Off-street loading and parking facilities and the storage of goods used,
produced or offered for sale which shall be accessory uses in commercial or
industrial districts only and subject to all regulations of the district where located.
4) Garage or other casual sales of personal property shall be considered
an accessory use so long as they are limited to no more than three (3) times a
year and for no longer than three (3) days each time.
5) The storage in residential districts of trailers, recreational vehicles or
boats owned by residents of the premises only. Storage of any such items for
nonresidents of the premises whether or not a fee is charged, shall not be
deemed an accessory use. All such items shall be stored no closer to the street
than the minimum front yard setback requirements of the district.
6) Accessory use shall include the keeping of dogs, cats or other domesticated pets,
but shall not allow the keeping of exotic or dangerous animals such as, but not
limited to, lions, tigers, leopards, panthers, cougars, bobcats, bears, wolves,
foxes, apes, gorillas, poisonous or constrictor snakes, crocodiles or alligators.
7) The sale of fruits and vegetables grown on the premises where sold.
8) Any activity which is the subject of any advertising including, but not limited to
newspaper, magazine, radio, television, poster, billboard, handbills, direct mailing,
yearbooks, telephone directory or other publications shall not be deemed to be an
accessory use in a residential district.
3.9 Adult Cabaret
Means a nightclub, bar, restaurant or similar establishment in which persons appear in a
state of nudity that is without opaque covering on the human genitalia, buttocks, pubic
area or the female breast nipple area, while performing their duties.
3.10 Agriculture
The use of land for farming, dairying, pasturage, apiculture, horticulture, floriculture,
viticulture and animal and poultry husbandry on a minimum of five (5) acres.
3.11 Airport
Any runway, land area or other facility designed or used either publicly or privately by any
person for the landing and taking-off or aircraft, including all necessary taxiways, aircraft
storage and tie down areas, hangars and other necessary buildings and open spaces.
3.12 Alley
See Street, Road, and Thoroughfare.
3.13 Alterations
Any structural change, additions, or modification in construction or type of occupancy, or
any change in the structural members of a building, such as bearing walls, columns,
beams, or girders, the consummated act of which may be referred to herein as “altered” or
“reconstructed”.
3.14 Apartment
A room or suite of rooms in a multi-family building arranged and intended as a place of
residence for a single-family or a group of individuals living together as a single
housekeeping unit as herein defined.
3.15 Apartment Hotel
A building designed for or containing both dwelling units and individual guest rooms or
suites of rooms, which building may include any accessory uses such as a cigar store,
coffee shop, etc. permitted in a hotel as defined herein, provided such uses are accessible
only from the lobby.
3.16 Attic
The space between the ceiling beams of the top story and the roof rafters.
3.17 Attic, Habitable
A habitable attic is an attic which has a stairway as a means of access and egress and in
which the ceiling area at a height of 7 1/3 feet (2235 mm) above the attic floor is not more
than one-third the area of the floor next below.
3.18 Auto Fuel Stations
The business of selling motor vehicle fuels and motor oil and related products, but which
does not provide any auto repair services. This business may exist on the same premises
and under common management with a grocery or other retail business.
3.19 Auto Repair Station
A place where the following services may be carried out: general repair, engine rebuilding,
rebuilding or reconditioning of motor vehicles, collision service, such as body, frame, or
fender straightening and repair, overall painting and undercoating of automobiles and/or
the sale of engine fuels.
3.20 Auto Service Stations
A building or buildings, structures and adjoining space used for the dispensing of motor
fuel from fixed equipment into the fuel supply tanks of motor vehicles and for the sale and
dispensing into or installation on motor vehicles of lubricants and operating supplies and
where automotive tires, batteries, parts and accessories may be sold, installed, serviced
and adjusted and where, if within a building such services as tire repairing, battery
recharging, cleaning and polishing of vehicles, chassis lubrication, motor repairs and
adjustments may be rendered.
3.21 Basement
The portion of a building which is partially or wholly below grade, but so located that the
vertical distance from the average grade to the floor is greater than the vertical distance
from the average grade to the ceiling. A basement shall not be counted as a story, except
as provided in the definition of story.
3.22 Bed and Breakfast Homestay
A private owner-occupied residence with one (1) to three (3) guest rooms. The Bed and
Breakfast Homestay must be a subordinate and incidental to the main residential use of
the building.
3.23 Bed and Breakfast Inn
Operated primarily as a business, even though the owner may live on the premises. The
Inn may offer a maximum of twelve (12) guest rooms and may include a restaurant open
to the general public, as well as to overnight guests.
3.24 Block
The property abutting one side of a street and lying between the two (2) nearest
intersecting streets (crossing or terminating), between the nearest such street and railroad
right-of-way.
3.25 Boarding House (Rooming House)
A building other than a hotel, where for compensation and by prearrangement for definite
periods, lodging, or lodging and meals are provided for three (3) or more persons, but not
exceeding ten (10) sleeping rooms. A rooming house or a furnished rooming house shall
be deemed a boarding house for the purpose of the Resolution.
3.26 Buffering
A landscaped area and/or fencing intended to separate and partially obstruct the view of
two adjacent land uses or properties from one another. (See also Screening.)
3.27 Building
Any structure, whether temporary or permanent, having a roof and used or built for the
shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels, or property of any kind. A building shall
not include such structures as billboards, fences, radio towers, tents or structures with
interior areas not normally accessible for human use such as tanks, smokestacks, grain
elevators, coal bunkers, oil cracking towers, or similar structures.
3.28 Building - Accessory
See Accessory Building.
See Accessory Use.
3.29 Building, Height
Is the vertical distance from the grade to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof or to
the deck line of a mansard roof or to the height of the highest gable of a pitched hip roof.
Where the building is located on sloping terrain, the height may be measured from the
average ground level of the grade at the front building wall, unless otherwise defined
herein.
3.30 Building Line
A line parallel to the front lot line at the minimum required front setback line.
3.31 Building, Principal
A building in which is conducted the main or principal use of the lot on which said building
is situated.
3.32 Business, Convenience
Commercial establishments which cater to and can be located in close proximity to
residential districts without creating undue vehicular congestion, excessive noise, or other
objectionable influences. To prevent congestion, convenience uses include, but need not
be limited to drugstores, beauty salons, barber shops, carry-outs, dry cleaning and laundry
pick-up facilities, and grocery stores, if less than 10,000 square feet in floor area. Uses in
this classification tend to serve a day-to-day need in the neighborhood.
3.33 Business, General
Commercial uses which generally require locations on or near major thoroughfares and/or
their intersections and which tend, in addition to serving day-to-day needs of the
community, also supply the more durable and permanent needs of the whole community.
General business uses include, but need not be limited to such activities as supermarkets;
stores that sell hardware, apparel, footwear, appliances and furniture; department stores;
and discount stores.
3.34 Business, Highway
Commercial uses which generally require locations on or near major thoroughfares and/or
their intersections which tend to serve the motoring public. Highway business uses
include, but need not be limited to such activities as filling stations; truck and auto sales
and service; restaurants and motels; and commercial recreation.
3.35 Business, Office Type
Quasi-commercial uses which may often be transitional between retail business and/or
manufacturing and residential uses. Office business generally accommodates such
occupations as administrative, executive, professional, accounting, writing, clerical,
stenographic and drafting. Institutional offices of a charitable, philanthropic, or religious or
educational nature are also included in this classification.
3.36 Business Services
Any profit-making activity which renders services primarily to other commercial or industrial
enterprises, or which services and repairs appliances and machines used in homes and
businesses.
3.37 Business, Wholesale
Business establishments that generally sell commodities in large quantities or by the piece
to retailers, jobbers, other wholesale establishments, or manufacturing establishments.
These commodities are basically for further resale, for use in the fabrication of a product,
or for use by a business service.
3.38 Cemetery
Land used or intended to be used for the burial of the human or animal dead and
dedicated for cemetery purposes, including crematories, mausoleums and mortuaries if
operated in connection with and within the boundaries of such cemetery.
3.39 Channel
A natural or artificial watercourse of perceptible extent, with bed and banks to confine and
conduct continuously or periodically flowing water.
3.40 Child Day-Care
Administering to the needs of infants, toddlers, pre-school children and school children
outside of school hours by persons other than their parents or guardians, custodians, or
relatives by blood, marriage, or adoption for any part of the twenty-four hour day in a place
or residence other than the child’s own home. The following are child day-care facilities.
3.41 Child Day-Care Center
Any place in which child day-care is provided, with or without compensation, for 13 or
more children at any one time, or any place that is not the permanent residence of the
licensee or administrator in which child day-care is provided, with or without compensation
for 7 to 12 children at any one time. In counting children for the purpose of this definition,
any children under 6 years of age who are related to a licensee, administrator, or
employee and who are on the premises shall be counted.
3.42 Type A Family Day-Care Home
A permanent residence of the administrator in which child day-care is provided for 4 to 12
children at any one time, if 4 or more children are under 2 years of age. In counting
children under 6 years of age who are related to a licensee, administrator, or employee
and who are on the premises of the “Type A family day-care home” does not include a
residence in which the needs of children are administered to, if all such children are
siblings of the same immediate family and the residence is their home.
3.43 Type B Family Day-Care Home
A permanent residence of the provider in which child day-care services are provided for 1
to 6 children at one time and in which no more than 3 children may be under 2 years of
age at any one time. In counting children for the purposes of this definition, any children
under 6 years of age who are related to the provider and are on the premises of the Type
B home shall be counted. The term “Type B family day-care home" does not include a
residence in which the needs of children are administered to, if all such children are
siblings of the same immediate family and the residence is their home.
3.44 Clinic
A place used for the care, diagnosis and treatment of sick, ailing, infirm, or injured persons
and those who are in need of medical and/or surgical attention, but who are not provided
with board or room or kept overnight on the premises.
3.45 Club
A building or portion thereof or premises owned or operated by a person for a social,
literary, political, educational or recreational purpose primarily for the exclusive use of
members and their guest.
3.46 Commercial Entertainment Facilities
Any profit-making activity which is generally related to the entertainment field, such as
motion picture theaters, carnivals, night-clubs, cocktail lounges and similar entertainment
activities.
3.47 Comprehensive Development Plan
A plan or any portion thereof, adopted by the planning commission and the legislative
authority of the Township of Milan showing the general location and extent of present and
proposed physical facilities including housing, industrial and commercial uses, major
thoroughfares, parks, schools, and other community facilities. This plan established the
goals, objectives and policies of the community.
3.48 Conditional Use
A use permitted within a district other than a principally permitted use, requiring a
conditional use permit and approval of the Board of Zoning Appeals.
3.49 Conditional Use Permit
A permit issued by the Zoning Administrator upon approval by the Board of Zoning
Appeals to allow a use other than a principally permitted use to be established within the
district.
3.50 Condominium
A building or group of buildings in which units are individually owned and common areas
and facilities are owned on a proportional, undivided basis by all of the owners.
3.51 Corner Lot
See Lot Types.
3.52 Cul-de-sac
See Street, Road, Thoroughfare.
3.53 Dead-end Street
See Street, Road, Thoroughfare.
3.54 Density
A unit of measurement expressing the number of dwelling units per acre of land.
1) Gross Density - The number of dwelling units per acre of the total land to be
developed.
2) Net Density - The number of dwelling units per acre of land when the acreage
involved includes only the land devoted to residential uses.
3.55 Density Bonus
An increase in the number of allowable dwelling units per acre granted for some specific
reason, such as the provision of lower-income housing, open space, or other such
amenities, as provided for in the zoning regulations.
3.56 Development
Is the construction of a new building or other structure on a zoning lot, the relocation
of an existing building on another zoning lot, or the use of open land for a new use.
3.57 District
A part, zone, or geographic area within the township within which certain zoning or
development regulations apply.
3.58 Drive-In
Is a business establishment so developed that its retail or service character is dependent
on providing a driveway approach or parking spaces for motor vehicles so as to serve
patrons while in the motor vehicle, or within a building or structure on the same premises
and devoted to the same purposes as the drive-in service.
3.59 Driveway
The construction of any residential driveway shall be in accordance with the requirements
and provisions of this Resolution; and construction shall not start until plans are submitted
to and approved by the zoning inspector. The driveway should be a minimum of one (1)
foot from the lot line and designed so no drain water from such driveway drains onto the
adjoining private property.
3.60 Dwelling
Any building or structure (except a house trailer or mobile home as defined by Ohio
Revised Code 4501.01) which is wholly or partly used or intended to be used for living or
sleeping by one or more human occupants.
3.61 Dwelling, Converted
Is a dwelling altered to change the number of dwelling units.
3.62 Dwelling Unit
Space, within a dwelling, comprising living, dining, sleeping room or rooms, storage
closets, as well as space and equipment for cooking, bathing and toilet facilities, all used
by only one family and its household employees.
3.63 Dwelling, Industrialized Unit
An assembly of materials or products comprised all or part of a total structure which, when
constructed, is self-sufficient or substantially self-sufficient and when installed, constitutes
a dwelling unit, except for necessary preparation for is placement including a modular or
sectional unit, but not a mobile home. (See also Factory-Built Housing.)
3.64 Dwelling, Mobile Home
Is a detached dwelling unit designed to be transported on highways, and when arriving at
the site for placement involving only minor and incidental unpacking, assembling and
connection operations; but which involves no substantial reconstruction which would
render the unit unfit as a conveyance on the highway. The unit shall be considered as
real property if such reconstruction is undertaken. No seasonal or temporary dwelling
defined as a recreational vehicle in Definition Number 103 Recreational Vehicle of these
definitions shall be considered as a mobile home for any purpose under this Zoning
Resolution. (See also Factory-Built Housing.) (See also Mobile Home.)
3.65 Dwelling, Single Family
A dwelling consisting of a single dwelling unit only, separated from other dwelling units by
open space.
3.66 Dwelling, Two-Family
A dwelling consisting of two dwelling units which may be either attached side by side or
one above another.
3.67 Dwelling, Multi-Family
A dwelling consisting of three or more dwelling units including condominiums with varying
arrangements of entrances and party walls. Multi-family housing may include public
housing and industrialized units.
3.68 Dwellings, Unconventional
Shall include coaches, bus bodies, vans, streetcars and railroad cars used for dwellings.
3.69 Easements
Authorization by a property owner for the use by another and for a specified purpose, of
any designated part of his property.
3.70 Elderly Household
Not more than three (3) persons, related or unrelated, who occupy a single dwelling unit,
of whom one person is elderly.
3.71 Elderly Housing Facility
A building or buildings containing twelve (12) or more dwelling units where occupancy is
restricted to elderly persons or households. Such facilities may include emergency first
aid care, day care, therapy, personal care, nursing facilities, recreational facilities and
provide for independent or semi-independent living. For the purposes of this definition,
“elderly housing facility” shall not include convalescent homes, nursing homes, group
residential facilities, or homes for the aged.
3.72 Elderly Person
Any person who is 62 years of age or older, or any person under 62 years of age who is
handicapped such that his physical impairments are of a long-term duration and impede
his ability to live independently without a suitable housing environment.
3.73 Erected
For the purpose of this Resolution shall include built, constructed, altered, reconstructed,
moved upon, or any physical operation on the premises, including excavation, fill and/or
drainage of a building site.
3.74 Essential Services
The erection, construction, alteration, or maintenance, by public utilities or municipal or
other governmental agencies, of underground gas, electrical, stream or water
transmission, or distribution systems, collection, communication, supply or disposal
systems or sites, including poles, wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes, traffic signals,
hydrants, or other similar equipment and accessories in connection therewith which are
reasonably necessary for the furnishing of adequate service by such public utilities or
municipal or other governmental agencies or for the public health or safety or general
welfare, but not including buildings
.
3.75 Excavation
Is any breaking of ground, except common household gardening and ground care or tilling
for agricultural purposes.
3.76 Factory-Built Housing
Factory-built Housing means a factory-built structure designed for long-term residential
use, the components of which are essentially constructed or assembled prior to its delivery
to and installation upon a site. For the purposes of this Resolution, “factory-built housing”
shall include the following:
1) Manufactured Home . A factory-built structure that is manufactured or
constructed under the authority of 42 United States Code Section 540 and is to be
used as a place for human habitation, but which is not constructed or equipped
with a permanent hitch or other device allowing it to be moved other than for the
purpose of moving to a permanent site and with wheels or axles. Manufactured
homes must comply with the following minimum standards:
A) Exterior Siding . Exterior siding shall be made of non-reflective and
non-metallic materials unless approved otherwise. Acceptable siding
materials include: vinyl, wood, stucco, brick, stone or other masonry
materials, or any combination of these materials.
B) Color/Texture . Color and texture of exterior materials shall be
compatible with the adjacent single-family structures.
C) Roof Structure . Except for authorized deck areas, all roof
structures shall be sloped and provide an eave projection of no less than
six inches and no greater than 30 inches.
D) Roofing Material . All roofing material shall consist of the following
categories: wood, shingle, concrete tile or any other material that the
Township deems. Metallic roofing surfaces shall not be permitted on the
residential structure or on any garage or carport.
E) Minimum Floor Area . The minimum floor area for every dwelling
located on a lot in an "R" Zoning District, which is not a part of a mobile
home subdivision, shall be 1,000 square feet, excluding the area of
garage or carport.
F) Minimum Width . The minimum width of a dwelling located on a
lot outside of a mobile home subdivision shall be 20 feet.
G) Foundations . All manufactured homes shall be placed on a
permanent foundation that meets applicable building code requirements,
such as the floor elevation of the proposed dwelling is reasonably
compatible with the floor elevations of surrounding dwelling units.
H) Manufactured homes must be approved HUD units.
2) Mobile Home . Any non-self propelled vehicle so designed, constructed,
reconstructed or added to by means of accessories in such manner as will permit
the use and occupancy thereof for human habitation, when connected to utilities,
whether resting on wheels, jacks, blocks, or other temporary foundation and used
or so construed as to permit its being used as a gross weight of four thousand,
five hundred (4,500) pounds and an overall length of thirty (30) feet and not in
compliance with the Federal Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety
Standards Act of 1974.
3.77 Family
A person living alone, or two or more persons living together as a single housekeeping
unit in a dwelling unit as distinguished from a group occupying a rooming house, motel or
hotel, dormitory, fraternity or sorority house, provided, however, that “family” shall not
include more than four persons unrelated to each other by blood, marriage or legal
adoption, except for Class I, Type B group residential facilities.
3.78 Farm
Is all the contiguous neighboring or associated land operated as a single unit on which
bona fide farming is carried on directly by the owner-operator, manager or tenant farmer,
by his own labor or with the assistance of members of his household or hired employees;
provided, however, that land to be considered a farm hereunder shall include a
contiguous parcel of five (5) acres or more in area, provided further, farms may be
considered as including establishments operated as bona fide greenhouses, nurseries,
orchards, chicken hatcheries, poultry farms, and apiaries; but not including establishments
keeping fur-bearing animals, riding or boarding stables and commercial dog kennels.
3.79 Farm Vacation Enterprises (Profit or Non-Profit)
Farms adapted for use as vacation farms, picnicking and sport areas, fishing waters,
camping, scenery and nature recreation areas; hunting preserves and watershed projects.
3.80 Feedlot
A relatively small, confined land area for fattening or temporarily holding livestock for
shipment.
3.81 Filling
Is the depositing or dumping of any matter onto, or into, the ground, except common
household gardening and ground care.
3.82 Fireworks
Fireworks shall mean and include any combustible or explosive composition, or any
substance or combination of substances or article prepared for the purpose of producing a
visible or audible effect by combustion, explosion, deflagration, or detonation, and shall
include blank cartridges, toy pistols, toy cannons, toy canes, or toy guns in which
explosives are used, the type of balloon which requires fire underneath to propel the
same, firecrackers, torpedoes, skyrockets, roman candles, dago bombs, sparklers, or
other devices of like construction and any devices containing any explosive or flammable
compound, or any tablet or other device containing any explosive substance, except that
the term “fireworks” shall not include auto flares, paper caps containing not in excess of an
average of twenty-five hundredths (.25) of a grain of explosive content per cap, and toy
pistols, toy canes, toy guns, or other devices for the use of such caps.
3.83 Flood Plain
That land, including the flood fringe and the floodway, subject to inundation by the regional
flood.
3.84 Flood, Regional
Large floods which have previously occurred or which may be expected to occur on a
particular stream because of like physical characteristics. The regional flood generally has
an average frequency of the one hundred (100) year recurrence interval flood.
3.85 Floodway
That portion of the flood plain, including the channel, which is reasonably required to
convey the regional flood waters. Floods of less frequent recurrence are usually
contained completely within the floodway.
3.86 Floodway Fringe
That portion of the flood plain, excluding the floodway, where development may be
allowed under certain restrictions.
3.87 Floor Area, Gross
Is the sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors of a building or buildings,
measured from the exterior walls or from the centerline of walls separating two buildings.
In particular, floor area includes: basement space, elevator shafts or stairwells, floor
space for mechanical equipment, penthouses, balconies, mezzanines, enclosed porches,
accessory buildings, attic floor space (whether or not floor has been laid) providing
structural head room of seven (7) feet six (6) inches. Floor area shall not include:
elevator or stair bulkheads, accessory water tanks or cooling towers, uncovered steps,
attic floor space less than seven (7) feet six (6) inches high. Covered but unenclosed
portion of porches, terraces or breezeways shall have their floor area computed at fifty
(50) percent of the actual floor area. Uncovered and unenclosed porches, terraces or
breezeways shall have their floor areas computed at twenty-five (25) percent of the actual
floor area.
3.88 Floor Area, Residential
For the purpose of computing the minimum allowable floor area in a residential dwelling
unit, the sum of the horizontal areas of each story of the building shall be measured
from the exterior faces of the exterior wall. The floor area measurement is exclusive of
areas of basements, unfinished attics, attached garages, breezeways and enclosed or
unenclosed porches.
3.89 Floor Area, Useable (For the Purposes of Computing Parking)
Is that area used for or intended to be used for the sale of merchandise or services,
or for use to serve patrons, clients or customers. Such floor area which is used or
intended to be used principally for the storage or processing of merchandise, such as
hallways, stairways and elevator shafts, or for utilities or sanitary facilities, shall be
excluded from this computation of Useable Floor Area. Measurement of useable floor
area shall be the sum of the horizontal areas of the several floors of the building,
measured from the interior faces of the exterior walls.
3.90 Food Processing
The preparation, storage of processing of food products. Examples of these activities
include bakeries, dairies, canneries and other similar businesses.
3.91 Foundation
The lowest division of a wall for a structure intended for permanent use; that part of a
wall on which the building is erected; usually that part of a building which is below the
surface of the ground and on which the superstructure rests.
3.92 Foundation Wall
Any bearing wall below the first tier of floor joists of beams; that portion of an enclosing
all below the first-floor construction
3.93 Garage Commercial Parking
Is a building or other structure which is used for the storage or parking of motor vehicles.
A commercial parking garage shall not include a building or other facility used for
automotive repair, or primarily for the storage of commercial vehicles or for dead storage
of vehicles.
3.94 Garages, Private
Is an accessory building or portion of a main building designed or used solely for the
storage of motor-driven vehicles, boats and similar vehicles owned and used by the
occupants of the building to which it is accessory.
3.95 Grade (Ground Level)
Is the average of the finished ground level at the center of all walls of a building. In case
walls are parallel to and within five (5) feet of a sidewalk, the above ground level shall be
measured at the sidewalk, unless otherwise defined herein.
3.96 Greenbelt
A planting strip.
3.97 Group Residential Facility
A group residential facility is a community residential facility, licensed and/or approved
and regulated by the State of Ohio, which provides rehabilitative or habilitative services.
There are two classes of group residential facilities:
3.98 Class I
Any state, federal or locally approved dwelling or place used as a foster home for children
or adults (not including nursing homes) or as a home for the care or rehabilitation of
dependent or pre-delinquent children, for the physically handicapped or disabled, or for
those with mental illness or developmental disabilities. A Class I Type A group residential
facility contains six (6) or more residents, exclusive of staff. A Class I Type B group
residential facility contains five (5) or fewer residents, exclusive of staff.
3.99 Class II
Any state, federal or locally approved dwelling or place used as a home for juvenile
offenders; a halfway house providing residential care of rehabilitation for adult offenders in
lieu of institutional sentencing; a halfway house providing residence for persons leaving
correctional institutions; and residential rehabilitation centers for alcohol and drug abusers,
provided that detoxification is expressly prohibited on such premises. A Class II Type A
group residential facility contains six (6) or more residents, exclusive of staff. A Class II
Type B group residential facility contains five (5) or fewer residents, exclusive of staff.
3.100 Historic Area
A district or zone designated by a local authority, state or federal government within which
the buildings, structures, appurtenances and places are of basis and vital importance
because of their association with history, or because of their unique architectural style and
scale, including materials, proportion, form and architectural detail, or because of their
being a part of or related to a square, park or area the design or general arrangement of
which should be preserved and/or developed according to a fixed plan based on cultural,
historical or architectural motives or purposes.
3.101 Home Occupation
Is that occupation conducted in a dwelling unit, provided that:
1) No person other than members of the family residing on the premises shall be
engaged in such occupation.
2) The use of the dwelling unit for the home occupation shall be clearly incidental
and subordinate to its use for residential purposes by it occupants, and not more
than twenty-five percent (25%) of the residential floor area of the dwelling unit
shall be used in the conduct of the home occupation.
3) There shall be no change in the outside appearance of the building or premises,
or other visible evidence of the conduct of such home occupation other than one
(1) sign, not exceeding two (2) square feet in area per side, which may be located
not less than twenty-five (25) feet from the road right-of-way and not less than ten
(10) feet from the side lot line of the property, and shall not be illuminated except
by continuous indirect white lighting.
4) If the home is in any residential zoning district, no traffic shall be generated by
such home occupation in greater volumes than would normally be expected in a
residential neighborhood and any need for parking generated by the conduct of
such home occupation shall be met off the street and other than in a required front
yard.
5) No equipment or process shall be used in such home occupation which creates
noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors, or electrical interference detectable to the
normal senses off the lot, if the occupation is conducted in a single-family
residence. In the case of electrical interference, no equipment or process shall be
used which creates visual or audible interference in any radio or television
receivers off the premises, or causes fluctuations in line voltage off the premises.
3.102 Homes For The Aging
Means a home that provides both of the following:
1) Accommodations, supervision and personal care services or accommodations,
supervision, personal care services, administration of medication and
supervision of special diets for three or more unrelated individuals who are
dependent on the services of others by reason of age and physical or mental
impairment;
2) Personal care services and skilled nursing care for three or more unrelated
individuals. The part or unit of the home for the aging that provides personal
care services, that may administer medication and that may supervise special
diets is licensed as a rest home. The part or unit that provides other skilled
nursing care is licensed as a nursing home.
3.103 Hospital
Is any institution providing physical or mental health services, in-patient or overnight
accommodations, and medical or surgical care of the sick or injured. Hospital includes
sanitariums and sanitoriums.
3.104 Hotel
Is a building or part of a building with a common entrance or entrances, in which the
dwelling units or rooming units are used primarily for transient occupancy, and in which
one or more of the following services are offered:
1) Maid service.
2) Telephone, secretarial or desk service.
3) Furnishing of linen.
4) Bellboy service
A hotel may include a restaurant or cocktail lounge, public banquet halls, ballrooms or
meeting rooms.
3.105 Institution
Building and/or land designed to aid individuals in need of mental, therapeutic,
rehabilitative counseling or other correctional services.
3.106 Junk
Any worn, used or discarded item or material including but not limited to scrap metals,
rags, cans, bottles, glass, new or used building materials, packaging, motor vehicles or
parts thereof, machinery or parts thereof, paper, tires, batteries, or any other waste
product that may or may not be used again.
3.107 Junk Buildings, Junk Shops, Junk Yards
Any land, property, structure, building or combination of the same, on which junk is stored
or processed.
3.108 Junk Motor Vehicle, Collector's Vehicle
Junk motor vehicle means any motor vehicle that is left uncovered in the open on private
property for more than seventy-two (72) hours with or without the permission of the person
having the right to the possession of the property, except if the person is operating a
licensed junk yard or scrap metal processing facility and meets all of the following
requirements:
1) Extensively damaged;
2) Apparently inoperable and not able to be "started up" and moved under its
own power; and
3) Not licensed with current license plates.
3.109 Junk Yard
Is a place, structure or lot where junk, waste, discarded, salvaged, or similar materials,
such as old iron or other metal, wood, liquid waste, timber, glass, paper, rags, cloth,
bagging, cordage, barrels, containers, etc., are bought, sold, exchanged, baled,
disassembled, or handled, including auto wrecking yards, used lumber yards, house
wrecking yards, and places or yards for use of salvaged house wrecking and structural
steel materials and equipment and excluding pawn shops, and establishments for the
sale, purchase, or storage of used cars, salvaged machinery, used furniture, radios,
stoves, refrigerators, or similar household goods, and the processing of used, discarded,
or salvaged materials as part of manufacturing operations. (See also Salvage Yard.)
3.110 Kennel
Any lot or premises on which four (4) or more domesticated animals more than four (4)
months of age are housed, groomed, bred, boarded, trained, sold and/or which offers
provisions for minor medical treatment.
3.111 Landfill
An area in which garbage, refuse, debris, recyclable material, non-hazardous
commercial and/or industrial waste and building material are deposited for disposition.
3.112 Loading Space, Off-Street
A space logically and conveniently located for bulk pickups and deliveries, scaled to
delivery vehicles expected to be used and accessible to such vehicles when required
off-street parking spaces are filled. Required off-street loading space is not to be
included as off-street parking space in computation of required off-street parking spaces.
All off-street loading spaces shall be located totally outside of any street or alley
right-of-way.
3.113 Location Map
See Vicinity Map.
3.114 Lot
For the purposes of this Resolution, a lot is a parcel of land of sufficient size to meet
minimum zoning requirements for use, coverage and area and to provide such yards and
other open spaces as are herein required. Such lot shall have frontage on a dedicated
and accepted public street, or on an approved private street and may consist of:
1) A single lot of record;
2) A portion of a lot of record;
3) A combination of complete lots of record, of complete lots or record and
portions of lots of record, or of portions of lots of record.
3.115 Lot Area
Is the total horizontal area within the lot lines of the lot.
3.116 Lot Coverage
The ratio of enclosed ground floor area of all buildings and accessory structures on a lot to
the horizontally projected area of the lot, expressed as a percentage.
3.117 Lot Lines
Are the lines abounding a lot as defined herein:
1) Lot Line, Front: Is the distance as measured between the two foremost points of
the side lot lines.
2) Lot Line, Rear: Is a lot line which is opposite the front lot line. In the case of a
corner lot, the rear lot line may be opposite either front lot line, but there shall only
be one rear lot line. In the case of a lot pointed at the rear, the rear lot line shall
be an imaginary line parallel to the front lot line, not less than twenty (20) feet
long, lying farthest from the front lot line and wholly within the lot.
3) Lot Line, Side: Is any lot line not a front line or not a rear line.
3.118 Lot Measurements
A lot shall be measured as follows:
1) Depth : The distance between the midpoints of straight lines connecting
the foremost points of the side lot lines in front and the rearmost points of the side
lot lines in the rear.
2) Width : The distance between straight lines connecting front and rear lot
lines at each side of the lot, measured at the building setback line.
3) Frontage: The lot width at the front of the lot as defined by deed description.
3.119 Lot of Record
A lot which is part of a subdivision recorded in the Office of the County Recorder, or a lot
or parcel described by metes and bounds, the description of which has been so recorded.
3.120 Lot Orientation
The front of a lot shall be construed to be the portion nearest the street. For the purpose
of determining yard requirements on corner lots and through lots, one side of a lot
adjacent to streets shall be considered frontage, and yards shall be provided as indicated
under "yard" in this section. (See also Yard.)
3.121 Lot Types
Terminology used in this Resolution with reference to corner lots, interior lots and through
lots is as follows:
1) Corner Lot : A lot located at the intersection of two or more streets. A lot
abutting on a curved street or streets shall be considered a corner lot if
straight lines drawn from the foremost point of the lot meet at an interior angle
of less than one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees.
2) Interior Lot : A lot with only one frontage on a street.
3) Through Lot : A lot other than a corner lot with frontage on more than one street.
Through lots abutting tow streets may be referred to as double frontage lots.
4) Reversed Frontage Lot : A lot on which frontage is at right angles to the
general pattern in the area. A reversed frontage lot may also be a corner lot.
3.121 Lot, Zoning *** RELOOK ***
3.122 Main Building
Is a building in which is conducted the principal use of the lot upon which it is situated.
3.123 Main Use
Is the principal use to which the premises are devoted and the principal purpose for which
the premises exist.
3.124 Maintenance and Storage Facility
Land, building and structures devoted primarily to the maintenance and storage of
construction equipment and material.
3.125 Major Thoroughfare
Is an arterial street which is intended to serve as a large volume trafficway for both the
immediate area and the region beyond.
3.126 Manufactured Home
See Factory Built Housing, No. 1 Manufactured Home.
3.127 Manufactured Home Park
Any lot upon which manufactured homes are located within a PUD District for residential
use, including any roadway, building, structures, vehicle, or enclosure used or intended to
be used as a part of the facilities of such park.
3.128 Manufacturing, Heavy
Manufacturing processing, assembling, storing, testing and similar industrial uses which
are generally major operations and extensive in character; require large sites, open
storage and service areas, extensive services and facilities, ready access to regional
transportation; and normally generate some nuisances such as smoke, noise, vibration,
dust, glare, air pollution and water pollution, but not beyond the district boundary.
3.129 Manufacturing, Light
Manufacturing or other industrial uses which are usually controlled operations; relatively
clean, quiet and free of objectionable or hazardous elements such as smoke, noise, odor,
or dust; operating and storing within enclosed structures; and generating little industrial
traffic and no nuisances.
3.130 Manufacturing, Extractive
Any mining, quarrying, excavating, processing, storing, separating, cleaning, or marketing
of any mineral natural resource.
3.131 Marina
Is an establishment located on the shore of a body of water, where a boathouse, boat
storage yard, pier and dock or jetty facilities are available for any type of marine pleasure
craft and may include a gasoline pump or other facility for the fueling of marine craft and a
building or structure for the supply of marine craft accessories or refreshments.
3.132 Massage Establishment
Any fixed place of business where a person offers massages either in exchange for anything
of value or in connection with the provision of another legitimate service but
excluding the practice of any limited branch of medicine or surgery in accordance with
sections 4731.15 and 4731.16 of the Revised Code or the practice of providing
therapeutic massage by a licensed physician, a licensed chiropractor, a licensed
podiatrist, a licensed nurse or any other licensed health professional or duly licensed
barbers and cosmetologists practicing their professions pursuant to Chapters 4709 and
4713, Ohio Revised Code and the Ohio Administrative Code in massaging the neck, face,
scalp and hair of the customer.
3.133 Master Plan
Is the Comprehensive Development Plan approved by the Erie Regional Planning
Commission and including graphic and written materials indicating the general location for
streets, parks, schools, public buildings and other physical development of the County and
includes any unit or part of such plan, and any amendment to such plan or parts thereof.
3.134 Mezzanine
Is an intermediate floor in any story occupying not to exceed two-thirds (2/3) of the floor
area of such story.
3.135 Mini-Warehouse
A structure containing separate storage spaces usually containing about thirty (30) to four
hundred (400) square feet each with direct access to paved driveways and leased or
rented on an individual basis.
3.136 Mobile Home
See Factory-Built Housing, 2) Mobile Home.
3.137 Mobile Home Park
Any site, or tract of land under single ownership within a PUD District, upon which mobile
homes used for habitation are parked, including any roadway, building, structure, vehicle,
or enclosure or intended for use as a part of the facilities of such park.
3.138 Motel
Is a building or group of buildings on a lot, consisting of individual sleeping quarters,
detached or connected, not more than fifty (50) percent of which have kitchen facilities for
rental to transients. It may include all facilities specified under the definition of Hotel.
3.139 Nonconformities
Lots, uses of land, structures and uses of structures and land in combination lawfully
existing at time of enactment of this Resolution or its amendments which do not conform
to the regulations of the zone in which they are situated and are therefore incompatible.
3.140 Nuisance Factor
Is an offensive, annoying, unpleasant or obnoxious thing or practice, a cause or source of
annoyance, especially a continuing or repeating invasion of any physical characteristics of
activity or use across a property line which can be perceived by or affects a human being,
or the generation of an excessive or concentrated movement of people or things, such as:
(a) noise, (b) dust, (c) smoke, (d odor, (e) glare, (f) fumes, (g) flashes, (h )vibration, (i)
shock waves, (j) heat, (k) electronic or atomic radiation, (l) objectionable effluent, (m)
noise of congregation of people, particularly at night, (n) passing traffic, (o) invasion of
street frontage by traffic generated from an adjacent land use which lacks sufficient
parking and circulation facilities
3.141 Nursery, Plant Material
Is a space, building or structure, or combination thereof, for the storage, cultivating or
transplanting of live trees, shrubs or plants offered for retail sale on the premises including
products used for gardening or landscaping.
3.142 Nursing Home
A home used for the reception and care of individuals who by reason of illness or physical
or mental impairment require skilled nursing care and of individuals who require personal
car services, but not skilled nursing care. A nursing home is licensed to provide personal
car services and skilled nursing care.
3.143 Open Spaces
An area substantially open to the sky which may be on the same lot with a building. The
area may include, along with the natural environmental features, water areas, swimming
pools and tennis courts, any other recreational facilities that the planning commission
deems permissible. Streets, parking areas, structures for habitation and the like shall not
be included.
3.144 Overlay District
A district described by the zoning map within which, through superimposition of a special
designation, further regulations and requirements apply in addition to those of the
underlying districts to which such designation is added.
3.145 Parking Space, Off-Street
For the purpose of this resolution, an off-street parking space shall consist of an area
adequate for parking an automobile with room for opening doors on both sides, together
with properly related access to a public street or alley and maneuvering room, but shall be
located totally outside of any street or alley right-of-way.
3.146 Performance Bond, Surety Bond, or Financial Guarantee
An agreement by a subdivider or developer with the County for the amount of the
estimated construction cost guaranteeing the completion of physical improvements
according to plans and specifications within the time prescribed by the subdivider’s
agreement.
3.147 Planned Unit Development
An area of land in which a variety of housing types and subordinated commercial and
industrial facilities are accommodated in a preplanned environment under more flexible
standards, such as lot sizes and setbacks, than those restrictions that would normally
apply under these regulations. The procedure for approval of such development contains
requirements in addition to those of the standard subdivision, such as building design
principles and landscaping plans.
3.148 Public Service Facility
The erection, construction, alteration, operation or maintenance of buildings, power plants,
or substations, water treatment plants or pumping stations, sewage disposal or pumping
plants and other similar public service structures by a public utility, by a railroad, whether
publicly or privately owned, or by a municipal or other governmental agency, including the
furnishing of electrical, gas, rail transport, communications, public water and sewage
services.
3.149 Public Uses
Public parks, schools, administrative and cultural buildings and structures, not including
public land or buildings devoted solely to the storage and maintenance of equipment and
materials and public service facilities.
3.150 Public Utility
Is a person, firm, corporation, municipal department, board of commission duly authorized
to furnish and furnishing under Federal, State or Municipal regulations to the public:
water, gas, steam, electricity, telephone, telegraph, waste disposal, communication and
transportation.
3.151 Public Way
An alley, avenue, boulevard, bridge, channel, ditch, easement, expressway, freeway,
highway, land, parkway right-of-way, road sidewalk, street, subway, tunnel viaduct, walk,
bicycle path; or other ways in which the general pubic or a public entity have a right or
which are dedicated, whether improved or not.
3.152 Quasi-Public Use
Churches, Sunday schools, parochial schools, colleges, hospitals and other facilities of an
educational, religious, charitable, philanthropic, or non-profit nature.
3.153 Recreation Camp
An area of land on which two or more travel trailers, campers, tents or other similar
temporary recreational structures are regularly accommodated with or without charge,
including any building, structure or fixture of equipment that is used or intended to be used
in connection with providing such accommodations.
3.154 Recreation Facilities
Public or private facilities that may be classified as either "extensive" or "intensive"
depending upon the scope of services offered and the extent of use. Extensive facilities
generally require and utilize considerable areas of land and include, but need not be
limited to hunting, fishing and riding clubs, golf courses and parks. Intensive facilities
generally require less land (used more intensely) and include, but need not be limited to,
miniature golf courses, amusement parks, stadiums and bowling alleys.
3.155 Recreational Vehicle
A vehicular portable structure that is designed and constructed to be used as a temporary
dwelling for travel, recreational, and vacation uses and is classed as follows:
1) Travel Trailer: A non-self-propelled recreational vehicle that does not exceed an
overall length of thirty-five (35) feet, exclusive of bumper and tongue or coupling,
and includes a tent-type fold-out camping trailer as defined below (at F.).
2) Motor Home: A self-propelled recreational vehicle that is constructed with
permanently installed facilities for cold storage, cooking and consuming of food,
and for sleeping.
3) Park Trailer: A vehicle commonly known as a park model recreational vehicle,
which meets the American National Standard Institute A119.5 (1988) for park
trailers, is built on a single chassis, has a gross trailer area of four hundred (400)
square feet or less when set up, is designed for seasonal or temporary living
quarters, and may be connected to utilities necessary for operation of installed
features and appliances.
4) Truck Camper: A non-self-propelled recreational vehicle that does not have
wheels for road use and is designed to be placed upon and attached to a motor
vehicle. Truck camper does not include truck covers that consist of walls and
a roof, but do not have floors and facilities that enable them to be used as a
dwelling.
5) Fifth Wheel Trailer: A vehicle that is of such size and weight as to be movable
without a special highway permit, that has a gross trailer area of four hundred
(400) square feet or less, that is constructed with a raised forward section that
allows a bi-level floor plan, and that is designed to be towed by a vehicle equipped
with a fifth-wheel hitch ordinarily installed in the bed of a truck.
6) Tent-Type Fold Out Camping Trailer: Means any vehicle intended to be used,
when stationary, as a temporary shelter with living and sleeping facilities, and
which is subject to the following properties and limitations:
A) A minimum of twenty-five (25) percent of the fold out portion of the top
and sidewalls combined must be constructed of canvas, vinyl or other
fabric, and form an integral part of the shelter.
B) When folded, the unit must not exceed:
(1) Fifteen (15) feet in length, exclusive of bumper and tongue;
(2) Sixty (60) inches in height from the point of contact with the
ground;
(3) Eight (8) feet in width;
(4) One ton gross weight at time of sale.
3.156 Rest Homes
Means a home that provides either of the following:
1) Accommodations for seventeen (17 )or more unrelated individuals and
supervision and personal care services for three (3) or more of those individuals
who are dependent on the services of others by reason of age or physical or
mental impairment or, in the case of a rest home component of a home for the
aging, accommodations to three (3) or more individuals and supervision and
personal care for at least three (3) of those individuals;
2) Accommodations for three (3) or more unrelated individuals, supervision and
personal care services for at least three (3) of those individuals who are
dependent on the services of others by reason of age or physical or mental
impairment and supervision of special diets or the administration of medication
to at least one (1) of those individuals.
3.157 Research Activities
Research, development and testing related to such fields as chemical, pharmaceutical,
medical, electrical, transportation and engineering. All research, testing and development
shall be carried on within entirely enclosed buildings, and no noise, smoke, glare, vibration
or odor shall be detected outside of said building.
3.158 Right-of-Way
A strip of land taken or dedicated for use as a public way. In addition to the roadway, it
normally incorporates the curbs, lawn strips, sidewalks, lighting and drainage facilities and
may include special features (required by the topography or treatment) such as grade
separation, landscaped areas, viaducts and bridges.
3.159 Roadside Stand
A structure designed or used for the display or sale of locally grown agricultural and
related products in accordance with O.R.C. 519.21, Section C.
3.160 Salvage Yard
An establishment licensed by the State of Ohio to permit the processing of wrecked
and/or abandoned motorized vehicles for parts and materials which may be sold both
as retail and wholesale.
3.161 Satellite Signal Receiver
“Dish-type Satellite Signal-Receiving Antennas”, “earth stations” or “ground stations”,
whether functioning as part of a basic service system, direct broadcast satellite system, or
multi-point distribution service system, shall mean one, or a combination of two or more of
the following:
1) A signal-receiving device such as a dish antenna whose purpose is to receive
communications or signals from earth-orbiting satellites or similar sources.
2) A low-noise amplifier (LNA) whose purpose is to boost, magnify, store, transfer
or transmit signals.
3) A coaxial cable whose purpose is to convey or transmit signals to a receiver.
3.162 Seasonal Residence ** relook **
3.162 Seat
For purposes of determining the number of off-street parking spaces or certain uses, the
number of seats is the number of seating units installed or indicated, or each twenty-four
(24) lineal inches of benches, pews, or space for loose chairs.
3.163 Setback Line
1) Rear and Side Setback Line. A line established by the zoning resolution,
generally parallel with and measured from the lot line, defining the limits of a yard
in which no building, other than accessory building or structure may be located
above ground, except as may be provided in said code. (See also Yard.)
2) Front Setback Line. A line established by the zoning resolution, generally
parallel with and measured from the road right-of-way, defining the limits of a
yard in which no building may be located above ground, except as may be
provided in said code. (See also Yard.)
3.164 Sewers, Central or Group
An approved sewage disposal system which provides a collection network and disposal
system and central sewage treatment facility for a single development, community or
region.
3.165 Sewers, Sanitary
A septic tank or similar installation on an individual lot subject to the approval of health
and sanitation officials having jurisdiction.
3.166 Sewers, Storm Water
A system for the collection of storm water and rain water including watershed drainage
ditches along the road.
3.167 Sidewalk
That portion of the road right-of-way outside the roadway, which is improved for the use of
pedestrian traffic.
3.168 Sign
Is a name, identification, description, display or illustration which is affixed to, painted,
or represented, directly or indirectly, upon a building, structure, parcel or lot, and which
direct attention to an object, product, place, activity, person, institution, organization, or
business on that property. A sign shall include the following types:
1) Ground Sign. Is a sign which is supported by one or more poles, uprights, or
braces in or upon the ground, which are not part of a building, and the bottom
edge of the sign face of which is less than eight and one-half (8 1/2) feet above
the grade.
2) Projecting Sign. Is a sign other than a wall sign suspended from or supported by
a building or structure and projecting therefrom, including a marquee.
3) Roof Sign. Is a sign which is erected, constructed and maintained above the
roof of a building.
4) Wall Sign. Is a sign which is attached directly to the wall of a building and which
extends not more than twelve (12) inches from the wall, including window signs.
5) Pole Sign. Is a sign that is mounted on a free-standing pole or other support
so that the bottom edge of the sign face is eight and one half (8 1/2) feet or more
above grade.
** INSERT MILAN TWP. DIAGRAM **
3.169 Stable, Private
Is the stable for the keeping of horses for the use of the residents of the principal use and
shall not include the keeping of horses for others, or for commercial boarding, and with a
capacity for not more than two (2) horses, provided, however, that the capacity of a private
stable may be increased if the lot whereon such stable is located contains at least one (1)
acre of land for each horse stabled thereon.
3.170 Stable, Public
Is a stable other than a private stable, with a capacity for more than two (2) horses, and
carried on within a tract of land of not less than ten (10) acres.
3.171 Story
That part of a building between the surface of a floor and the ceiling immediately above.
(See also Basement.)
3.172 Story, Half
Is an uppermost story lying under a sloping roof having an area of at least two hundred
(200) square feet with a clear height of seven (7) feet six (6) inches. For the purpose of
this Resolution, the usable floor area is only that area having at least seven (7) feet six (6)
inches clear height between floor and ceiling.
3.173 Street, Thoroughfare or Road
The full width between property line bounding every public way of whatever nature, with a
part thereof to be used for vehicular traffic and designated as follows:
1) Alley : A minor street used primarily for vehicular service access to the back or
side of properties abutting on another street.
2) Arterial Street : A general term denoting a highway primarily for through traffic,
carrying heavy loads and large volume of traffic, usually on a continuous route.
3) Collector Streets : A thoroughfare, whether within a residential, industrial,
commercial, or other type of development, which primarily carries traffic from local
streets to arterial streets, including the principal entrance and circulation routes
within residential subdivisions.
4) Cul-de-sac : A local street having only one (1) outlet for vehicular traffic and the
other end terminating in a vehicular turnaround.
5) Dead-end Street : A street having only one (1) outlet for vehicular traffic and
may be extended or continued in the future.
6) Local Street : A street primarily for providing access to residential or other
abutting property.
7) Loop Street : A type of local street, each end of which terminates at an
intersection with the same arterial or collector street and whose principal radius
points of the one hundred and eighty (180) degree system of turns are not more
than one thousand (1,000) feet from said arterial or collector street, nor normally
more than six hundred (600) feet from each other.
8) Marginal Access Street : A local or collector street, parallel and adjacent
to an arterial or collector street, providing access to abutting properties and
protection from arterial or collector streets (also called frontage streets).
3.174 Structure
Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires location on the ground, or
attachment to something having a fixed location on the ground. Among other things,
structures include buildings, walls, fences and billboards.
3.175 Subdivision
1) The division of any parcel of land shown as a unit or as contiguous units on the
last preceding tax roll, into two or more parcels, sites or lots, any one of which is
less than five acres for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of transfer of
ownership, provided, however, that the division or partition of land into parcels of
more than five (5) acres not involving any new streets or easements of access
and the sale or exchange of parcels between adjoining lot owners, where such
sale or exchange does not create additional building sites, shall be exempted; or
2) The improvement of one or more parcels of land for residential, commercial or
industrial structures or groups of structures involving the division or allocation of
land for the opening, widening or extension of any street or streets, except private
streets serving industrial structures; the division or allocation of land as open
spaces for common use by owners, occupants or lease holders or as easements
for the extension and maintenance of public sewer, water, storm drainage or other
public facilities.
3.176 Supply Yards
A commercial establishment storing and offering for sale building supplies, steel supplies,
coal, heavy equipment, feed and grain and similar goods.
3.177 Swimming Pool
A pool, pond, lake or open tank containing at least 1.5 feet of water at any point and which
is maintained by the owner or manager.
1) Private: Exclusively used without paying an additional charge for admission
by the residents, development, or a community, the guest of a club member,
or the patrons of a motel or hotel; an accessory use.
2) Community: Operated with a charge for admission; a primary use.
3.178 Temporary Use of a Building
Is a use of a building of construction of the main building or use or for special events.
3.179 Through Lot
See Lot Types.
3.177 Transportation, Director of
The Director of the Ohio Department of Transportation.
3.178 Use
The specific purposes for which land or a building is designated, arranged, intended, or for
which it is or may be occupied or maintained.
3.179 Variances and Exceptions
1) Exception. Is a conditional use permitted only after review of an application by the
Board of Appeals, such review being necessary because the provisions of this
Resolution covering conditions, precedent or subsequent, are not precise enough
for all applications without interpretation, and such review is required by the
Resolution.
2. Variance. Is a modification of the literal provisions of the Zoning Resolution
granted when strict enforcement of the Zoning Resolution would cause undue
hardship owing to circumstances unique to the individual property on which the
variance is granted.
The crucial points of variance are undue hardship and unique circumstances applying to
to the property. A variance is not justified unless both elements are present in the case.
The "Exception" differs from the "Variance" in several respects. An exception does not
require "undue hardship" in order to be allowable. The exceptions that are found in this
Resolution appear as "special approval" or review by the Planning Commission,
Legislative Body or Board of Appeals. These land uses could not be conveniently
allocated to one zone or another, or the effects of such uses could not be definitely
foreseen as of a given time. The general characteristics of these uses include one or
more of the following:
1) They require large areas.
2) They are infrequent.
3) They sometimes create an unusual amount of traffic.
4) They are sometimes obnoxious or hazardous.
5) They are required for public safety and convenience.
3.180 Veterinary Animal Hospital or Clinic
A place used for the care, grooming, diagnosis and treatment of sick, ailing, infirm or
injured animals and those who are in need of medical or surgical attention and may
include overnight accommodations on the premises for the treatment, observation and/or
recuperation. It may also include boarding that is incidental to the primary activity.
3.181 Vicinity Map
A drawing located on the plat which sets forth by dimensions or other means, the
relationship of the proposed subdivision to other nearby developments or landmarks and
community facilities and devices within the general area in order to better locate and orient
the area in question.
3.182 Walkway
A public way, four (4) feet or more in width for pedestrian use only, whether along the side
of a road or not.
3.183 Yard
A required open space other than a court unoccupied and unobstructed by any structure
or portion of a structure from three (3) feet above the general ground level of the graded
lot upward; provided, accessories, ornaments and furniture may be permitted in any yard,
subject to height limitations and requirements limiting obstruction of visibility.
1) Yard, Front : A yard extending between side lot lines across the front of
a lot and from the front lot line to the front of the principal building.
2) Yard, Rear : A yard extending between side lot lines across the rear of a
lot and from the rear lot line to the rear of the principal building.
3) Yard, Side : A yard extending from the principal building to the side lot
line on both sides of the principal building between the lines establishing the front
and rear yards.
3.184 Zoning Inspector
The Zoning Inspector is the person designated by the Board of Township Trustees to
administer and enforce zoning regulations and related resolution.
3.185 Zoning Variances and Exceptions
See Variances and Exceptions.
3.186 Zoning Permit
A document issued by the Zoning Inspector authorizing the use of lots, structures, uses of
land and structures and the characteristics of the uses.
ARTICLE 4
ADMINISTRATION
4.0 Purpose
This Article sets forth the powers and duties of the Zoning Commission, the Board of
Zoning Appeals, the Board of Township Trustees and the Zoning Inspector with respect to
the administration of the provisions of this Resolution.
4.1 General Provisions
The formulation, administration and enforcement of this Zoning Resolution is hereby
vested in the following offices and bodies within the Township:
1) Zoning Inspector
2) Zoning Commission
3) Board of Zoning Appeals
4) Township Trustees
5) County Prosecutor or Special Counsel hired pursuant to R.C. 519.24.
4.2 Zoning Inspector
A Zoning Inspector designated by the Board of Township Trustees shall administer and
enforce this Resolution. He or she may be provided with the assistance of such other
persons as the Board of Township Trustees may direct.
The Zoning Inspector shall not refuse to issue a permit when conditions imposed by this
Resolution are complied with by the applicant despite violations of contracts, such as
covenants or private agreements which may occur upon granting of said permit.
4.3 Responsibilities of Zoning Inspector
For the purpose of this Resolution, the Zoning Inspector shall have the following duties:
1) Enforce the provisions of this Resolution and application of its provisions.
2) Respond to questions concerning applications for amendments to the
Zoning Resolution text and the Official Zoning District Map.
3) Issue zoning permits as provided by this Resolution and keep a record of same
with a notation of any special conditions involved.
4) Act on all applications upon which he or she is authorized to act by the
provisions of this Resolution within the specified time or notify the applicant in
writing of his or her refusal or disapproval of such application and the reasons
therefore. Failure to notify the applicant in case of such refusal or disapproval
within the specified time shall entitle the applicant to submit his request to the
Board of Zoning Appeals.
5) Conduct inspections of buildings and uses of land to determine compliance with
this Resolution and in the case of any violation, to notify in writing the person(s)
responsible, specifying the nature of the violation and ordering corrective action.
6) Maintain in current status the Official Zoning District Map which shall be
kept on permanent display in the Township offices.
7) Maintain permanent and current records required by this Resolution,
including but not limited to zoning permits, zoning certificates, inspection
documents and records of all variances, amendments and special uses.
8) Make such records available for the use of the Township Trustees, the
Zoning Commission, the Board of Zoning Appeals and the public.
9) Review and approve plot plans pursuant to this Resolution.
10) Determine the existence of any violations of this Resolution and cause such
notifications, revocation notices, stop work orders to be issued or initiate such
other administrative or legal action as needed to address such violations.
A) A notice of zoning violation when the Zoning Inspector determines
that there is a violation of any provision of this Resolution;
B) A stop work order when the Zoning Inspector determines that work is
being done contrary to this Resolution;
C) An order to cease and desist when the Zoning Inspector determines that
land is being used contrary to this Resolution;
D) A revocation notice revoking a permit issued contrary to this Resolution
based upon mistake, false or incomplete information, or
misrepresentation; or any combination of the above.
11) Prepare and submit monthly reports to the Township Trustees and Zoning
Commission on the administration of this Resolution, setting forth such information
as may be of interest and value in advancing and furthering the purpose of this
Resolution. Such report shall include recommendations concerning the schedule
of fees.
4.4 Township Zoning Commission
The Board of Township Trustees of any Township proceeding under Sections 519.01 to
519.99, inclusive, of the Revised Code, shall create and establish a Township Zoning
Commission. The Commission shall be composed of five (5) members, who reside in the
unincorporated area of the Township, to be appointed by the Board, and the terms of the
members shall be of such length and so arranged that the term of one member will expire
each year. The Board of Township Trustees may appoint two (2) alternate members to
the Township Zoning Commission for terms to be determined by the Board of Township
Trustees. An alternate member shall take the place of an absent regular member at any
meeting of the Township Zoning Commission, according to procedures prescribed by
Resolution of the Board of Township Trustees. An alternate member shall meet the same
appointment criteria as a regular member. When attending a meeting on behalf of an
absent member, the alternate member may vote on any matter on which the absent
member is authorized to vote.
Where there is a County or Regional Planning Commission, the Board may appoint
qualified members of such Commission to serve on the township zoning commission.
Each member shall serve until his successor is appointed and qualified. Members of the
Zoning Commission shall be removable for non-performance of duty, misconduct in office,
or other cause by the Board, upon written charges being filed with the board, after a public
hearing has been held regarding such charges and after a copy of the charges has been
served upon the member so charged at least ten days prior to the hearing, either
personally by certified mail or by leaving such copy at his usual place of residence. The
member shall be given an opportunity to be heard and answer such charges. Vacancies
shall be filled by the Board and shall be for the unexpired term.
4.5 Recommendations of Township Zoning Commission; Organization, Powers
and Compensation of Commission
The Township Zoning Commission shall submit a plan, including both text and maps
representing the recommendations of the Zoning Commission for the carrying out by the
Board of Township Trustees of the powers, purposes and provisions set forth in Sections
519.01 to 519.99, inclusive, of the Revised Code, including additions to territory in which a
Township Zoning Resolution is in effect.
The Zoning Commission shall organize, adopt rules for the transaction of its business and
keep a record of its actions and determinations. Members of the Zoning Commission may
be allowed their expenses, or such compensation, or both, as the Board may approve and
provide. No Township Trustee shall be employed by the Zoning Commission of his or her
Township.
The Zoning Commission shall make use of such information and counsel as is available
from appropriate public officials, departments and agencies and such officials,
departments and agencies having information, maps and data pertinent to Township
Zoning shall make them available for the use of the Zoning Commission.
In any county where there is a Regional Planning Commission, the Zoning Board of
Commission may request such Planning Commission to prepare or make available to the
Zoning Commission a zoning plan, including text and maps for the unincorporated area of
the Township or any portion of the same.
4.6 Amendments to Zoning Resolution; Procedure; Referendum
Amendments to the Zoning Resolution may be initiated by motion of the Township Zoning
Commission, by the passage of a Resolution therefore by the Board of Township
Trustees, or by the filing of an application therefore by one or more of the owners or
lessees of property within the area proposed to be changed or affected by the proposed
amendment with the Township Zoning Commission. The Board of Township Trustees
may require that the owner or lessees of property filing an application to amend the zoning
resolution pay a fee therefore to defray the cost of advertising, mailing, filing with the
County Recorder and other expenses. If the Township Trustees require such a fee, it
shall be required generally, for each application. The Board of Township Trustees shall
upon the passage of such resolution certify it to the Township Zoning Commission.
Upon the adoption of such motion, or the certification of such resolution or the filing of
such application, the Township Zoning Commission shall set a date for a public hearing
thereon, which date shall not be less than twenty (20) nor more than forty (40) days from
the date of the certification of such resolution or the date of adoption of such motion or the
date of the filing of such application. Notice of such hearing shall be given by the
Township Zoning Commission by one (1) publication in one (1) or more newspapers of
general circulation in the Township at least ten (10) days before the date of such hearing.
If the proposed amendment intends to rezone or redistrict ten (10) or fewer parcels of
land, as listed on the County Auditor’s current tax list, written notice of the hearing shall be
mailed by the Zoning Commission, by first class mail, at least ten (10)days before the date
of the public hearing to all owners of property within and contiguous to and directly across
the street from such area proposed to be rezoned or redistricted to the addresses of such
owners appearing on the County Auditor’s current tax list. The failure of delivery of such
notice shall not invalidate any such amendment.
If the proposed amendment intends to rezone or redistrict ten (10) or fewer parcels of land
as listed on the County Auditor’s current tax list, the published and mailed notices shall set
forth the time, date and place of the public hearing and shall include all of the following:
1) The name of the zoning commission that will be conducting the public hearing;
2) A statement indicating that the motion, resolution or application is an
amendment to the zoning resolution;
3) A list of the addresses of all properties to be rezoned or redistricted by the
proposed amendment and of the names of owners of these properties, as they
appear on the County Auditor’s current tax list;
4) The present zoning classification of property named in the proposed
amendment and the proposed zoning classification of such property;
5) The time and place where the motion, resolution or application proposing to
amend the zoning resolution will be available for examination for a period of at
least ten (10) days prior to the public hearing;
6) The name of the person responsible for giving notice of the public hearing by
publication or by mail, or by both publication and mail;
7) Any other information requested by the Zoning Commission;
8) A statement that after the conclusion of such hearing the matter will be
submitted to the Board of Township Trustees for its action.
If the proposed amendment alters the text of the zoning resolution, or rezones or
redistricts more than ten (10) parcels of land, as listed on the County Auditor’s current tax
list, the published notice shall set forth the time, date and place of the public hearing and
shall include all of the following:
1) The name of the Zoning Commission that will be conducting the public hearing on
the proposed amendment;
2) A statement indicating that the motion, application or resolution is an amendment
to the zoning resolution;
3) The time and place where the text and map(s) of the proposed amendment will be
available for examination for a period of at least ten days prior to the public
hearing;
4) The name of the person responsible for giving notice of the public hearing by
publication;
5) A statement that after the conclusion of such hearing the matter will be submitted
to the Board of Township Trustees for its action;
6) Any other information requested by the Zoning Commission.
Within five (5) days after the adoption of such motion or the certification of such resolution
or the filing of such application the Township Zoning Commission shall transmit a copy
thereof together with text and map pertaining thereto to the Regional Planning
Commission.
The Regional Planning Commission shall recommend the approval or denial of the
proposed amendment or the approval of some modification thereof and shall submit such
recommendation to the Township Zoning Commission. Such recommendation shall be
considered at the public hearing held by the Township Zoning Commission on such
proposed amendment.
The Township Zoning Commission shall, within thirty (30) days after such hearing,
recommend the approval or denial of the proposed amendment, or the approval of some
modification thereof and submit such recommendation together with such application or
resolution, the text and map pertaining thereto and the recommendation of the Regional
Planning Commission thereon to the Board of Township Trustees.
The Board of Township Trustees shall, upon receipt of such recommendation, set a time
for a public hearing on such proposed amendment, which date shall not be more than
thirty (30) days from the date of the receipt of such recommendation from the Township
Zoning Commission. Notice of such public hearing shall be given by the Board by one (1)
publication in one (1) or more newspapers of general circulation in the township, at least
ten (10) days before the date of such hearing.
If the proposed amendment intends to rezone or redistrict ten (10) or fewer parcels of land
as listed on the County Auditor’s current tax list, the published notice shall set forth the
time, date and place of the public hearing and shall include all of the following:
1) The name of the board that will be conducting the public hearing;
2) A statement indicating that the motion, application or resolution is an
amendment to the Zoning Resolution;
3) A list of the addresses of all properties to be rezoned or redistricted by the
proposed amendment and of the names of owners of these properties, as they
appear on the County Auditor’s current tax list;
4) The present zoning classification of property named in the proposed
amendment and the proposed zoning classification of such property;
5) The time and place where the motion, application or resolution proposing to
amend the zoning resolution will be available for examination for a period of at
least ten (10) days prior to the public hearing;
6) The name of the person responsible for giving notice of the public hearing by
publication or by mail, or by both publication and mail;
7) Any other information requested by the Board.
If the proposed amendment alters the text of the zoning resolution, or rezones or
redistricts more than ten (10) parcels of land as listed on the County Auditor’s current tax
list, the published notice shall set forth the time, date and place of the public hearing and
shall include all of the following:
1) The name of the board that will be conducting the public hearing on the
proposed amendment;
2) A statement indicating that the motion, application or resolution is an
amendment to the zoning resolution;
3) The time and place where the text and maps of the proposed amendment will be
available for examination for a period of at least ten (10) days prior to the public
hearing;
4) The name of the person responsible for giving notice of the public hearing by
publication;
5) Any other information requested by the board.
Within twenty (20) days after such public hearing, the board shall either adopt or deny the
recommendations of the Zoning Commission or adopt some modification thereof. In the
event the board denies or modifies the recommendation of the Township Zoning
Commission, the unanimous vote of the board shall be required.
Such amendment adopted by the board shall become effective in thirty (30) days after the
date of such adoption unless within thirty (30) days after the adoption of the amendment
there is presented to the Board of Township Trustees a petition, signed by a number of
registered electors residing in the unincorporated area of the township or part thereof
included in the zoning plan equal to not less than eight percent (8%) of the total vote cast
for all candidates for governor in such area at the last preceding general election at which
a governor was elected, requesting the Board of Township Trustees to submit the
amendment to the electors of such area for approval or rejection at a special election to be
held on the day of the next primary or general election. Each part of this petition shall
contain the number and the full and correct title, if any, of the zoning amendment,
resolution, motion or application furnishing the name by which the amendment is known
and a brief summary of its contents. In addition to meeting the requirements of this
section, each petition shall be governed by the rules specified in Section 3501.38 of the
Revised Code.
The petition shall be filed, accompanied by an appropriate map of the area affected by the
zoning proposal, with the Board of Township Trustees, which shall then transmit the
petition within two weeks of its receipt to the Board of Elections, which shall determine the
sufficiency and validity of the petition. The petition shall be certified to the Board of
Elections not less than seventy-five (75) days prior to the election at which the question is
to be voted upon.
No amendment for which such referendum vote has been requested shall be put into
effect unless a majority of the vote cast on the issue is in favor of the amendment. Upon
certification by the Board of Elections that the amendment has been approved by the
voters it shall take immediate effect.
4.7 Ratification of Amendments to Township Zoning Plan
All amendments or supplements to a township zoning plan adopted by a Board of
Township Trustees prior to the effective date of this act, except those amendments or
supplements which a court of competent jurisdiction has declared unlawful or
unreasonable or which are the subject of an action now pending in such a court, are
hereby ratified and shall be valid amendments or supplements to such zoning plan
regardless of the procedure followed with respect to such amendments or supplements
prior to their adoption by a Board of Township Trustees, except that no right of appeal on
the issue of the unlawful or unreasonable character of an amendment or supplement shall
be lost by the provisions of this section.
4.8 Township Board of Zoning Appeals; Compensation and Expenses
In any township which adopts zoning regulations, the Board of Township Trustees shall
appoint a Township Board of Zoning Appeals of five (5) members who shall be residents
of the unincorporated territory in the township included in the area zoned. The terms of all
members shall be of such length and so arranged that the term of one member will expire
each year. Each member shall serve until his or her successor is appointed and qualified.
Members shall be removable for the same causes and in the same manner as provided by
Section 519.04 of the Revised Code. Vacancies shall be filled by the Board of Township
Trustees and shall be for the unexpired term. The members may be allowed their
expenses, or such compensation, or both, as the Board of Township Trustees may
approve and provide.
The Board of Zoning Appeals may within the limits of the moneys appropriated by the
Board of Township Trustees for the purpose, employ such executives, professional,
technical and other assistants as it deems necessary.
4.9 Powers of Township Board of Zoning Appeals
The Township Board of Zoning Appeals may:
1) Hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order,
requirement, decision or determination made by an administrative official in the
Revised Code or of any resolution adopted pursuant thereto;
2) Authorize, upon appeal, in specific causes, such variance from the terms of the
zoning resolution as will not be contrary to the public interest, where, owing to
special conditions, a literal enforcement of the resolution will result in unnecessary
hardship and so that the spirit of the resolution shall be observed and substantial
justice done;
3) Grant conditional zoning certificates for the use of land, buildings or other
structures if such certificates for specific uses are provided for in the zoning
resolution;
4) Revoke an authorized variance or conditional zoning certificate, if any condition of
the variance or certificate is violated.
The Board shall notify the holder of the variance or certificate by certified mail of its intent
to revoke the variance or certificate under division (d) of this section and of his or her right
to a hearing before the Board, within thirty (30) days of the mailing of the notice, if he or
she so requests. If the holder requests a hearing, the Board shall set a time and place for
the hearing, and notify the holder. At the hearing, the holder may appear in person, by his
or her attorney or other representative, or he or she may present his/her position in writing.
He/She may present evidence and examine witnesses appearing for or against him/her. If
no hearing is requested, the Board may revoke the variance or certificate without a
hearing. The authority to revoke a variance or certificate is in addition to any other means
of zoning enforcement provided by law.
In exercising the above-mentioned powers, such Board may, in conformity with such
sections, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision
or determination appealed from and may make such order, requirement, decision or
determination as ought to be made and to that end has all powers of the officer from
whom the appeal is taken.
4.10 Rules, Organization and Meeting of Zoning Appeals Board
The Township Board of Zoning Appeals shall organize and adopt rules in accordance with
the zoning resolution. Meetings of the Board of Zoning Appeals shall be held at the call of
the chairman and at such other times as the board determines. The chairman, or in his
absence the acting chairman, may administer oaths and the Board of Zoning Appeals may
compel the attendance of witnesses. All meetings of the Board of Zoning Appeals shall be
open to the public. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall keep minutes of its proceedings
showing the vote of each member upon each question or, if absent or failing to vote,
indicating such fact and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all
of which shall be immediately filed in the Office of the Board of Township Trustees and be
a public record.
Appeals to the Board of Zoning Appeals may be taken by any person aggrieved or by any
officer of the township affected by any decision of the administrative officer. Such appeal
shall be taken within twenty (20) days after the decision by filing with the officer from
whom the appeal is taken and with the Board of Zoning Appeals, a notice of appeal is
taken shall forthwith transmit to the Board of Zoning Appeals all the papers constituting the
record upon which the action appealed from was taken.
The Board of Zoning Appeals shall fix a reasonable time for the public hearing of the
appeal, give at least ten (10) days notice in writing to the parties in interest, give notice of
such public hearing by one (1) publication in one (1) or more newspaper(s) or general
circulation in the county at least ten (10) days before the date of such hearing and decide
the appeal within a reasonable time after it is submitted. Upon the hearing, any person
may appeal in person or by attorney.
4.11 Duties of Zoning Inspector, Board of Zoning Appeals, Legislative Authority
and Courts on Matters of Appeal
It is the intent of this Resolution that all questions of interpretation and enforcement shall
be first presented to the Zoning Inspector and that such questions shall be presented to
the Board only on appeal from the decision of the Zoning Inspector and that recourse from
the decisions of the Board shall be to the courts as provided by law. It is further the intent
of this Resolution that the duties of the Board of Township Trustees in connection with this
Resolution shall not include hearing and deciding questions of interpretation and
enforcement that may arise. The procedure for deciding such questions shall be as stated
in this section and this Resolution. Under this Resolution, the Board of Township Trustees
shall only have the duties of considering and adopting or rejecting proposed amendments
or the repeal of this Resolution as provided by law and of establishing a schedule of fees
and charges as stated in Section 1351 of this Resolution.
Nothing in this Resolution shall be interpreted to prevent any official of the Township from
appealing a decision of the Board to the courts as provided in Chapter 2505 and 2506 of
the Ohio Revised Code. Any such appeal shall be made within ten (10) days of the
Board’s written decision.
4.12 Board of Township Trustees
The powers and duties of the Township Trustees pertaining to the Zoning Resolution are
as follows:
1) Approve the appointments of members to the Zoning Commission.
2) Approve the appointments of members to the Zoning Board of Appeals.
3) Initiate or act upon suggested amendments to the Zoning Resolution text or
Official Zoning District Map. All action upon a suggested zoning amendment shall
be undertaken at a public hearing.
4) Approve appointment of the zoning inspectors and assistants, as may be
requested.
4.13 Schedule of Fees
The Board of Township Trustees shall, by Resolution, establish a schedule of fees for
zoning permits, amendments, appeals, variances, conditional use permits, plan approvals
and other procedures and services pertaining to the administration and enforcement of
this Resolution, after considering the recommendations of the Zoning Inspector with
respect to actual administrative costs, both direct and indirect. The schedule of fees shall
be posted in the Office of the Zoning Inspector and may be altered or amended only by
the Board of Township Trustees. Until all such appropriate fees, charges and expenses
have been paid in full, no action shall be taken on any application, appeal or
administrative procedure.
ARTICLE 5
ENFORCEMENT
5.0 General
This article stipulates the procedures to be followed in obtaining permits, certificates and
other legal or administrative approvals under this Resolution.
5.1 Zoning Permits Required
No building or other structure shall be erected, moved, added to, structurally altered nor
shall any building, structure or land be established or changed in use without a permit
therefore, issued by the Zoning Inspector. Zoning permits shall be issued only in
conformity with the provisions of this Resolution unless the Zoning Inspector receives a
written order from the Board of Zoning Appeals deciding on appeal, conditional use or
variance or from the Board of Township Trustees approving a Planned Unit Development
District, as provided by this Resolution.
5.2 Contents of Application for Zoning Permit
The application for a zoning permit shall be made in writing and be signed by the owner or
applicant attesting to the truth and exactness of all information supplied on the application.
Each application shall clearly state that the permit shall expire and may be revoked if work
has not begun within one year or completed within two and one-half (2 ½) years. At a
minimum, the application shall contain the following information and be accompanied by
all required fees:
1) Name, address and phone number of applicant;
2) Erie County Tax Identification Number and legal description of the property, when
required by Zoning Inspector;
3) Existing use of land and/or structure;
4) Proposed use of land and/or structure;
5) Zoning district;
6) Plans in triplicate drawn to scale (when required by the Zoning Inspector),
showing the actual dimensions and the shape of the lot to be built upon; the exact
size and location of existing buildings on the lot, if any; and the location and
dimensions of the proposed building(s) or alteration;
7) Building heights;
8) Number of off-street parking spaces or loading berths, and their layout;
9) Location and design of access drives;
10) Number of dwelling units;
11) If applicable, application for a sign permit or a conditional, special or temporary
use permit, unless previously submitted.
5.3 Approval of Zoning Permit
Within thirty (30) days after receipt of an application, the Zoning Inspector shall either
approve or disapprove a zoning permit.
5.4 Submission to Director of Ohio Department of Transportation
Before any zoning permit is issued affecting any land within three hundred (300) feet of
the centerline of a proposed new highway or a highway for which changes are proposed
as described in the certification to local officials by the Director of the Ohio Department of
Transportation or any land within a radius of five hundred (500) feet from the point of
intersection of said centerline with any public road or highway, the Zoning Inspector shall
give notice, by registered mail, to the Director of the Ohio Department of Transportation
that he shall not issue a zoning permit for one hundred twenty (120) days from the date
the notice is received by the Director. If the Director notifies the Zoning Inspector that he
shall proceed to acquire the land needed, then the Zoning Inspector shall refuse to issue
the zoning permit. If the Director notifies the Zoning Inspector that acquisition at this time
is not in the public interest or upon the expiration of the one hundred twenty (120) day
period or of any extension thereof agreed upon by the Director and the property owner,
the Zoning Inspector shall, if the application is in conformance with all provisions of this
Resolution, issue the zoning permit.
5.5 Expiration of Zoning Permit
If the work described in any zoning permit has not begun within one year from the date of
issuance thereof, said permit shall expire; it shall be revoked by the Zoning Inspector; and
written notice thereof shall be given to the persons affected. If the work described in any
zoning permit has not been completed within two and one half (2½) years of the date of
issuance thereof, said permit shall expire and be revoked by the Zoning Inspector and
written notice thereof shall be given to the persons affected, together with notice that
further work as described in the cancelled permit shall not proceed unless and until a new
zoning permit has been obtained or an extension granted.
5.6 Record of Zoning Permits
The Zoning Inspector shall maintain a record of all zoning permits and payment of the
established fee. Copies shall be furnished to any person upon request.
5.7 Failure to Obtain a Zoning Permit
Failure to obtain a zoning permit shall be a punishable violation of this Resolution.
5.8 Construction and Use to be as Provided in Applications, Plans and Permits
Zoning permits are issued on the basis of plans and applications being approved by the
Zoning Inspector authorizing only the use and arrangement set forth in such approved
plans and applications or amendments thereto, and no other use, arrangement or
construction. Use, arrangement or construction contrary to that authorized shall be
deemed a punishable violation of this Resolution.
5.9 Complaints Regarding Violations
Whenever a violation of this Resolution occurs, or is alleged to have occurred, any person
may file a written complaint. Such complaint stating fully the causes and basis thereof
shall be filed with the Zoning Inspector. The Zoning Inspector shall record properly such
complaint, immediately investigate it and take action thereon as provided by this
Resolution.
5.10 Entry and Inspection of Property
Prior to seeking entry to any property or structure for such examination or survey, the
Zoning Inspector shall attempt to obtain the permission of the owner or occupant to
inspect. The Zoning Inspector is authorized to make inspections of properties and
structures in order to examine and survey the same, at any reasonable hour, for the
purpose of enforcing the provisions of this Resolution. If such permission is denied or
cannot be obtained, the Zoning Inspector shall request the assistance of the County
Prosecutor in securing a valid search warrant prior to entry.
5.11 Stop Work Order
Subsequent to his determination that work is being done contrary to this Resolution, the
Zoning Inspector shall write a stop work order and post it on the premises involved.
Removal of a stop work order, except by the order of the Zoning Inspector, shall constitute
a punishable violation of this Resolution.
5.12 Zoning Permit Revocation
The Zoning Inspector may issue a revocation notice to revoke a permit or administrative
approval which was issued contrary to this Resolution or based upon false information or
misrepresentation in the application.
5.13 Notice of Violation
1) Whenever the Zoning Inspector or his agent determines that there is a violation of
any provision of this Resolution, a warning tag shall be issued and shall serve as
a notice of violation. Such order shall:
A) Be in writing;
B) Identify the violation;
C) Include a statement of the reason or reasons why it is being issued and
refer to the sections of this Resolution being violated; and
D) State the time by which the violation shall be corrected.
2) Service of notice of violation shall be as follows:
A) By personal delivery to the person or persons responsible, or by leaving
the notice at the usual place of residence of the owner with a person of
suitable age and discretion (and noting the date, time and place of service
on the Township copy); or
B) By certified mail deposited in the United States Post Office addressed to
the person or persons responsible at a last known address. If a certified
mail envelope is returned with endorsement showing that the envelope is
unclaimed, then service shall be sent by ordinary mail and the mailing
shall be evidenced by a certificate of mailing which shall be filed by the
Zoning Inspector. Service shall be deemed complete when the fact of
mailing is entered on record, provided that the ordinary mail envelope is
not returned by the postal authorities with an endorsement showing failure
of delivery; or
C) By posting a copy of the notice form in a conspicuous place on the
premises found in violation.
5.14 Ticketing Procedure **OMIT** 7/28/200
5.14 Penalties and Fines
It shall be unlawful to erect, establish, locate, construct, reconstruct, enlarge, change,
convert, move, repair, maintain or structurally alter any building, structure or land in
violation of any provision of this Resolution or any amendment thereto. Any person, firm
or corporation who violates this Resolution or fails to comply with any of the requirements
shall upon conviction thereof be fined not more than one hundred ($100) dollars and in
addition shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day such violation
continues after receipt of a violation notice shall be considered a separate offense. The
owner or tenant of any building, structure, premises or part thereof, and any architect,
builder, contractor, agent or other person who commits, participates in, assists in or
maintains such violation may each be found guilty of a separate offense and suffer the
penalties herein provided.
5.15 Additional Remedies
Nothing in this Resolution shall be deemed to abolish, impair or prevent other additional
remedies as provided by law. In the event of a violation of any provision or requirement of
this Resolution, or in the case of an imminent threat of such a violation, the Zoning
Inspector, the Township Trustees, the Prosecuting Attorney or the owner of any
neighboring property who would be especially damaged by such violation, may, in addition
to other resources provided by law, institute mandamus, injunction, abatement or other
appropriate actions to prevent, remove, abate, enjoin or terminate such violation.
ARTICLE 6
NONCONFORMITIES
6.0 Purpose
Within the districts established by this Resolution, or by amendments thereto which may
later be adopted, lots, uses of land, structures and uses of structures and land in
combination exist which were lawful before this Resolution was passed or amended, but
which would be prohibited, regulated or restricted under the terms of this Resolution. The
legitimate interest of those who lawfully established these nonconformities are herein
recognized by providing for their continuance, subject to regulations limiting their
completion, restoration, reconstruction, extension and substitution. Furthermore, nothing
contained in this Resolution shall be construed to require any change in the layout, plans,
construction, size or use of any lot, structure or structure and land in combination, for
which a zoning permit became effective prior to the effective date of this Resolution, or
any amendment thereto. Nevertheless, while it is the intent of this Resolution that such
nonconformities be allowed to continue until removed, they should not be encouraged to
survive. Therefore, no nonconformity may be moved, extended, altered, expanded or
used as grounds for any other use(s) or structure(s) prohibited elsewhere in the district
without the approval of the Board of Zoning Appeals, except as otherwise specifically
provided for in this Resolution.
6.1 Incompatibility of Nonconformities
Nonconformities are declared by this Resolution to be incompatible with permitted uses in
the districts in which such uses are located. A nonconforming use of a structure, a
nonconforming use of land, or a nonconforming use of a structure and land in combination
shall not be extended or enlarged after passage of this Resolution by attachment on a
building or premises of additional signs intended to be seen from off the premises, or by
the addition of other uses of a nature which would be generally prohibited in the district in
which such use is located without approval of the Board of Zoning Appeals, except as
otherwise specifically provided for in this Resolution.
6.2 Completion of Nonconforming Structures
To avoid undue hardship, nothing in this Resolution shall be deemed to require a change
in the plans, construction, or designated use of any building on which actual construction
was lawfully begun prior to the effective date of adoption or amendment of this Resolution
and upon which actual building construction has been carried on diligently. Actual
construction is hereby defined to include the placing of construction materials in
permanent position and fastened in a permanent manner. Where demolition or removal of
an existing building has substantially begun in preparation of rebuilding, such demolition or
removal shall be deemed to be actual construction, provided that the work shall be carried
out diligently.
6.3 Certificates for Nonconforming Uses
The Zoning Inspector may, upon his own initiative, or shall upon the request of any owner,
issue a certificate for any lot, structure, use of land, use of structure, or use of land and
structure in combination, that certifies that the lot, structure or use is a valid
nonconforming use. The certificate shall specify the reason why the use is a
nonconforming use, including a description of the extent and kind of use made of the
property in question, the portion of the structure or land used for the nonconforming use
and the extent that dimensional requirements are nonconforming. The purpose of this
section is to protect the owners of lands or structures that are or become nonconforming.
No fee shall be charged for such a certificate. One copy of the certificate shall be returned
to the owner and one copy shall be retained by the Zoning Inspector, who shall maintain
as a public record a file of all such certificates.
6.4 Substitution of Nonconforming Uses
So long as no structural alterations are made, except as required by enforcement of other
codes or resolutions, any nonconforming use may, upon appeal to and approval by the
Board of Zoning Appeals, be changed to another nonconforming use of the same
classification or of a less intensive classification, or the Board shall find that the use
proposed for substitution is equally appropriate or more appropriate to the district than the
existing nonconforming use. In permitting such change, the Board may require that
additional conditions and safeguards be met, in accordance with the standards contained
in Section 6.7, which requirements shall pertain as stipulated conditions to the approval of
such change and failure to meet such conditions shall be considered a punishable
violation of said Resolution. Whenever a nonconforming use has been changed to a less
intensive use or becomes a conforming use, such use shall not thereafter be changed to a
more intensive use.
6.5 Single Nonconforming Lots of Record
In any district in which single-family dwellings are permitted, a single-family dwelling and
customary accessory buildings may be erected on any single lot of record at the effective
date of adoption or amendment of this Resolution, notwithstanding limitations imposed by
other provisions of this Resolution. Such lot must be in separate ownership and not of
continuous frontage with other lots in the same ownership. This provision shall apply even
though such lot fails to meet the requirements for area or width, or both, that are generally
applicable in the district, provided that yard dimensions and requirements other than those
applying to area or width, or both, of the lot shall conform to the regulations for the district
in which such lot is located.
6.6 Nonconforming Lots of Record in Combination
If two or more lots or a combination of lots and portions of lots with continuous frontage in
single ownership are of record at the time of passage or amendment of this Resolution
and if all or part of the lots with no buildings do not meet the requirements established for
lot width and area, the lands involved shall be considered to be an undivided parcel for the
purposes of this Resolution and no portion of said parcel shall be used or sold in a manner
which diminishes compliance with lot width and area requirements established by this
Resolution, nor shall any division of any parcel be made which creates a lot with a width or
area below the requirements.
6.7 Nonconforming Structures or Uses
Where a lawful structure or use of land exists at the effective date of adoption or
amendment of this Resolution that does not meet the minimum requirements of the district
in which the lot is located, or is not a lawful use within the district, such structure or use
may be continued as long as it remains otherwise lawful.
1) The Board of Zoning Appeals is hereby authorized to grant a variance
from the literal provisions of this Resolution in order to allow the restoration,
reconstruction, extension or substitution of a nonconforming use of land or
nonconforming structure in accordance with the following terms:
A) The restoration, reconstruction, extension or substitution of the
nonconforming use or structure will not be contrary to the public interest.
B) Where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the
provisions of this Resolution would result in unnecessary hardship.
C) There must exist special circumstances or conditions fully described by
the applicant and which are such that strict application of the provisions of
this Resolution would deprive the applicant of reasonable use of the
structure or land. Mere loss in value shall not justify an approval by the
Zoning Board of Appeals; there must be deprivation of beneficial use of
the structure or land.
D) The lot area shall be adequate to accommodate the required off-street
parking for the structure as restored, reconstructed, extended or
substituted. The design, location and surface of the parking area shall be
provided so as to reduce congestion, promote safety and to reduce the
impact on the existing neighborhood.
E) No nonconforming use shall be permitted to restore, reconstruct, extend
or substitute if it will result in a greater detriment to surrounding
properties.
F) No nonconforming use may be expanded beyond the property limits as
existing at the time this Resolution was adopted or amended to make the
use or structure nonconforming.
G) Where nonconforming use status applies to a structure and premises in
combination, removal or destruction of the structure shall eliminate the
nonconforming status of the land. Destruction for the purposes of this
Article is defined as damaged to an extent of more than sixty (60) percent
of the replacement costs at time of destruction.
H) The replacement of one mobile home with another mobile home shall not
be considered reconstruction or restoration under this provision.
I) If any nonconforming use is discontinued or abandoned for more than two
(2) years (except when government action impedes access to the
premises), any subsequent use of such land shall conform to the
regulations specified by this Resolution for the district in which such land
is located.
6.8 Repairs and Maintenance
On any nonconforming structure or portion of a structure containing a nonconforming use,
work may be done in any period of twelve (12) consecutive months on ordinary repairs or
on repair or replacement of non-bearing walls, fixtures, wiring or plumbing, to an extent not
exceeding fifty (50) percent of the current assessed value of the nonconforming structure
as the case may be, provided that the cubic feet existing when it became nonconforming
shall not be increased.
If a nonconforming structure or portion of a structure containing a nonconforming use
becomes physically unsafe or unlawful due to lack of repairs and maintenance, and is
declared by the Zoning Inspector to be unsafe or unlawful by reason of physical condition,
it shall not thereafter be restored, repaired or rebuilt except in conformity with the
regulations of the District in which it is located.
ARTICLE 7
PROCEDURES AND REQUIREMENTS FOR APPEALS AND VARIANCES
7.0 General
Appeals and variances shall conform to the procedures and requirements of 7.1 to 7.11
inclusive, of this Resolution. The Board of Zoning Appeals has appellate jurisdiction
relative to appeals and variances.
7.1 Appeals
Appeals to the Board of Zoning Appeals concerning interpretation or administration of this
Resolution may be taken by any person aggrieved or by any officer or bureau of the
legislative authority of the Township affected by any decision of the Zoning Inspector.
Such appeal shall be taken within twenty (20) days after the decision by filing, with the
Zoning Inspector and with the Board of Zoning Appeals, a notice of appeal specifying the
grounds upon which the appeal is being taken. The Zoning Inspector shall transmit to the
Board of Appeals all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed
from was taken.
7.2 Stay of Proceedings
An appeal stays all actions by the Zoning Inspector seeking enforcement of or compliance
with the order or decision appealed from, unless the Zoning Inspector certifies to the
Board of Appeals that (because of facts stated in the certificate) a stay would, in his
opinion, cause imminent peril to life property. In that case, proceedings shall not be
stayed except by order of the Board of Appeals or a court, issued on application of the
party seeking the stay, for due cause shown, after notice to the Zoning Inspector.
7.3 Variances
A variance may be granted by the Board of Appeals if it concludes that strict enforcement
of the Resolution would result in unnecessary hardships in the case of use variances for
the applicant and that by granting the variance, the spirit of the Resolution will be
observed, public safety and welfare secured, substantial justice done and that the
variance will not be contrary to the public interest. No nonconforming use of neighboring
lands, structures or buildings in the same district and no permitted or nonconforming use
of lands, structures or buildings in other districts shall be considered grounds for issuance
of a variance. Variances shall not be granted on the grounds of convenience or profit, but
only where strict application of the provisions of this Resolution would result in
unnecessary hardship in the case of a use variance or practical difficulties in the case of
an area variance.
7.4 Application and Standards for Variances
Except as otherwise permitted in this Resolution, no variance in the strict application of the
provisions of this Resolution shall be granted by the Board of Zoning Appeals, unless the
Board of Zoning Appeals, unless the Board shall find that the written application for the
requested variance contains all of the following requirements:
1) Name, address and phone number of applicant(s);
2) Legal description of property;
3) Description or nature of variance requested;
4) A fee as established by resolution;
5) Narrative statements establishing and substantiating that the variance
conforms to the following standards:
A) Will be of such location, size and character that it will be in harmony with
the appropriate and orderly development of the surrounding
neighborhood and applicable regulations of the Zoning District in which it
is to be located.
B) Will be of a nature that will make vehicular and pedestrian traffic no more
hazardous than is normal for the District involved, taking into
consideration vehicular turning movements in relation to routes of traffic
flow, proximity and relationship to intersections, adequacy of sight
distances, location and access of off-street parking and provisions for
pedestrian traffic, with particular attention to minimizing child-vehicle
contacts in residential districts.
C) Will be designed as to location, size, intensity, site layout and periods of
operation of any such proposed use to eliminate any possible nuisance
emanating therefrom which might be noxious to the occupants of any
other nearby permitted uses, whether by reason of dust, noise, fumes,
vibration, smoke or lights.
D) Will be such that the proposed location and height of buildings or
structures and location, nature and height of walls, fences and
landscaping will not interfere with or discourage the appropriate
development and use of adjacent land and buildings or unreasonably
affect their value.
E) Will relate harmoniously with the physical and economic aspects of
adjacent land uses as regards prevailing shopping habits, convenience of
access by prospective patrons continuity of development, and need for
particular services and facilities in specific areas of the Township.
F) Mere loss in value shall not justify a variance; there must be deprivation
of beneficial use of land.
G) Is so designed, located and proposed to be operated that the public
health, safety and welfare will be protected.
H) Will not cause substantial injury to the value of other property in the
neighborhood in which it is to be located.
I) There must be proof of hardship created by the strict application of this
Resolution. It is not sufficient proof of hardship to show that greater profit
would result if the variance were granted. Furthermore, the hardship
complained of cannot be self-created; nor can it be established on this
basis by one who purchases with or without knowledge of the restrictions;
it must be suffered directly by the property in question; and evidence of
variances granted under similar circumstances need not be considered.
J) The granting of the variance is necessary for the reasonable use
of the land or building and the variance as granted is the minimum
variance that will accomplish this purpose.
7.5 Additional Conditions and Safeguards
The Board may further prescribe any conditions and safeguards that it deems necessary
to insure that the objectives of the regulations or provisions to which the variance applies
will be met. Any violation of such conditions and safeguards, when which the variance
has been granted, shall be deemed a punishable violation under this Resolution.
7.6 Public Hearing by the Board of Zoning Appeals
The Board of Zoning Appeals shall hold a public hearing within thirty (30) days after the
receipt of an application for an appeal of variance from the Zoning Inspector or an
applicant.
7.7 Notice of Public Hearing in Newspaper
Before conducting the public hearing required in Section 7.6, notice of such hearing shall
be given in one or more newspapers of general circulation in the Township at least ten
(10) days before the date of said hearing. The notice shall set forth the time and place of
the public hearing and the nature of the proposed appeal or variance.
7.8 Notice to Parties in Interest
Before conducting the public hearing required in Section 7.6, written notice of such
hearing shall be mailed by the Chairman of the Board of Zoning Appeals, by first class
mail, at least ten (10) days before the day of the hearing to all parties in interest. The
notice shall contain the same information required of notices published in newspapers as
specified in Section 7.7.
7.9 Action by Board of Zoning Appeals
Within thirty (30) days after the public hearing required in Section 7.6, the Board of Zoning
Appeals shall either approve, approve with supplementary conditions or disapprove the
request for appeal or variance. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall maintain minutes
containing its conclusions of fact and reasons for granting or refusing to grant the variance
or for sustaining or denying the appeal. Appeals from the Board’s decision shall be in
accordance with Chapter 2506, Ohio Revised Code.
7.10 Term of Variance
No order of the Zoning Board of Appeals granting a variance shall be valid for a period
longer than twelve (12) months from the date of such order unless the building permit or
zoning approval is obtained within such period and the erection or alteration of a building
is started or the use is commenced within such period.
ARTICLE 8
AMENDMENT
8.1 General
Whenever the public necessity, convenience, general welfare, or good zoning practices
require, the Board of Township Trustees may by resolution, after receipt of
recommendation thereon from the Zoning Commission and subject to the procedures
provided by law, amend, supplement, change or repeal the regulations, restrictions and
boundaries or classification of property.
8.2 Initiation of Zoning Amendments
Amendments to this Resolution may be initiated in one of the following ways:
1) By adoption of a motion by the Zoning Commission;
2) By adoption of a resolution by the Board of Township Trustees;
3) By the filing of an application by at least one (1) owner or lessee of property
within the area proposed to be changed or affected by said amendment.
8.3 Contents of Application for Zoning Map Amendment
Applications for amendments to the Official Zoning Map adopted as part of this Resolution
by Article 10 shall contain at least the following information:
1) The name, address and phone number of applicant;
2) A statement of the reason(s) for the proposed amendment;
3) Present use;
4) Present zoning district;
5) Proposed use;
6) Proposed zoning district;
7) A vicinity map at a scale approved by the Zoning Inspector showing property
lines, thoroughfares, existing and proposed zoning and such other items as the
Zoning Inspector may require;
8) A list of all property owners and their mailing addresses who are within,
contiguous to or directly across the street from the parcel(s) proposed to be
rezoned and others that may have a substantial interest in the case, except that
addresses need not be included where more than ten (10) parcels are to be
rezoned;
9) A fee as established by Resolution of the Board of Township Trustees.
8.4 Contents of Application for Zoning Text Amendment
Application for amendments proposing to change, supplement, amend or repeal any
portion(s) of this Resolution, other than the official Zoning Map, shall contain at least the
following information:
1) The name, address and telephone number of the applicant;
2) The proposed amending resolution, approved as to form by the County
Prosecutor;
3) A statement of the reason(s) for the proposed amendment;
4) A site plan indicating how the site will be developed;
5) A fee as established by Resolution of the Board of Township Trustees.
8.5 Transmittal to Zoning Commission
Immediately after the adoption of a resolution by the Board of Township Trustees or the
filling of an application by at least one (1) owner or lessee of property, said resolution or
application shall be transmitted to the Commission.
8.6 Submission to Regional Planning Commission
Within five (5) days after the adoption of a motion by the Commission, transmittal of a
resolution by the Board of Township Trustees, or the fillings of an application by at least
one (1) owner or lessees, the Zoning Commission shall transmit a copy of such motion,
resolution or application, together with the text and map pertaining to the case in question,
to the Regional Planning Commission. The Regional Planning Commission shall
recommend the approval or denial of the proposed amendment or the approval of some
modification thereof and shall submit such recommendation to the Zoning Commission.
Such recommendation considered at the public hearing held by the Zoning Commission.
8.7 Standards of Recommendations of Township Zoning Commission
The Zoning Commission shall review the particular facts and circumstances, each
amendment should be carefully considered, keeping in mind the fact that the burden of
proof and that the need for the change rests with the applicant. The following questions
should be asked when considering district changes.
1) Is there vacant land in the area already zoned to accommodate this use? If
there is a considerable amount of land zoned for the requested purpose, and if
little of it is used, the need to rezone more land should be carefully analyzed.
The fact that the cost of the land already zoned may be more expensive does not
mean that the Township should rezone more land.
2) What other effects might the adoption of the proposed amendment on future land
uses in the area? What will be the long term effect of the proposed change?
3) How does the proposed change relate to existing public facilities and services
such as water, sewer, police and fire protection and schools?
4) What is the present character of the area in terms of existing land use and
physical characteristics? Do the physical characteristics of the area cause
problems for development?
5) What are the factors that make this location well-suited for the uses permitted in
the proposed zoning district?
6) Would all of the permitted uses in the proposed district be compatible with the
existing potential future development in the area?
7) What effect would the rezoning have on property values?
8) Would the rezoning cause a considerable increase in the volume of traffic? Can
existing roads accommodate this traffic?
9) Does the area proposed for rezoning reflect land needed for the proposed use or
does it merely reflect the applicant’s property lines?
10) Is there a physical feature such as a river, creek, or railroad that can be used as a
natural dividing line to separate a new district from adjacent properties?
8.8 Submission to Director of Transportation
Before any zoning amendment is approved affecting any land within three hundred (300)
feet of the centerline of a proposed new highway or highway for which changes are
proposed as described in the certification to local officials by the Director of
Transportation, or within a radius of five hundred (500) feet from the point of intersection of
said centerline with any public road or highway, the Commission shall give notice, by
registered or certified mail, to the Director of Transportation. The Zoning Commission may
proceed as required by law; however, the Board of Township Trustees shall not approve
the amendment for one hundred twenty (120) days from the date the notice is received by
the Director of Transportation. If the Director of Transportation notifies the Board of
Township Trustees that he shall proceed to acquire the land needed, then the Board of
Township Trustees shall refuse to approve the rezoning. If the Director of
Transportation notifies the Board of Township Trustees that acquisition at this time is not
in the public interest or upon the expiration of the one hundred twenty (120) day period or
any extension thereof agreed upon by the Director of Transportation and the property
owner, the Board of Township Trustees shall proceed as required by law.
8.9 Public Hearing by Zoning Commission
The Zoning Commission shall schedule a public hearing after the adoption of their motion,
the transmittal of a resolution from the Board of Township Trustees, or the filing of an
application for zoning amendment. Said hearing shall be not less than twenty (20) nor
more than forty (40) days from the date of adoption of such motion, transmittal of such
resolution, or filing of such application.
8.10 Notice of Public Hearing in Newspaper
The notice of the hearing before the Zoning Commission which is published and sent to
landowners if there are ten or fewer parcels must contain in addition to the time, date and
place of the hearing the following:
1) The name of the Zoning Commission that will be conducting the public hearing;
2) A statement indicating that the motion, resolution, or application is an amendment
to the zoning resolution;
3) A list of the addresses of all properties to be rezoned or redistricted by the
proposed amendment and the names of owners of these properties, as they
appear on the County Auditor’s current tax list;
4) The present zoning classification of property named in the proposed
amendment and the proposed zoning classification of such property;
5) The time and place where the motion, resolution or application proposing to
amend the zoning resolution will be available for examination for a period of at
least ten days prior to the public hearing;
6) The name of the person responsible for giving notice of the public hearing by
publication or by mail, or by both publication and mail;
7) Any other information requested by the zoning commission;
8) A statement that after the conclusion of such hearing the matter will be submitted
to the Board of Township Trustees for its action.
The notice that is published if the amendment alters the text or when there are more than
ten parcels must contain in addition to the time, date and place of the public hearing all of
the following:
1) The name of the Zoning Commission that will be conducting the public hearing on
the proposed amendment;
2) A statement indicating that the motion, application, or resolution is an amendment
to the zoning resolution;
3) The time and place where the text and maps of the proposed amendment will be
available for examination for a period of at least ten days prior to the public
hearing;
4) The name of the person responsible for giving notice of the public hearing by
publication;
5) A statement that after the conclusion of such hearing the matter will be submitted
to the Board of Township Trustees for its action;
6) Any other information requested by the Zoning Commission.
8.11 Notice of Property Owners by Zoning Commission
If the proposed amendment intends to rezone or redistrict ten (10) or less parcels of land
as listed on the tax duplicate, written notice of the hearing shall be mailed by the Zoning
Commission by first class mail, at least ten (10) days before the date of the public hearing,
to all owners of property within, contiguous to, and directly across the thoroughfare from
such area proposed to be rezoned or redistricted to the address of such owners appearing
on the County Auditor’s current tax list or the Treasurer’s mailing list and to such other list
or lists that may be specified by the Board of Township Trustees. The failure to deliver the
notice, as provided in this section, shall not invalidate any such amendment. The notice
shall contain the same information as required of notices published in newspapers as
specified in Section 8.10.
8.12 Recommendation by Zoning Commission
Within thirty (30) days after the public hearing required by Section 8.9, the Zoning
Commission shall recommend the Board of Township Trustees that the amendment be
granted as requested, or it may recommend a modification of the amendment requested,
or it may recommend that the amendment not be granted. The written decision of the
Zoning Commission shall indicate the specific reason(s) upon which the recommendation
is based, to include the basis for their determination that the proposed amendment is or is
not consistent with the Comprehensive Plan.
8.13 Public Hearing by Board of Township Trustees
Where the proposed amendment intends to rezone ten or fewer parcels, the published
notice must contain in addition to the time, date and place of the hearing:
1) The name of the board that will be conducting the public hearing;
2) A statement indicating that the motion, application, or resolution is an
amendment to the zoning resolution;
3) A list of the addresses of all properties to be rezoned or redistricted by the
proposed amendment and of the names of owners of these properties, as they
appear on the County Auditor’s current tax list;
4) The present zoning classification of property named in the proposed
amendment and the proposed zoning classification of such property;
5) The time and place where the motion, application, or resolution proposing to
amend the zoning resolution will be available for examination for a period of at
least ten days prior to the public hearing;
6) The name of the person responsible for giving notice of the public hearing by
publication or by mail, or by both publication and mail;
7) Any other information requested by the board.
If the amendment alters the text or rezones more than ten parcels, the published notice
must contain in addition to the time, date and place of the hearing:
1) The name of the board that will be conducting the public hearing on the
proposed amendment;
2) A statement indicating that the motion, application, or resolution is an
amendment to the zoning resolution;
3) The time and place where the text and maps of the proposed amendment will be
available for examination for a period of at least ten days prior to the public
hearing;
4) The name of the person responsible for giving notice of the public hearing by
publication;
5) Any other information requested by the board.
8.14 Action by Board of Township Trustees
Within twenty (20) days after the public hearing required by Section 8.13, the Board of
Township Trustees shall either adopt or deny the recommendation of the Zoning
Commission or adopt some modification thereof. In the event the Board of Township
Trustees denies or modifies the recommendation of the Zoning Commission, the
unanimous vote of the Township Trustees is required.
8.15 Effective Date and Referendum
Such amendment adopted by the Board of Township Trustees shall become effective
thirty (30) days after the date of such adoption unless within thirty (30) days after the
adoption of the amendment there is presented to the Board of Township Trustees a
petition, signed by a number of qualified voters residing in the unincorporated area of the
Township or part thereof include in the zoning plan equal to not less than eight (8) percent
of the total vote cast for all candidates for Governor in such area at the last preceding
general election at which a Governor was elected, requesting the Board of Township
Trustees to submit the amendment to the electors of such area, for approval or rejection,
at the next primary or general election. No amendment for which such referendum vote
has been requested shall be put into effect unless a majority of the voters cast on the
issue is in favor of the amendment. Upon certification by the Board of Elections that the
amendment has been approved by the voters it shall take immediate effect.
ARTICLE 9
PROCEDURES AND GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
FOR CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS;
SUBSTANTIALLY SIMILAR USES; AND ACCESSORY USES
9.0 Purpose
In recent years, the characteristics and impacts of an ever-increasing number of new and
unique uses, together with the broadening of numerous conventional uses, have fostered
the development of more flexible regulations designed to accommodate these activities in
a reasonable and equitable manner, while safeguarding both the property rights of all
individuals and the health, safety and general welfare of the community. Toward these
ends, it is recognized that this Resolution should provide for more detailed evaluation of
each use conditionally permissible in a specific district with respect to such considerations
as location, design, size, method(s) of operation, intensity of use, public facilities
requirements and traffic generation. Consequently, conditional use permits are not
affected by the transfer of ownership, provided the use remains the same.
9.1 Contents of Conditional Use Permit Application
Any owner, or agent thereof, of property for which a conditional use is proposed, shall
make an application for a conditional use permit by filing it with the Zoning Inspector, who
shall within seven (7) days transmit it to the Board of Zoning Appeals. Such application at
a minimum shall contain the following information:
1) Name, address and phone number of the applicant;
2) Legal description of the property;
3) Zoning district;
4) Description of existing use;
5) Description of proposed conditional use;
6) A plan of the proposed site for the conditional use showing the location
of all buildings, parking and loading areas, streets and traffic accesses, open
spaces, refuse and service areas, utilities, signs, yards, landscaping features and
such other information as the Board may require;
7) A narrative statement discussing the compatibility of the proposed use with the
existing uses of adjacent properties and with the Erie County Comprehensive
Plan, to include an evaluation of the effects on adjoining properties of such
elements as traffic circulation, noise, glare, odor, fumes and vibration;
8) A list containing the names and mailing addresses of all owners of property within
five hundred (500) feet of the property in question;
9) A fee as established by Resolution; and
10) A narrative addressing each of the applicable criteria contained in Section 9.2
General Standards for all Conditional Uses.
9.2 General Standards for all Conditional Uses
The Board shall review the particular facts and circumstances of each proposed use in
terms of the following standards and shall find adequate evidence showing that such use
at the proposed location:
1) Is in fact a conditional use as appears on the schedule of district regulations
adopted for the zoning district involved;
2) Will be in accordance with the general objectives, or with any specific objective, of
the County's Comprehensive Plan and/or zoning resolution;
3) Will be designed, constructed, operated and maintained so as to be harmonious
and appropriate in appearance with the existing or intended character of the
general vicinity and that such use will not change the essential character of the
same area;
4) Will not be hazardous or disturbing to existing or future neighboring uses;
5) Will be served adequately by essential public facilities and services such
as highways, streets, police and fire protection, drainage structures, refuse
disposal, water and sewer, and schools; or that the persons or agencies
responsible for the establishment of the proposed use shall be able to provide
adequately any such services;
6) Will not create excessive additional requirements at public cost for public
facilities and services and will not be detrimental to the economic welfare of the
community;
7) Will not involve uses, activities, processes, materials, equipment and conditions of
operation that will be detrimental to any person, property or the general welfare by
reason of excessive production of traffic, noise, smoke, fumes, glare or odors;
8) Will have vehicular approaches to the property which shall be so designed as not
to create an interference with traffic on surrounding public thoroughfares; and
9) Will not result in the destruction, loss, or damage of a natural, scenic, or historic
feature of major importance.
9.3 Public Hearing
The Board of Zoning Appeals shall hold a public hearing within thirty (30) days after it
receives an application for a conditional use permit submitted by an applicant through the
Zoning Inspector.
9.4 Notice of Public Hearing
Before conducting the public hearing required in Section 9.3, notice of such hearing shall
be given in one or more newspapers of general circulation in the Township at least ten
(10) days before the date of said hearing. The notice shall set forth the time and place of
the hearing and shall provide a summary explanation of the conditional use proposed.
9.5 Notice to Parties of Interest
Prior to conducting the public hearing required in Section 9.3, written notice of such
hearing shall be mailed by the Chairman of the Board of Zoning Appeals, by first class
mail, at least ten (10) days before the date of the hearing to all parties of interest, to
include all property owners listed on the application. The notice shall contain the same
information as required in Section 9.4 for notices published in newspapers.
9.6 Action by the Board of Zoning Appeals
Within thirty (30) days after the date of the public hearing required in Section 9.3, the
Board shall take one of the following actions:
1) Approve issuance of the conditional use permit by making an affirmative
finding in writing that the proposed conditional use is to be located in a district
wherein such use may be conditionally permitted. Such written finding may also
prescribe supplementary conditions and safeguards as specified in Section 9.7.
Upon making an affirmative finding, the Board shall direct the Zoning Inspector to
issue a conditional use permit for such use which shall list all conditions and
safeguards specified by the Board for approval.
2) Make a written finding that the application is deficient in information or is in need
of modification and is being returned to the applicant. Such finding shall specify
the information and/or modifications which are deemed necessary.
3) Make a written finding that the application is denied, such finding specifying the
reason(s) for disapproval. If an application is disapproved by the Board, the
applicant may seek relief through the Court of Common Pleas.
9.7 Supplementary Conditions and Safeguards
In granting approval for any conditional use, the Board may prescribe appropriate
conditions and safeguards in conformance with this Resolution. Any violation of such
conditions and safeguards, when made a part of the terms under which the conditional
use is granted, shall be deemed a punishable violation of this Resolution. The conditions
are as follows:
1) The location, width, radius and number of driveways entering onto any public
street;
2) The requirement that barriers be established to prevent access to a public street
at any other location than established driveways;
3) A limitation upon access to certain public streets where there are more than one
public street abutting the property;
4) Limitations upon the use of required setbacks for the parking of motor vehicles,
storage or display of goods for sale or use, or the location of dumpsters;
5) Limitations on the intensity and location of lighting and requirements that
lighting be shielded from adjoining properties;
6) Requirements that surface water be detailed, channelized or otherwise carried
from the property to public storm sewers so as to avoid injury to adjoining
properties; and
7) Requirements that culverts be installed parallel to the road under any proposed
driveway so as not to interfere with the existing flow of surface water. The size of
the culvert shall be determined based upon accepted engineering standards.
9.8 Expiration of Conditional Use Permit
A conditional use permit shall be deemed to authorize any one particular conditional use
and said permit shall automatically expire if such conditionally permitted use has not been
instituted or utilized within one (1) year of the date on which the permit was issued, or if for
any reason such use shall cease for more than two (2) years.
9.9 Certificate for Conditional Use
1) The Zoning Inspector shall upon his own initiative, or shall upon the request of
any owner, issue a certificate for any conditional use deemed valid by the Board
of Zoning Appeals.
2) The purpose of this section is to protect the owners of lands or structures that are
of a conditional nature. One copy of the certificate shall be returned to the owner,
one shall be sent to the Erie County Department of Planning and Development
and one copy shall be retained by the Zoning Inspector, who shall maintain as a
public record a file, along with an indexed overlay, of all such certificates.
ARTICLE 10
ZONING DISTRICTS & BOUNDARIES INTERPRETATION
10.0 Purpose
The purpose of this article is to establish zoning districts in order to realize the general
purposes set forth in the preamble of this Resolution, to provide for orderly growth and
development and to protect the property rights of all individuals by assuring the
compatibility of uses and practices within districts.
10.1 Establishment of Districts
The unincorporated portions of Milan Township are hereby divided into districts or zones
as shown on the Zoning Map, which accompanies this Resolution. The different districts
are as follows:
1) Agricultural District AG
2) Rural Residential District ***DELETED*** R-R
2) Single Family District R-1-A
Single Family Residential District R-1-B 3) Two-Family Residential District R-2
4) Multi-Family Residential District R-3
6) Professional & Business Offices ***DELETED*** PBO
Recreation District ***DELETED***
5) Local Commercial District C-1
6) General Commercial District C-2
7) Light Industrial 8) Heavy Industrial 11) Mineral Aggregate ***DELETED*** MA
9) Planned Unit Development PUD
10) Floodplain, Floodway, & Wetland Overlay District FFW
10.2 Zoning District Map
The districts established in Section 10.1, as shown on the Official Zoning Map, which,
together with all data, references, explanatory material and notations thereon, are hereby
officially adopted as part of this Resolution and hereby incorporated by reference herein,
thereby having the same force and effect as if herein fully described in writing.
10.3 Zoning Map Legend
There shall be provided on the Official Zoning Map a legend which shall list the name of
each zoning district and indicate the symbol for that district. A color, combination of
colors, or black and white patterns may be used in place of symbols to identify the
respective zoning districts in such legend.
10.4 Identification of Official Zoning Map
The Official Zoning Map shall be properly identified by the signature of Township Trustees,
as attested by the Township Clerk and bearing the official seal. The Map shall be
maintained by the Zoning Inspector and shall remain on file in the Office of the Clerk. The
Official Zoning Map shall control whenever there is an apparent conflict between the
district boundaries as shown on the Map and the description as found in the text of this
Resolution. The Official Zoning Map shall be of a reproducible document and copies shall
be made available to the public upon request and upon payment of a fee as established
by resolution.
10.5 Interpretation of District Boundaries
The following rules shall be used to determine the precise location of any zoning district
boundary unless such boundary is specifically indicated on the Official Zoning Map:
1) Where district boundaries are so indicated as approximately following the center
lines of thoroughfares or highways, street lines, or highway right-of-way lines,
such center lines, street lines, or highway right-of-way shall be construed to be
said boundaries;
2) Where district boundaries are so indicated that they approximately follow lot lines,
such lot lines shall be construed to be said boundaries;
3) Where district boundaries are so indicated that they are approximately parallel to
the center lines or street lines of streets, or the center lines or right-of-way lines of
highways, such district boundaries shall be construed as being parallel thereto
and at such distance therefrom as indicated on the Official Zoning Map. If no
distance is given, such dimensions shall be determined by the use of the scale
shown on the Official Zoning Map;
4) Where the boundary of a district follows a railroad line, such boundary shall be
deemed to be located in the middle of the main tracks of said railroad line;
5) Where the boundary of a district follows a stream, lake, or body of water, said
boundary line shall be deemed to be at the limit of the jurisdiction of the Township
unless otherwise indicated;
6) Where district boundaries are so indicated that they follow or approximately follow
the limits of any municipal corporation, such boundaries shall be construed as
following such limits; and
7) Whenever any street, alley, or other public way is vacated by any official Board of
Township Trustees' action, the zoning district adjoining each side of such street,
alley, or public way shall automatically be extended to the center of such vacation
and all areas within that vacation shall henceforth be subject to all regulations
appropriate to the respective extended districts.
All questions and disputes concerning the exact location of zoning district boundaries shall
be resolved by the Board of Zoning Appeals.
ARTICLE 11
AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT (AG)
11.0 Statement of Purpose
The following reasons are given in evidence to support the purposes for which this zoning
district is intended to accomplish:
1) Land containing agricultural value should be preserved because it is a vital
resource.
2) Land with agricultural value justifies design requirements which attempt to support
a town-country spatial relationship.
2) Agricultural zoning permits the timing of land allotments to urban purposes in
keeping with a theory of maximizing supporting public utilities so as to achieve the
greatest of service for each dollar of capital expenditure.
4) Indiscriminate urbanizing of agricultural lands adversely affects the remaining
owners of land pursuing agricultural endeavors by creating urban land values and
character.
Any use not specifically permitted under 11.1 Principally Permitted Uses or 11.2
Conditionally Permitted Uses of this section is expressly prohibited.
11.1 Principally Permitted Uses
The following uses are principally permitted uses in the Agricultural District:
1) Agriculture;
2) Single family residential dwellings - farm-related or non-farm related;
3) Accessory uses and structures incidental to the above permitted uses,
including but not limited to the following:
A) Roadside stands on five (5) acres or more for the sale of agricultural
products where fifty (50) percent or more of the gross income produced
by the stand is derived from produce grown on farms owned or operated
by the farm operator, subject to the following:
(1) Any structure used to display such goods shall be less than two
hundred fifty (250) square feet in size and be located at least
fifty (50) feet from any side or rear property line.
(2) The structure shall be setback at least forty (40) feet from the
road right-of-way.
(3) Off-street parking shall be provided for all employees and
customers.
(4) Any signs used shall be attached to the roadside stand structure
and shall not exceed five (5) square feet in total area.
4) Farms;
5) Nurseries, Lawn and Garden Centers;
6) Veterinary Clinics or Hospitals;
7) Public stables and riding academies of at least ten (10) acres in size;
8) Type "B" Family Day Care Home;
9) Home Offices and Home Occupations, subject to the following:
a) No person other than members of a family residing on the premises
shall be engaged in such occupation.
b) The use of the dwelling unit for the home occupation shall be clearly
incidental and subordinate to its use for residential purposes by its
occupants and not more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the residential
floor area of the dwelling unit shall be used in conducting the home
occupation.
c) There shall be no change in the outside appearance of the building or
premises or other visible evidence of the conduct of such home
occupation other than one (1) sign, not exceeding two (2) square feet in
area, non-illuminated.
d) Home offices will only be accessory offices for members practicing any of
the professions, including accountant, architect, artist, engineer, lawyer
and physician.
e) If the home is in any residential zoning district, no traffic shall be
generated by such home occupation or home office in greater volumes
than would normally be expected in a residential neighborhood and any
need for parking generated by the conduct of such home occupation shall
be met off the street and other than in a required front yard.
f) No equipment or process shall be used in such home occupation which
creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors, or electrical interference
detectable to the normal senses off the lot, if the occupation is conducted
in a single-family residence.
11.2 Conditionally Permitted Uses
The following uses may be permitted subject to the granting of a conditional use permit
within the provisions of Article 9 of this Resolution:
1) The commercial raising of fur-bearing animals, including mink, chinchillas, rabbits,
foxes, guinea pigs and similar animals, subject to the following:
a) All such operations shall be located on a continuous parcel of
forty (40) acres or more in area.
b) All outdoor runs or breeding areas shall be set back from the
front property line a minimum of one hundred (100) feet and the rear
property line a minimum of one hundred (100) feet.
2) The commercial raising of domestic or laboratory animals, such as cats,
dogs, mice, rats or other similar animals, subject to the following:
a) All such operations shall be located on a parcel of property not
less than ten (10) acres in area.
b) All outdoor runs or breeding areas shall be enclosed on all sides
by a wall or fence.
3) Cemeteries of at least twenty (20) acres in size, subject to the following:
a) The site shall have direct access to a major thoroughfare which
the Board of Zoning Appeals determines is adequate to serve the
size of the facility proposed.
b) Any new cemetery shall be located on a site containing not less
than twenty (20) acres.
c) All buildings, including but not limited to mausoleums and
maintenance buildings, shall not be located within one hundred (100)
feet of any property line.
d) All graves or burial lots shall be set back not less than fifty (50)
feet from any property line.
4) Airports, airfields, runways, hangars, beacons and other facilities involved with
aircraft operations, subject to the following:
a) The area shall be sufficient to meet the Federal Aviation
Administration requirements for the class of airport proposed.
b) There is no existing flight obstruction such as towers, chimneys,
or other tall structures, or which would fall within the approach zone
to any of the proposed airport runways or landing strips.
c) There is sufficient distance between the end of each usable
landing strip and the airport boundary to satisfy the requirements of the
Federal Aviation Administration, or any other appropriate authority. In
cases where air rights or easements have been acquired from the owners
of abutting properties, in which approach zones fall, satisfactory evidence
thereof shall be submitted with the application.
d) Any building, hangars or other structures shall be at least one
hundred (100) feet from any street or lot line.
e) Adequate space for off-street parking for at least fifty (50) vehicles
will be required, the Board may increase this requirement.
f) The application for authorization of an airport shall be
accompanied by a plan, drawn to scale, showing the proposed location of
the airport; boundary lines; dimensions; names of owners of abutting
properties; proposed layout of runways, landing strips or areas, taxi strips,
aprons, roads, parking areas, hangars, buildings and other structures and
facilities; the location and height of all buildings, structures, trees and
overhead wires falling within the airport approach zone and less than five
hundred (500) feet distance from the boundary lines of the airport, other
pertinent data such as topography and grading plan, drainage, water and
sewage, etc.
g) The plans of the proposed airport shall be reviewed by the Regional
Planning Commission. It shall make a recommendation to the Board of
Zoning Appeals which shall include the compatibility of the proposed
airport with the master plan for the township and the potential detrimental
effects upon the surrounding properties and proposals to eliminate or
reduce them.
5) Golf courses and golf driving ranges, subject to the following conditions:
a) All buildings and structures shall be at least fifty (50) feet from all
property lines.
b) A minimum of two (2) off-street parking spaces shall be provided
for each driving tee and putting green. Additional spaces shall be
furnished for other uses in conjunction with the range.
c) All drives and parking areas shall be surfaced with a hard,
durable material and properly drained.
d) All lights shall be directed away from site boundary lines.
e) Fences, plantings or sufficient area shall be provided to insure the
safety and protection of persons on all adjacent land.
f) All driving directions shall be away from any street or highway.
6) Private parks, country clubs, archery clubs and gun clubs, subject to the following:
** NO REQUIREMENTS LISTED **
acreage, lighting, traffic patterns, buffering and parking
as well as NRA safety regulations for gun clubs needed
7) Type "A" Family Day Care Home, subject to the following:
a) Outdoor playgrounds, tot lots, exercise areas, etc. shall be fully
enclosed by a fence, the height and design of which shall be approved by
the Board of Zoning Appeals.
b) The applicant shall submit a parking and traffic circulation plan to
the Board of Zoning Appeals for approval. The design, location and
surface of the parking areas and vehicular approaches shall be subject to
approval by the Board of Zoning Appeals so as to reduce the impact on
the residential character of the neighborhood. The outgoing vehicles
during high volume periods shall provide a safe drop-off point for children
that will not impede other traffic.
c) One sign, not exceeding four (4) square feet in area and mounted
flush against the building, as approved by the Zoning Board of Appeals
shall be permitted.
8) Publicly-owned and operated libraries, parks and recreation facilities,
subject to the following:
a) All permanent buildings shall be constructed and designed so as
to conform with the required setback and building design.
b) Screening and plantings to buffer any structures other than
buildings from adjacent residential uses are required.
9) Churches, subject to the following:
a) The lot area shall be adequate to accommodate the required offstreet
parking requirements of the church.
b) The church building and parking shall be set back from any
adjacent residential property line a minimum of fifty (50) feet.
c) Parking should not be permitted within fifty (50) feet of any side or
rear property line where feasible.
d) A cemetery shall not be a permitted use in conjunction with the
church. (See 11.2 Conditionally Permitted Uses, Item 3. Cemeteries.)
10) Public, parochial or other private elementary, intermediate schools and/or high
schools offering courses in general education on sites of not less than ten (10)
acres, subject to the following:
a) No school shall be located nearer than one hundred (100) feet to
any adjacent residentially-zoned property.
b. Refer to Article 27 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING FACILITIES.
11) Colleges, universities and other such institutions of higher learning,
public and private, offering courses in general, technical or religious education,
subject to the following conditions:
a) Any use permitted herein shall be developed only on sites of at
least forty (40) acres in area and shall not be permitted on any portion of
a recorded subdivision plat.
b) No building or other use of land except landscaped passive areas
shall be situated within one hundred (100) feet of any private residence
not included as part of this site.
c) Refer to Article 27 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING FACILITIES.
12) Bed and Breakfast Homestays or Tourist Homes, subject to the
following:
a) A bed and breakfast homestay or tourist home is a private owneroccupied
residence with one to three (3) guest rooms. The bed and
breakfast homestay must be subordinate and incidental to the main
residential use of the dwelling.
b) No modifications to the external appearance of the building
(except fire escapes) which would alter its residential character, shall be
permitted.
c) One off-street parking space shall be provided for each room
available for rent, in addition to those required for the dwelling unit.
d) Refer to Article 27 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING FACILITIES.
e) One sign shall be permitted not exceeding two (2) square feet in
area and three and one half (3 ½) feet above ground.
f) Length of stay for guests shall not exceed fourteen (14) days.
13) Outdoor advertising and billboards, subject to the following:
a) No billboard shall be located within two hundred (200) feet of
another billboard or two hundred (200) feet from a park, playground,
public or semi-public building or residence.
b) All billboards shall be a minimum of fifty (50) feet from all side
and rear property lines.
c) All billboards shall be set back at least fifty (50) feet from any
road right-of-way.
d) All billboards shall be set back at least one hundred (100) feet
from any land within a residential zoning district.
e) No billboard shall obstruct the view of motorists on adjoining
roads or in view of adjoining commercial or industrial uses which depend
upon visibility for identification.
f) No billboard shall exceed an overall size of three hundred (300)
square feet nor exceed twenty-five (25) feet in height.
11.3 Development Standards
Minimum Lot Area 1 acre
Minimum Lot Frontage 150 feet
Minimum Front Yard Setback 50 feet
Minimum Side Yard Setback 20 feet (each side)
Minimum Rear Yard Setback 35 feet
Minimum Dwelling Floor Area 1,200 square feet
Minimum Setback for Corner Lots
from Side Street 50 feet
Minimum Setback on Cul-de-sacs Refer to Section 25.20
11.4 Required Parking
Refer to specifications in Article 27 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING FACILITIES.
11.5 Signs
Refer to specifications in Article 28 SIGNS.
11.6 Accessory Structures
1) Where the accessory structure is attached to a main building, it shall be
subject to and must conform to all regulations of this Resolution applicable
to the main building.
2) Except as otherwise provided herein, no accessory building or structure,
or use shall be erected or carried on in the required front yard.
3) A detached private garage, or other accessory structure may be erected
and used in the interior side or rear yard provided that:
a) When such accessory structure is located in the rear yard, a minimum
side and rear yard of ten (10) feet shall be maintained, unless the
structure is 1,000 square feet or greater, then the minimum side yard and
rear yard shall be twenty (20) feet.
b) In no case shall an accessory structure be located closer than fifty
(50) feet to any road right-of-way.
4) An accessory building shall be a minimum distance of ten (10) feet from
any main building(s).
5) No accessory structure shall be used for human habitation.
6) No accessory structure shall be used for commercial or industrial
purposes.
7) Accessory structures shall not cover more than thirty-five percent (35%)
of the required rear yard.
8) Accessory structures must be subordinate in floor area to the principal
use.
9) The maximum height of any accessory structure shall be thirty (30) feet in size.
10) No more than two (2) accessory buildings on lots less than one (1) acre in size.
11) Private swimming pools, refer to Section 26.3 Regulations of Swimming Pools as
Accessory Uses.
ARTICLE 12
SINGLE FAMILY DISTRICT (R-1-A)
12.0 Statement of Purpose
The following reasons are given in evidence to support the purposes for which this
zoning district is intended to accomplish:
1) To permit a degree of urbanization of lands which are not expected to have
public utilities available to them for many years.
2) Because of the above consideration, and because there is a demand for non-farm
residences within a rural environment, the R-1-A District provides an opportunity
to satisfy one's housing preference without unduly contributing to uneconomical
urban sprawl conditions.
3) The R-1-A District will lessen urbanizing forces on the good agricultural land and
reduce the possible mixture of farm and non-farm dwellings which have several
undesirable effects, including assessment practices and weed problems related to
uncultivated land.
4) Acreage zoning is necessary to prohibit erosion and sedimentation in certain
areas of the Township where topographical conditions are such that the removal
of vegetative cover would constitute a pollution problem.
5) Any use not specifically permitted under Article 12.1 Principally Permitted Uses or
Article 12.2 Conditionally Permitted Uses is expressly prohibited.
12.1 Principally Permitted Uses
In the R-1-A District, no person shall hereafter use any land, building or structure and no
person shall erect any building or structure except in accordance with the following
provisions:
1) All uses principally permitted in the Article 11 Agricultural District except
churches and schools other than as provided below:
12.2 Conditionally Permitted Uses
The following uses may be permitted by the Township Board of Zoning Appeals pursuant
to Article 9 PROCEDURES AND GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR CONDITIONAL USE
PERMITS; SIMILAR USES; AND ACCESSORY USES and subject further to the terms
and conditions herein provided:
1) Cemeteries and other facilities incidental thereto, subject to the following
conditions:
a) The principal access to the cemetery shall be from a directly adjoining
Regional, Major or Secondary Thoroughfare as defined in the Erie County
Comprehensive Development Plan.
b) The site shall contain a minimum of twenty (20) contiguous acres of land.
c) The perimeter of the entire site shall be fenced in a manner satisfactory to
the Board of Zoning Appeals.
2) Nursery schools, day nurseries and child care centers (not including dormitories),
providing that for each child so cared for, there shall be provided and maintained
a minimum of one hundred fifty (150) square feet of outdoor play area. Such play
space shall have a total minimum area of not less than five thousand (5,000)
square feet, and shall be screened from any adjoining lot in any residential district.
Said use shall not be permitted in the interior of any residential block and shall
have minimum side and rear yard setbacks of one hundred (100) feet.
3) Churches and other facilities normally incidental thereto, subject to the
following conditions:
a) A church site shall contain an area of at least three (3) acres.
b) The site shall be so located as to have at least one (1) property line
abutting a road designated as a Regional, Major or Secondary
Thoroughfare on the Erie County Comprehensive Development Plan.
The major ingress and egress to the site shall be directly onto said
thoroughfare.
c) Wherever the off-street parking area is adjacent to land zoned for
residential purposes, a contiguous and obscuring wall not less than four
(4) feet six (6) inches in height shall be provided along the sides of the
parking area adjacent to the residentially zoned land. The wall shall be
further subject to the provisions of ARTICLE 26.28 FENCES, WALLS
AND OTHER PROTECTIVE BARRIERS.
4) Public, parochial and other private elementary, intermediate and/or high schools
offering courses in general education, but not commercial trade schools. No
school permitted in this subsection shall be located nearer than one hundred
(100) feet to any adjacent zoned single-family residential property.
Every school property shall be surrounded by a minimum five (5) foot chain link
fence on the side and rear lot lines and by a minimum four (4) foot chain link fence
along streets.
5) Non-profit swimming pool clubs consisting of members residing within the
immediate area of the swimming pool, or from a membership who are owners of
lots within the recorded subdivision in which the pool is situated. Said subdivision
may have been recorded in stages, and subdivision in this sense shall consist of
the various stages of development.
Said pool shall be for the exclusive use of the membership, as conditioned above,
and their guests, all subject to the following conditions:
a) As a condition of the original granting of such a permit and the operation
of such non-profit swimming pool clubs, the subdivision in which said pool
is to be situated, shall have been so advertised in the development
promotion of the said subdivision so that all purchasers of lands in the
subdivision are adequately put on notice as to the location of the pool.
Prior to the granting of a conditional use permit, the Board of Zoning
Appeals shall determine that the location of the pool and the organization
of the swimming pool was in fact public knowledge to those owners of
lands in the subdivision in question.
b) Front, side and rear yards shall be at least eighty (80) feet wide, except
on those sides adjacent to non-residential districts, wherein it shall be ten
(10) feet, and shall be landscaped in trees, shrubs, grass and terrace
areas. All such landscaping shall be maintained in a healthy condition.
There shall be no parking or structures permitted in these yards, except
for required entrance drives and those walls and/or fences used to
obscure the use from abutting residential districts.
c) All lighting shall be shielded to reduce glare and shall be so arranged and
maintained as to direct the light away from all residential lands which
adjoin the site.
d) When the parking plan is so laid out as to beam automobile headlights
toward any residential land, a wall at least four (4) feet six (6) inches in
height shall be provided along that entire side of the parking area, and
said wall shall further be subject to the requirements of ARTICLE 26.28
FENCES, WALLS AND OTHER PROTECTIVE BARRIERS.
e) When a swimming pool is constructed under this section of the Zoning
Resolution, said pool area shall be provided with a protective fence five
(5) feet in height, and entry shall be provided by means of a controlled
gate. A controlled-access shall be provided for above-ground swimming
pools.
f) Off-street parking shall be provided so as to accommodate not less than
one-half (1/2) of the member families and/or individual members at one
time. Prior to the issuance of a conditional use permit, by-laws of the
organization shall be provided in order to establish the membership
involved for computing the off-street parking requirements. Off-street
parking areas shall be subject further to the provisions of ARTICLE 19
OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS.
g) All plans for storm sewers, sanitary sewers and other utilities shall be
reviewed and approved the County Engineer and Sanitary Engineer.
6) Private recreational areas and institutional or community recreation centers
subject to the following conditions:
a) Provision for the land and/or building shall have been identified in the
original platting of the land, such that all subsequent lot purchasers were
duly placed on notice. Prior to the issuance of a conditional use permit,
the Board of Zoning Appeals shall, within thirty (30) days, determine that
such affected area residents were able to determine that such facilities
were a part of the original development scheme. Evidence to this effect
would include a provision in the plat.
b) The proposed site for any of the uses permitted herein which would
attract persons from, or are intended to serve, areas beyond the
immediate neighborhood shall have at least one property line abutting a
Regional, Major or Secondary Thoroughfare as shown in the Erie County
Comprehensive Development Plan, and the site shall be so planned as to
provide all ingress and egress directly onto or from said thoroughfare.
c) Front, side and rear yards shall be at least eight (80) feet wide and shall
be landscaped in trees, shrubs and grass. All such landscaping shall be
maintained in a healthy condition. There shall be no parking or structures
permitted in these yards, except required entrance drives and those walls
used to obscure the use from abutting residential districts.
d) Off-street parking shall be provided so as to accommodate not less than
one-half (1/2) of the member families and or individual members at one
time. The Board of Zoning Appeals may modify the off-street parking
requirements in those instances where it is specifically determined that
the users will originate from the immediately adjacent areas, and will
therefore be pedestrians. Prior to the issuance of a conditional use
permit, by-laws of the organization shall be provided in order to establish
the membership involved for computing the off-street parking
requirements. In those cases wherein the proposed use or organization
does not have by-laws or formal membership, the off-street parking
requirements shall be determined by the Board of Zoning Appeals on the
basis of usage.
7) Golf courses and driving ranges, subject to the following conditions:
a) The site shall be so planned as to provide all ingress and egress directly
to a Regional, Major or Secondary Thoroughfare as shown on the Erie
County Comprehensive Development Plan.
b) The site shall be laid out to achieve a relationship between the
thoroughfare and any proposed service roads, entrances, driveways and
parking areas which will encourage pedestrian and vehicular traffic safety.
c) Development features, including the principal and accessory buildings
and structures, shall be so located and related as to minimize the
possibilities of any adverse effects upon adjacent property. This shall
mean that all principal or accessory buildings shall be not less than two
hundred (200) feet from any property line of abutting residentially zoned
lands; provided that, where topographic conditions are such that building
would be screened from view, the Board of Zoning Appeals may modify
this requirement.
d) The minimum number of off-street parking spaces to be provided shall be
six (6) spaces per hole, plus one (1) space per employee, plus spaces
as required under ARTICLE 19 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING
REQUIREMENTS for each accessory use such as a restaurant or a bar.
e) Whenever a swimming pool is to be provided, said pool shall be provided
with a protective fence five (5) feet in height, and entry shall be by means
of a controlled gate.
f) Such use must comply with ARTICLE 12 SINGLE FAMILY DISTRICT
regarding parking and lighting (ARTICLE 12.4 REQUIRED PARKING)
and Article 12.2, Items 5 and 6 as to the parking, lighting and location of
the pool and the golf course parking and building locations.
g) Temporary buildings for use incidental to construction work for a period
not to exceed one (1) year, subject to renewal.
8) Manufactured Homes, provided they comply with the following minimum
standards:
a) Exterior siding shall be made of non-reflective and nonmetallic materials,
Acceptable siding materials include: vinyl, wood, stucco, brick, stone or
other masonry materials, or any combination of these materials;
b) Color and texture of exterior materials shall be compatible with the
adjacent single family structure;
c) Except for authorized deck areas, all roof structures shall be sloped and
provide an eave projection of no less than six (6) inches and no greater
than thirty (30) inches;
d) All roofing material shall consist of one of the following categories:
wood, shingle, wood shake, synthetic composite shingle, concrete tile.
Metallic roofing surfaces shall not be permitted on the residential structure
or on any garage or carport;
e) The minimum floor area for every dwelling located on a lot in any zoning
district shall be one thousand, two hundred (1,200) square feet, excluding
the area for basements, porches, and attached garages;
f) The minimum width of a dwelling located on a lot outside of a mobile
home subdivision shall be twenty (20) feet;
g) All manufactured homes shall be placed on a permanent foundation that
meets the applicable building code requirements such that the floor
elevation of the proposed dwelling is reasonably compatible with the floor
elevations of surrounding dwelling units.
h) Manufactured homes must be approved HUD units.
12.3 Development Standards
Minimum Lot Area 1 acre
Minimum Lot Frontage 150 feet
Minimum Front Yard Setback 50 feet
Minimum Side Yard Setback Least One: 10 feet
Total of Two: 30 feet
Minimum Rear Yard Setback 35 feet
Minimum Floor Area 1200 square feet
Maximum Height 2 1/2 stories
30 feet
Minimum Setback for Corner Lot
from Side Street 50 feet
Minimum Setback on 50 feet
Cul-de-Sacs Refer to Article 25.20
12.4 Required Parking
As specified in Article 27 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING FACILITIES.
12.5 Signs
As specified in Article 28 SIGNS.
12.6 Accessory Structures
1) Where the accessory structure is attached to a main building, it shall be subject to
and must conform to all regulations of this Resolution applicable to the main
building.
2) Except as otherwise provided herein, no accessory building or structure,
or use shall be erected or carried on in the required front yard.
3) A detached private garage, or other accessory structure may be erected
and used in the interior side or rear yard provided that:
a) When such accessory structure is located in the rear yard, a minimum
ten (10) ft. side yard setback and ten (10) ft. rear yard setback shall be
maintained, unless the structure is one thousand (1,000) square feet or
greater, then the minimum side and rear yard setback shall be twenty (20)
feet.
b) In no case shall an accessory structure be located closer than fifty (50)
feet to any road right-of-way.
4) An accessory building shall be a minimum distance of ten (10) feet from
any main building(s).
5) No accessory structure shall be used for human habitation.
6) No accessory structure shall be used for commercial or industrial purposes.
7) Accessory structures shall not cover more than thirty-five percent (35%)
of the required rear yard.
8) Accessory structures must be subordinate in area to the principal use.
9) The maximum height of any accessory structure shall be thirty (30) feet.
10) No more than two (2) accessory buildings on lots less than one acre in size.
11) Private swimming pools, refer to Section 26.3 Regulations of Swimming Pools
as Accessory Uses.
ARTICLE 13
SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT (R-1-B)
13.0 Purpose
The Single Family Residential District is designed to provide a single-family detached
dwelling environment with supporting ancillary uses. This District is primarily intended to
permit the subdivision of land for residential purposes, with lot sizes sufficiently large to
assure adequate space on the lot for individual water and/or sewerage services. The
District may also be utilized in areas containing water and sewer systems, to provide the
amenities of the larger lot.
Any use not specifically permitted under Article 13.1 or Article 13.2 of this section is
expressly prohibited.
13.1 Principally Permitted Uses
In the R-1-B District, no person shall hereafter use any building , structure or land and no
person shall erect any building or structure except in accordance with the following
provisions:
1) Single-family dwellings;
2) Publicly owned and operated schools, libraries, parks, parkways and
recreation facilities;
3) Accessory uses, subject to the provisions of Article 13.6 Accessory Structures.
13.2 Conditionally Permitted Uses
The uses listed in Article 12 SINGLE FAMILY DISTRICT (R-1-A), 12.2 Conditionally Permitted
Uses may be permitted by the Township Board of Zoning Appeals pursuant to Article 9
PROCEDURES AND GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS;
SUBSTANTIALLY SIMILAR USES AND ACCESSORY USES.
13.3 Development Standards
Minimum Lot Area With
Public Water Only 30,000 square. feet
Minimum Lot Area With
Public (Sanitary) Sewer
and Public Water 13,500 square feet
Minimum Lot Frontage
With Public Water Only 100 feet
Minimum Lot Frontage With
Public (Sanitary) Sewer and
Public Water 90 feet
Minimum Front Yard Setback 50 feet
Minimum Side Yard Setback Least One: 10 feet
Total of Two: 20 feet
Minimum Rear Yard Setback 35 feet
Minimum Floor Area 1,200 square feet
Minimum Setback for Corner Lots
from Side Street 50 feet
Maximum Building Height 2 1/2 stories
30 feet
Minimum Setback on Cul-de-Sac 50 feet
Refer to Section 25.20.
13.4 Required Parking
As specified in Article 27 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING FACILITIES.
13.5 Signs
As specified in Article 28 SIGNS.
13.6 Accessory Structures
1) Where the accessory structure is attached to a main building, it shall be subject to
and must conform to all regulations of this Resolution applicable to the main
building.
2) Except as otherwise provided herein, no accessory building or structure,
or use shall be erected or carried on in the required front yard.
3) A detached private garage, or other accessory structure may be erected
and used in the interior side or rear yard provided that:
a) When such accessory structure is located in the rear yard, a minimum
side and rear yard of ten (10) feet shall be maintained, unless the
structure is 1,000 square feet or greater, then the minimum side yard and
rear yard shall be twenty (20) feet.
b) In no case shall an accessory structure be located closer than
fifty (50) feet to any road right-of-way.
4) An accessory building shall be a minimum distance of ten (10) feet from
any main building(s).
5) No accessory structure shall be used for human habitation.
6) No accessory structure shall be used for commercial or industrial
purposes.
7) Accessory structures shall not cover more than thirty-five (35) percent of
the required rear yard.
8) Accessory structures must be subordinate in area to the principal use.
9) The maximum height of any accessory structure shall be thirty (30)
feet.
10) No more than two (2) accessory buildings on lots less than one (1) acre in size.
11) Private swimming pools, refer to Section 26.3 Regulations of Swimming Pools as
Accessory Uses.
ARTICLE 14
TWO FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT (R-2)
14.0 Purpose
The R-2 District is designed to provide for a one-and-two family residential environment on
relatively small lots with supporting ancillary uses in areas of the Township which contain
public water and sanitary sewer systems. This District is also designed to permit the
conversion of older large residences in areas which are experiencing a transition in use
acceptability because of external adverse influences.
Any use not specifically permitted under Article 14.1 or 14.2 of this section is expressly
prohibited.
14.1 Principally Permitted Uses
The following provisions apply in all R-2 Districts. In an R-2 District, no person shall
hereafter use any building or structure except in accordance with the following provisions:
1) All uses principally permitted in R-1 District unless otherwise provided;
2) Two-family dwellings;
14.2 Conditionally Permitted Uses
The uses listed in Article 12 Single Family District (R-1-A), 12.2 Conditionally Permitted
Uses may be permitted by the Township Board of Zoning Appeals pursuant to Article 9
PROCEDURES AND GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS;
SUBSTANTIALLY SIMILAR USES; QAND ACCESSORY USES and subject further to the
following provisions:
1) The conversion of existing residences is hereby permitted provided that further
encroachment into required yard areas is not necessary and provided that
the following conditions are met:
a. Conversion is prohibited in the event a lot is less than one hundred (100)
feet in width.
b. Conversion is prohibited if the effect of said conversion is to increase the
lot coverage to more than thirty-five (35) percent.
c. When converted, no dwelling unit shall contain a floor area of less than
nine hundred (900) square feet.
14.3 Development Standards
Minimum Lot Area 20,000 sq. ft.
Minimum Lot Frontage 100 feet
Minimum Front Yard Setback 50 feet
Minimum Side Yard Setback 10 feet each side
Minimum Rear Yard Setback 35 feet
Minimum Floor Area 900 square feet
Maximum Building Height 30 feet
Minimum Setback for Corner Lot 50 feet
Minimum Setback on Cul-de-Sacs 50 feet
Refer to Section 25.20
14.4 Required Parking
As specified in Article 27 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING FACILITIES.
14.5 Signs
As specified in Article 28 SIGNS.
14.6 Accessory Structure
In residentially zoned districts and on property used in a residential manner, accessory
buildings which are clearly incidental to, customarily found in connection with, subordinate
to, and located on the same zoning lot, except as otherwise permitted in this Resolution,
shall be subject to the following regulations:
1) Where the accessory structure is structurally attached to a main building, it shall
be subject to and must conform to all regulations of this Resolution applicable to
the main building.
2) Accessory buildings shall not be erected in any required yard, except a rear yard.
Accessory buildings, on a corner lot of record, that conflict with required yards
shall be submitted to the Board of Zoning Appeals for a variance. The Board's
decision as to extent and location shall be compatible with the intent of this
Resolution.
3) An accessory structure not exceeding twenty (20) feet in height may occupy not
more than twenty-five (25) percent of a required rear yard, plus forty (40) percent of
any non-required rear yard, provided that in no instance shall the accessory
building exceed the ground floor area of the main building or ten (10) percent of the
total lot, whichever is the lesser. Additionally, one other accessory structure not
to exceed two hundred (200) square feet in size and fifteen (15) feet in height may
be erected.
4) No detached accessory building shall be located closer than ten (10) feet to any
main building, nor shall it be located closer than ten (10) feet to any side lot line,
nor closer than five (5) feet to any rear lot line.
In those instances where the rear lot line is coterminous with an alley right-of-way
the accessory building shall not be closer than one (1) foot to such rear lot line. In
no instance shall any accessory building be located within a dedicated easement
right-of-way.
5) When an accessory building is located on a corner lot, said building shall not
project beyond the front yard line of the required rear yards.
ARTICLE 15
MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT (R-3)
15.0 Statement of Purpose
The R-3 District is designed to provide for a multiple housing environment with
townhouses and garden apartments constituting the principal type dwelling
accommodations. The District should be adequately supported with necessary public
utilities.
Any use not specifically permitted under 15.1 Principally Permitted Uses of this
section is expressly prohibited.
15.1 Principally Permitted Uses
In an R-3 District, no person shall hereafter use any building or structure except in
accordance with the following provisions:
1) All principally permitted uses and conditionally permitted uses in the R-1-B
District, subject to the terms and conditions provided herein.
2) Multiple-family dwelling units, including apartments, townhouses and row
houses.
3) Hospitals, provided the following conditions are met:
a) All such hospitals shall be developed only on sites consisting of
at least ten (10) acres in area.
b) The proposed site shall have at least one property line abutting a
Regional, Major or Secondary Thoroughfare as shown in the Erie County
Comprehensive Plan. All ingress and egress to the off-street parking
area
for guests, employees, staff, as well as any other uses of the facilities,
shall be directly from a said thoroughfare.
c) In the event one or more boundaries of the proposed site lies opposite
or contiguous to an R-1 or R-2 residential district, the minimum distance
between any hospital structure or accessory use and the residential
district boundary shall be at least one hundred (100) feet for buildings
containing two (2) stories or less. For buildings above two (2) stories, the
building shall be setback from the initial one hundred (100) foot setback
an additional one foot for each foot of additional height above two (2)
stories.
d) The minimum distance from any street right-of-way line shall not
be less than fifty (50) feet.
e) The minimum distance from any non-residential interior lot line
shall not be less than twenty-five (25) feet.
f) Ambulance and delivery areas shall be obscured from all residential
view with a wall of at least six (6) feet in height and said wall shall be
further subject to the requirements of ARTICLE 25.19 Site Plan
Review and ARTICLE 27 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING
FACILITIES.
4) Housing for the elderly shall be on a site of more than five (5) acres in
area and may provide for the following:
a) Cottage-type dwellings and/or apartment-type dwelling units.
b) Common services containing, but not limited to, central dining
rooms, recreational rooms, central lounges and workshops.
c) All dwellings shall consist of at least three hundred fifty (350)
square feet per unit (not including kitchen and sanitary facilities).
d) Total coverage of all buildings (including dwelling units and related
service buildings) shall not exceed thirty-five (35) percent of the total site
exclusive of any dedicated public right-of-way.
5) Convalescent and/or nursing homes, not to exceed a height of two (2)
stories, when the following conditions are met:
a) The site shall be so developed as to create a land-to-building ratio
on the lot or parcel whereby for each bed in the convalescent home, there
shall be provided not less than fifteen hundred (1,500) square feet of
open space. The fifteen hundred (1,500) square feet of land per bed shall
provide for landscaping, off-street parking, service drives, loading space,
yard requirements and space required for accessory uses.
b) No building shall be closer than forty (40) feet from any property
line.
5) Boarding house (rooming house), when the following conditions are
met:
a) No more than one (1) person shall occupy each sleeping room of not
less than one hundred (100) square feet.
b) Fire escapes shall be provided as approved by the Zoning Board
of Appeals.
c) Fire exit instructions shall be posted in each sleeping room.
d) All applicable provisions of the fire code shall be met, and
certification of such compliance by the appropriate fire department
official shall accompany the application.
6) Boarding house (rooming house), when the following conditions are met:
a) No more than one (1) person shall occupy each sleeping room of not less
than one hundred (100) square feet.
b) Fire escapes shall be provided as approved by the Zoning Board of
Appeals.
c) Fire exit instructions shall be posted in each sleeping room.
d) All applicable provisions of the fire code shall be met, and certification of
such compliance by the appropriate fire department official shall
accompany the application.
7) Accessory structures and uses customarily incidental to any of the above uses.
15.2 Site and Landscape Plan Review
For all uses permitted in the Multi-Family Residential R-3 District, a site plan shall be
submitted in accordance with the provisions of Article 25 SUPPLEMENTARY DISTRICT
REGULATIONS, Section 25.19 Site Plan Review.
15.3 Screening
Screening or buffering in compliance with the provisions of Article 25 SUPPLEMTARY
DISTRICT REGULATIONS, Section 25.18 Screening/Buffering is required.
15.4 Lot, Yard, Area and Building Requirements
Minimum Lot Area 1 acre
Minimum Lot Frontage 150 feet
Minimum Front Yard Setback 50 feet or as noted in Section 25.24
Minimum Side Yard Setback 15 feet (each side) or as noted
Minimum Rear Yard Setback 35 feet
Maximum Net Density 6 units per acre
Maximum Height 40 feet
15.5 Required Parking
Off-street parking facilities in compliance with the provisions of Article 27 OFF-STREET
PARKING AND LOADING FACILITIES are required.
15.6 Signs
Signs in compliance with the provisions of Article 28 SIGNS are permitted.
15.7 Accessory Structures
1) Except as otherwise provided herein, no accessory building or structure,
or use shall be erected or carried on in the front yard.
2) A detached private garage or other accessory structure may be erected
and used in the interior side or rear yard provided that:
a) When such accessory structure is located in the rear yard a
minimum side and rear yard of five (5) feet shall be maintained.
b) In no case shall an accessory structure be located closer than
fifty (50) feet to any right-of-way.
c) An accessory structure shall be a minimum distance of ten (10)
feet from any main building.
d) No accessory structure shall be used for commercial or industrial
purposes.
e) An accessory building not exceeding twenty (20) feet in height may
occupy not more than twenty-five percent (25%) of a required rear
yard, plus forty percent (40%) of any non-required rear yard, provided that
in no instance shall the accessory building exceed the ground floor area
of the main building or ten percent (10%) of the total lot, whichever is the
lesser. Additionally, one other accessory structure not to exceed two
hundred (200) square feet in size and fifteen (15) feet in height may be
erected.
f) Private swimming pools, refer to ARTICLE 26 SPECIAL
REGULATIONS, Section 26.10 Private Swimming Pools.
15.8 Development Standards for Multi-Family Dwellings
1) Purpose and Intent
The special provisions set forth herein are intended to provide design criteria for
multi-family dwellings. It is the express purpose of these provisions to establish
design criteria and to provide for implementation of these provisions by the
Township review of the site plan.
It is the intent that multi-family dwellings, where they are permitted, shall constitute
groupings making efficient, economical, comfortable and convenient use of land
and open space and serving the public purposes of zoning by means alternative
to conventional arrangements of yards and buildable areas.
2) Detailed Design Criteria
a) Each dwelling unit should be provided with reasonable visual and
acoustical privacy. Fences, walks and landscaping shall be provided for
the protection and aesthetic enhancement of the development and
privacy of the occupants, screening of objectionable views or uses and
the reduction of noise.
b) Walks should be provided for convenient and safe access to all
living units from streets, driveways, parking courts or garages and for
convenient circulation and access to all facilities.
c) The appearance and character of the site shall be preserved and
enhanced by retaining and protecting existing trees and other site
features and additional new plant material shall be added for privacy,
shade, beauty of buildings and grounds and to screen out objectionable
features. The planting plan shall be submitted with the site development
plan.
d) Existing trees, shrubs, evergreens and ground cover shall be retained
to the extent that they enhance the project, are effective as a screen
planting or are useful in protecting slopes.
e) Adequate recreation facilities for the residents of the project
should be provided in locations easily accessible to the living units and
where they do not impair the view and privacy of living units.
f) Attractive outdoor sitting areas should be provided, appropriate in
size, type and number to the needs of the residents.
g) Well-equipped playgrounds of adequate size and number shall be
provided, where it is anticipated that children will occupy the premises.
h) All public streets located within any multi-family development shall
meet the construction specifications set forth in the subdivision
regulations.
i) The Township shall act to insure that any private drives, parking areas
or other vehicular ways used for common access for two (2) or more
residents will be suitably paved and maintained as a condition of approval
of the project.
j) All dwelling units shall be so positioned as to insure the availability of
adequate fire protection. The fire department shall adjudge the adequacy
of protection.
ARTICLE 16
LOCAL COMMERCIAL DISTRICT (C-1)
16.0 Statement of Purpose
The C-1 District is intended for retail business and service uses which are needed to serve
the nearby residential area. The intent of this District is also to encourage the
concentration of local business areas to the mutual advantage of both the consumers and
merchants and thereby promote the best use of land at certain strategic locations.
Any use not specifically permitted under 16.1 Principally Permitted Uses or 16.3
Conditionally Permitted Uses of this section is expressly prohibited.
16.1 Principally Permitted Uses
1) Shops for the sale of baked goods, beverages, including liquor outlets
(not be be consumed on the premises), books, confections, drugs, flowers,
foodstuffs including meats, gifts, hardware, hobby equipment, jewelry, notions,
paint, periodicals, sundry, small household articles and tobacco except that
shopping centers shall comply with provisions in Section 16.3.
2) Personal service establishments performing services on the premises,
such as barber and beauty shops, watch and shoe repair, tailor shops, locksmith
and similar establishments.
3) Laundry or dry cleaning customer outlets, coin-operated laundromat and
self-serve dry cleaning center. Dry cleaning or laundry plants serving more than
one customer service outlet shall be prohibited.
4) Professional offices of doctors, lawyers, dentists, chiropractors and similar
professions.
5) Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the above Principally
Permitted Uses. Accessory buildings must be located a minimum of ten (10) feet
from other structures and must meet all of the Section 16.6 Development
Standards.
16.2 Required Conditions
1) All business establishments shall deal directly with consumers. All goods
produced on the premises shall be sold at retail on the premises where
they are produced.
2) All business, servicing or processing, except for off-street parking or
loading, shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building.
16.3 Conditionally Permitted Uses
The following uses may be permitted by the Township Board of Zoning Appeals pursuant
to Article 29 VESTED RIGHTS and subject further to the provisions herein ARTICLE 25
SUPPLELMENTARY DISTRICT REGULATIONS, Section 25.19 Site Plan Review:
1) Planned shopping center when used in this context means a commercial
development which has been designed, developed and operated as a unit and
can satisfy the following criteria: a site of three (3) to five (5) acres; six (6) to
fifteen (15) stores; and a floor area of 10,000 to 50,000 square feet; and which
further satisfies the following development standards:
a) A planting strip at least ten (10) feet wide shall be provided around the
entire perimeter of the site except for driveways onto the public street
system. A wall not less than five (5) feet high shall be required along
those property lines which abut a residential district.
b) No main or accessory building shall be situated less than fifty (50)
feet from any perimeter property line.
c) A landscaping plan which includes the entire site shall be
submitted for approval to determine compliance with screening and
planting strips. See Section 16.5 Screening/Buffering.
d) All signs shall be affixed to the face of the building and shall be of
a uniform design throughout, except for one ground or pole sign
advertising the name of the shopping center. See ARTICLE 28 SIGNS.
e) On-site pedestrian and vehicle circulation shall be designed to
limit traffic hazards.
f) The maximum grade of off-street parking spaces shall be three
percent (3%). See ARTICLE 27 OFF-STREET PARKING AND
LOADING FACILITIES.
g) A site plan must be submitted subject to provisions of ARTICLE 25,
Section 25.19 Site Plan Review.
2) Nursery schools, day nurseries, and child care centers (not including
dormitories) provided that for each child so cared for, there shall be provided and
maintained a minimum of one hundred and fifty (150) square feet of outdoor play
area. Such play space shall have a total minimum area of not less than five
thousand (5,000) square feet and shall be screened from any adjoining lot in any
residential district. Said use shall not be permitted in the interior of any residential
block and shall have minimum side and rear yards of one hundred (100) feet.
3) Residential use in conjunction with commercial use provided the
following conditions are met:
a) One dwelling unit may be permitted in conjunction with a
commercial use.
b) The permitted dwelling unit may only be occupied by the
owner/operator of the commercial use.
c) Off-street parking must be provided for the dwelling unit in
accordance with Section 27.8 of this Code.
d) The attached dwelling unit must be a minimum of four hundred fifty
(450) square feet in floor area and must meet the same setback
requirements as the commercial use.
4) Car washes. Any automatic or manually operated facility used to accommodate
the laundering of automobiles and construed to be of a commercial
operation managed to produce a profit and which further satisfies the
following development standards:
a) Public sewers and water facilities shall be utilized.
b) For drive-through car washes, an escape lane shall be provided
as an alternate exit route. Each washing bay shall be provided a stacking
lane, as determined by the Board of Zoning Appeals.
c) All structures housing washing apparatuses shall be setback fifty
(50) feet from any rear property line and twenty (20) feet from any side lot
lines; provided, however, that in the event that the lot fronts on two (2)
street right-of-way lines, then the setback requirements on the one street
frontage shall be fifty (50) feet and the setback on the other street
frontage shall be fifty (50) feet.
5) Mini-storage buildings, subject to the following conditions:
a) No lot shall be less than two (2) acres in size.
b) The lot shall abut and gain direct access to a local non-residential,
collector, or arterial street as specified in the Major Thoroughfare Plan.
c) Stormwater management shall be incorporated into the site plan for a
mini-storage building so that stormwater run-off from the site will not
increase as a result of the proposed development. The facility shall be
designed to control the stormwater run-off from at least a twenty-five (25)-
year return frequency storm as certified by a professional engineer.
d) No business activity other than rental of storage units shall be conducted
on the premises and no outside storage will be permitted.
e) All outdoor lighting shall be shielded to direct light and glare only onto the
mini-storage premises and may be of sufficient intensity to discourage
vandalism and theft. Said lighting and glare shall be deflected, shaped
and focused away from all adjoining property.
f) Building setbacks shall be as follows:
Front Yard Setback Not less than 25 feet on
which parking & internal
drives are prohibited.
Side Yard Setback Not less than 12.5 feet on
which all parking and
internal drives are prohibited.
Rear Yard Setback Not less than 12.5 feet on
which all parking and internal
drives are prohibited, except that
a rear yard is not required
adjacent to commercial or
industrial zoned land.
g) The storage facility shall be enclosed by a six (6) foot high, completely
opaque fence. Said fence shall be solid or semi-solid and constructed to
prevent the passage of debris and constructed of either brick, stone,
masonry units, wood or similar materials. Chain link fence may be used
so long as it has slats installed to prevent the passage of light through the
unit. Said fence shall be setback six (6) feet from the side property lines
and rear property line. When a rear yard setback is not required, a lesser
setback for a fence can be granted. Fences shall also be set back
twenty-five (25) feet from the front property line.
h) Landscaping shall be provided in the areas between the property line and
the required fencing. Landscaping shall consist of a variety of hardy
evergreen planted material consisting of trees, low-, medium-, and highprofile
shrubs, together with suitable groundcover such as native grasses,
bark, ornamental gravel or a combination thereof. The landscaping shall
be designed, placed and maintained in such a manner that no wall, fence,
sign or other structure or plant growth of a type that would interfere with
traffic visibility shall be permitted or maintained higher than three (3) feet
above curb level, within fifteen (15) feet of the intersection of any street
right-of-way line or driveway.
i) Parking shall be provided at a ratio of one (1) space for each two
thousand (2,000) square feet of gross building area, plus two (2) spaces for
the manager. One additional space shall be provided for each additional
employee. lnternal drives and parking shall be paved or provided with a
hard, dustless surface satisfactory to the Township.
j) Building heights shall be limited to one (1) story (not to exceed fourteen
[14] feet at the eaves).
k. Signs shall be limited to one (1) ground sign at the entrance to the
premises. No more than thirty-two (32) square feet shall be permitted with
a maximum height of ten (10) feet. This provision shall control any and all
contrary or conflicting provisions of the sign regulations of ARTICLER 28
SIGNS.
l) No facility herein provided for shall be used or maintained unless or until
an on-site manager shall be provided for such facility. Failure to provide
such a manager shall be grounds for revocation of the conditional use
permit.
m) The sale of any item from or at a mini-storage building is specifically
prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any owner, operator or lessee of any
storage warehouse or portion thereof to offer for sale, or to sell any item of
personal property or to conduct any type of commercial activity of any
kind whatsoever other than leasing of the storage units.
n) Because of the danger from fire or explosion caused by the accumulation
of vapors from gasoline, diesel fuel, paint, paint remover and other
flammable materials, the repair, construction or reconstruction of any
boat, engine, motor vehicle or furniture and the storage of any propane or
gasoline engine or propane or gasoline storage tank or any boat or vehicle
incorporating such components is prohibited within any structure on a tract
of land designated as a residential storage warehouse.
o) Any violation of the regulations regarding mini-storage buildings shall be
grounds for the revocation of the conditional use permit and shall also be
considered to be in violation of this zoning resolution.
16.4 Site and Landscape Plan Review
For all uses permitted in the C-1 District, a site plan shall be submitted to the Township
Zoning Inspector for his/her review and recommendations. The Zoning Inspector in the
review of the site plan shall have regard to the provisions of this Resolution. The Zoning
Board of Appeals may require certain modifications in terms of the location of buildings,
parking and driveways and may require screening/landscaping techniques to ameliorate
potential nuisance problems with adjoining districts or to lessen the transmission of noise
from the public street system. A site plan must be submitted in accordance with the
provisions of Article 25, Section 25.19 Site Plan Review.
16.5 Screening/Buffering
To assist in the prevention of the transmission of light and noise from within any
commercial district into any abutting residential district, screening shall be required where
such district abuts or is contiguous to any residential district, without an intervening alley
or other public way. Such screening shall be provided within the commercial district, but
not within a public street or alley, along the entire contiguity of said districts. Screening
shall be of opaque or translucent materials resistant to deterioration by natural causes, or
it shall be of such plant materials as will provide a year-round evergreen screening.
Screening as provided herein, shall not be less than six (6) feet in height, shall be
provided from the grade of the property upward and shall be permanently maintained. A
minimum of a ten (10) foot high buffer shall be provided adjacent to a Residential District.
16.6 Development Standards
Minimum Lot Area 1 acre
Minimum Lot Frontage 150 feet
Minimum Front Yard Setback 50 feet or as noted in Section 25.24
which includes 100 feet on the
eastern side of U. S. Route 250
between Scheid and Mason Roads
Minimum Side Yard Setback 30 feet (each side)
Minimum Rear Yard Setback 40 feet
Minimum Setback for Corner Lots 50 feet or as noted in Section 25.24
which includes 100 feet on the
eastern side of U. S. Route 250
between Scheid & Mason Rods
Maximum Height 35 feet at the highest point
Maximum Lot Coverage 40 percent (40%) and
not to exceed three (3) buildings
per acre
16.7 Required Parking
As specified in ARTICLE 27 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING FACILITIES.
16.8 Signs
As specified in ARTICLE 28 SIGNS.
16.9 Prohibition of Outdoor Storage and Land Use
All uses of land except as herein provided, shall take place within a wholly enclosed structure,
except that this shall not be construed to include the parking of motorized vehicles.
ARTICLE 17
GENERAL COMMERCIAL DISTRICT (C-2)
17.0 Statement of Purpose
The C-2 District is designed to accommodate types of businesses, including but not limited
to, those uses intended to serve passing motorists, those uses requiring large sites and
major shopping centers. The C-2 District uses are typified by having a majority of the
following characteristics:
1) They are large space users.
2) Their customers do not make frequent purchases.
3) They combine retail, wholesale, service and repair in various ways.
4) Their market is regional as contrasted to local.
5) Their market area is partially dependent upon extending services to
other business uses and not necessarily household oriented.
Any use not specifically permitted under 17.1 Principally Permitted Uses or
17.2 Conditionally Permitted Uses of this section is expressly prohibited.
17.1 Principally Permitted Uses
In a C-2 District, no person shall hereafter use any building, structure, or land and no
person shall erect any building or structure except in accordance with the following
provisions:
1) All principal uses permitted in the C-1 District except that shopping
centers shall be subject to the regulations of Article 17.2 Conditionally
Permitted Uses, Item 11.
2) Any service establishment of an office, showroom, or workshop nature of
an electrician, decorator, dressmaker, tailor, baker, painter, upholsterer; or an
establishment doing radio or home appliance repair, photographic reproduction
and similar service establishments that require a retail adjunct.
3) All retail business establishments conducted within a completely
enclosed building except those listed separately as conditional uses in this
District.
4) Wholesale business establishments and wholesale distribution centers
conducted within a completely enclosed building.
5) Dormitories, fraternities, clubs, lodges, social or recreational buildings.
6) Sales establishments, such as for real estate and insurance conducted
within a completely enclosed building, except those listed separately as
conditional uses in this District.
7) Repair shops conducted within a completely enclosed building except
those listed separately as conditional uses in this District.
8) Public buildings and uses.
9) Business schools and colleges or private trade schools operated for
profit.
10) Commercial or technical schools or training centers.
11) Offices.
12) Restaurants or other places serving food and beverages.
13) Data processing centers.
14) Banks.
15) Research and development facilities.
16) Merchandise service shops.
17) Specialized commercial uses including plumbing, electrical and building
supply shops.
18) Theaters, assembly halls, concert halls, or similar places of assembly,
conducted completely within an enclosed building.
19) Bowling alleys, billiard halls, indoor archery ranges, or indoor skating rinks,
or similar forms of indoor recreation when located at least one hundred (100) feet
from any front, rear or side yard of any residential lot in an adjacent residential
district.
20) Hotels and motels.
21) Accessory structures and uses customarily incidental to the above
permitted uses. Accessory buildings must be located a minimum of ten (10)
feet from other structures and must meet all of the Section 17.3 Development
Standards.
17.2 Conditionally Permitted Uses
The following uses shall be permitted by the Township Board of Zoning Appeals pursuant
to ARTICLE 29 VESTED RIGHT and subject further to the provisions herein ARTICLE 9
PROCEDURES AND GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS;
SUBSTANTIALLY SIMILAR USES; AND ACCESSORY USES.
1) Automobile service stations and Auto repair stations.
a) The curb cuts for ingress and egress to a service station shall not
be permitted at such locations that will tend to create traffic hazards in the
street immediately adjacent thereto. Entrances shall be no less than fifty
(50) feet from a street intersection (measured from the road right-of-way)
or from adjacent residential districts.
b) The minimum lot area shall be twenty thousand (20,000) square
feet, with minimum lot sides of one hundred fifty (150) feet each, and so
arranged that ample space is available for motor vehicles which are
required to wait for services.
c) Automobile service stations and auto repair stations shall not be located
within five hundred (500) feet of any school.
d) All lighting shall be shielded from adjacent residential districts.
e. The maximum length of time that a vehicle may be parked on the
premises waiting for service is sixty (60) days.
2) Car washes. Any automatic or manually operated facility used to accommodate
the laundering of automobiles and construed to be of a commercial operation
managed to produce a profit. Standards that apply to car washes are as follows:
a) Public sewers and water facilities shall be utilized.
b) For drive-through car washes, an escape lane shall be provided
as an alternate exit route. Each washing bay shall be provided a stacking
lane, as determined by the Board of Zoning Appeals.
c) All structures housing washing apparatuses shall be setback fifty
(50) feet from any rear property line and twenty (20) feet from any side lot
lines; provided, however, that in the event that the lot fronts on two (2)
street right-of-way lines, then the setback requirements on the one street
frontage shall be fifty (50) feet and the setback on the other street
frontage shall be fifty (50) feet.
3) Recreational vehicle sales and service, including boats, snowmobiles,
travel trailers, campers, tents and accessory equipment peculiar to the above;
motor vehicle sales and service; and farm implement sales and service, subject to
the following conditions:
a) All repairs shall be conducted within a wholly enclosed building.
b) Outdoor areas used for display shall be provided with a permanent,
durable and dustless surface and shall be graded and drained as to
dispose of all surface water accumulated within the area.
c) Points of ingress and egress to the lot shall be located at least
fifty (50) feet from the right-of-way of the intersection of any two (2)
streets.
d) All lighting shall be shielded from adjacent residential districts.
4) Any business of a drive-in nature or so called open front store or open
air business, subject to the following conditions:
a) A setback of at least sixty (60) feet from the right-of-way line of
any existing or proposed street must be maintained.
b) Ingress and egress points shall be located at least fifty (50) feet
from the right-of-way of the intersection of any two (2) streets.
c) All lighting shall be shielded from adjacent residential districts.
d) A completely opaque wall at least six (6) feet high shall be
provided when abutting or adjacent to any residential district.
5) Open air commercial amusements, including but not limited to miniature
golf courses, batting cages, and mini race car or go-cart tracks, subject to the
following conditions:
a) Such uses shall not have an adverse impact on surrounding
properties.
b) Such uses shall be appropriately screened from adjacent
properties with landscaping, a wall or wood privacy fencing so as to
reduce potential noise, glare and vehicular and pedestrian traffic
congestion.
6) Veterinary hospitals or clinics, subject to the following conditions:
a) All activities must be conducted within a totally enclosed building.
b) All abutting property must be non-residentially zoned.
c) Sanitation practices shall be adequate to ensure that objectionable
odors shall not be noticeable on or off the lot considering various wind
conditions.
d) No dead animals shall be buried on the premises and incineration
of dead animals shall not create odors or smoke.
e) Veterinary hospitals or clinics shall be designed, constructed and
maintained so that sound emitted through exterior walls and roofs of
enclosing areas where animals are treated or kept during treatment shall
not exceed 45 decibels. Building plans submitted for a building permit
application for veterinary hospitals or clinics shall include a certificate by a
registered architect or acoustical engineer that the building will meet
these requirements. Existing buildings that are to be used as veterinary
hospitals or clinics shall also be certified by a registered architect or
acoustical engineer as complying with the requirements.
7) Travel trailer parks which rent space to recreational vehicles as defined in
ARTICLE 3 Construction of Language and Definitions, 3.155 Recreational
Vehicle. No permanent structures shall be allowed on the premises, other than
a business office with a game room and grocery sales and/or sanitary facilities.
The issuance of a permit shall be subject to the following conditions:
a) Travel trailer parks musts be a minimum of ten (10) acres in size.
b) Sewer, water, fuel, electrical and telephone installation and
connections shall be done in accordance with plans approved by the
appropriate agency or utility. Underground sewer, water and electrical
connections must be supplied for each unit.
b) Maximum trailer size shall be forty (40) feet.
d) All streets and roadways shall be hard-surfaced and parking shall
be prohibited on all streets and roadways. Main roadways will be a
minimum of twenty-four (24) feet in width.
e) Outdoor areas used for display shall be provided with a permanent,
durable, dustless surface and shall be graded and drained as to dispose of
all surface water accumulated within the area in accordance with the
specifications of the County Engineer.
f) No trailer lot shall have direct access to a public thoroughfare.
g) Point of registration should be at least two hundred (200) feet
from the road right-of-way.
h) There shall be a space between each two (2) trailers of at least
twenty (20) feet and not less than twenty (20) feet between the ends of
each two (2) trailers.
i) No trailer shall be closer than ten (10) feet from any private street
or adjacent property line, or fifty (50) feet from any right-of-way line.
j) No business of any kind shall be conducted in any trailer.
k) All repairs shall be conducted within a wholly enclosed building.
l) Fence and/or greenbelts may be required by the Township Zoning Board
of Appeals.
m) All exterior lighting shall be sufficient to provide security and
discourage vandalism in the park. All lighting shall be shielded from
adjacent residential districts.
n) No facility herein provided for shall be used or maintained unless
or until an on-site manager shall be provided for such a facility. Failure to
provide such a manager shall be grounds for revocation of the conditional
use permit.
o) All signs shall conform to the sign regulations as stated in ARTICLE
28 SIGNS.
p) The Township Zoning Board of Appeals shall approve the plans
for any travel trailer park prior to issuance of a zoning certificate.
q) Accessory uses subject to approval by the Township Zoning Board of
Appeals.
r) There shall be no permanent recreational vehicles permitted in the park;
that is units which remain continuously on site and are rented by the
owner/operator of the travel trailer park to transients as if a motel/hotel
unit.
s) All non-self-propelled recreational vehicles shall be accompanied by a
motor vehicle which is both capable of towing the recreational vehicle and
is registered for travel upon the highways of this State.
t) All recreational vehicles shall be registered with the State of Ohio or
another licensing governmental unit such as another state or Canada for
travel upon public highways. All vehicles shall be registered for travel
upon the public highways of this State.
8) Bowling alleys, billiard halls, indoor archery ranges, or indoor skating
rinks, or similar forms of indoor recreation when located less than one hundred
(100) feet from any front, rear or side yard of any residential lot in an adjacent
residential district, subject to the following conditions:
a) All activities shall be conducted within a wholly enclosed building.
b) Points of ingress and egress to the lot shall be located at least
fifty (50) feet from the right-of-way of the intersection of any two (2)
streets.
c) All lighting shall be shielded from adjacent residential districts.
d) Screenings and plantings to buffer any adjacent residential areas
are required.
9) Mini-storage buildings, subject to the following conditions:
a) No lot shall be less than two (2) acres in size.
b) The lot shall abut and gain direct access to a local nonresidential,
collector, or arterial street as specified in the Major
Thoroughfare Plan.
c) Stormwater management shall be incorporated into the site plan
for a mini-storage building so that stormwater run-off from the site will not
increase as a result of the proposed development. The facility shall be
designed to control the stormwater run-off from at least a twenty-five
(25)year return frequency storm as certified by a professional engineer.
d) No business activity other than rental of storage units shall be
conducted on the premises and no outside storage will be permitted.
e) All outdoor lighting shall be shielded to direct light and glare only
onto the mini-storage premises and may be of sufficient intensity to
discourage vandalism and theft. Said lighting and glare shall be
deflected, shaded and focused away from all adjoining property.
f) Greenbelt setbacks shall be as follows:
Front Yard Setback Not less than 25 feet on which
parking & internal drives are
prohibited.
Side Yard Setback Not less than 12.5 feet on each side
on which all parking and internal drives
are prohibited
Rear Yard Setback Not less than 12.5 feet on which
all parking and internal drives are
prohibited, except that a rear yard
is not required adjacent to commercial
or industrial zoned land.
g) The storage facility shall be enclosed by a six (6) foot high fence. Said
fence shall be constructed to prevent the passage of debris. Said fence
shall be setback six (6) feet from the side property lines and rear property
line. When a rear yard setback is not required, a lesser setback for a
fence can be granted. Fences shall also be set back twenty-five (25) feet
from the front property line.
h) Landscaping shall be provided in the areas between the property
line and the required fencing. Landscaping shall consist of a variety of
hardy evergreen planted material consisting of trees, low-, medium- and
high-profile shrubs, together with suitable groundcover such as native
grasses, bark, ornamental gravel or a combination thereof. The
landscaping shall be designed, placed and maintained in such a manner
that no wall, fence, sign or other structure or plant growth of a type that
would interfere with traffic visibility shall be permitted or maintained higher
than three (3) feet above curb level, within fifteen (15) feet of the
intersection of any street right-of-way line or driveway.
i) Parking shall be provided at a ratio of one (1) space for each two
thousand (2,000) square feet of gross building area, plus two (2) spaces for
the manager. One (1) additional space shall be provided for each additional
employee. Internal drives and parking shall be paved or provided with a
hard, dustless surface satisfactory to the Township.
j) Building heights shall be limited to one (1) story (not to exceed
fourteen (14) feet at the eaves).
k) Signs shall be limited to one ground sign not more than thirty-two (32)
square feet in size at the entrance to the premises as per ARTICLE 28
SIGNS and Definition 3.168 Signs.
l) No facility herein provided for shall be used or maintained unless
or until an on-site manager shall be provided for such facility. Failure to
provide such a manager shall be grounds for revocation of the conditional
use permit.
m) The sale of any item from or at a mini-storage building is specifically
prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any owner, operator or lessee of any
storage warehouse or portion thereof to offer for sale, or to sell any item
of personal property or to conduct any type of commercial activity of any
kind whatsoever other than leasing of the storage units.
n) Because of the danger from fire or explosion caused by the
accumulation of vapors from gasoline, diesel fuel, paint, paint remover
and other flammable materials, the repair, construction or reconstruction
of any boat, engine, motor vehicle or furniture and the storage of any
propane or gasoline engine or propane or gasoline storage tank or any
boat or vehicle incorporating such components if prohibited within any
structure on a tract of land designated as a residential storage
warehouse.
o) Any violation of the regulation regarding mini-storage buildings
shall be grounds for the revocation of the conditional use permit and shall
also be considered to be in violation of this zoning resolution.
10) Golf courses and driving ranges, subject to the following conditions:
a) All buildings and structures shall be at least thirty (30) feet from all
property lines.
b) A minimum of two (2) off-street parking spaces shall be provided
for each driving tee and putting green. Additional spaces shall be
furnished for other uses in conjunction with the range.
c) All drives and parking areas shall be surfaced with a hard,
durable material and properly drained.
d) All lights shall be directed away from site boundary lines.
e) Fences, plantings or sufficient area shall be provided to insure the
safety and protection of persons on all adjacent land.
f) All driving directions shall be away from any street or highway.
g) For all signage, refer to ARTICLE 28 SIGNS and Definition 3.168 Signs.
11) Planned shopping centers, subject to the following conditions:
a) A planned shopping center when used in this context is a
commercial development which has been designed, developed and
operated as a unit and can satisfy the following criteria: a site exceeding
ten (10) acres; at least twenty (20) stores and a floor area of at least fifty
thousand (50,000) square feet.
b) A planting strip of at least ten (10) feet wide shall be provided
around the entire perimeter of the site except for driveways onto the
public street system. A wall not less than five (5) feet high may be
required along those property lines which abut a residential district.
c) No main or accessory building shall be situated less than one
hundred (100) feet from any residential district boundary except that such
buildings may be situated within twenty (20) feet of a non-residential
district boundary.
d) A landscape plan which includes the entire site shall be submitted
for approval to determine compliance with screening and planting strips.
e) On-site pedestrian and vehicle circulation shall be designed to
limit traffic hazards.
f) The maximum grade of off-street parking shall be three percent (3%).
g) A site plan must be submitted subject to the provisions of Section 25.19
Site Plan Review.
12) Residential use in conjunction with commercial use provided the
following conditions are met:
a) One dwelling unit may be permitted in conjunction with a
commercial use.
b) The permitted dwelling unit may only be occupied by the
owner/operator of the commercial use.
c) Off-street parking must be provided for the dwelling unit in
accordance with Section 27.8 Schedule of Required Parking Spaces.
d) The attached dwelling unit must be a minimum of 450 square feet in floor
area and must meet the same setback requirements as the commercial
use.
17.3 Development Standards
Minimum Lot Area One (1) acre
Minimum Lot Frontage 150 feet
Minimum Front Yard Setback 50 feet or
as noted in Section 25.24
Minimum Side Yard Setback 30 feet (each side)
Minimum Rear Yard Setback 40 feet
Minimum Setback for Corner Lots 50 feet or
as noted in Section 25.24
Maximum Height 70 feet. Buildings above two (2) stories
or forty (40) feet shall have sprinkler
systems in accordance with Township
Fire Code.
Maximum Lot Coverage Forty percent (40%)
not to exceed three (3) buildings per
acre
17.4 Site and Landscape Plan Review
For all uses permitted in the C-2 District, a site plan shall be submitted to the Township
Zoning Inspector for his review and recommendations. The Zoning Inspector in review of
the site plan, shall have regard to the provisions of this Resolution. The Inspector may
require certain modifications in terms of the location of buildings, parking and driveways
may require screening and landscaping and driveways may require screening and
landscaping techniques to ameliorate potential nuisance problems with adjoining districts
or uses or to lessen the transmission of noise from the public street system. A site plan
must be submitted in accordance with the provisions of Article 25, Section 25.19 Site Plan
Review.
17.5 Screening/Buffering
To assist in the prevention of the transmission of light and noise from within any
commercial district into any abutting residential district, screening shall be required where
such district abuts or is contiguous to any residential district, without an intervening alley
or other public way. Such screening shall be provided within the commercial district, but
not within a public street or alley, along the entire contiguity of said districts. Screening
shall be of opaque or translucent materials resistant to deterioration by natural causes, or
it shall be of such plant materials as will provide a year round evergreen screening.
Screening as provided herein shall not be less than six (6) feet in height, shall be provided
from the grade of the property upward and shall be permanently maintained. A minimum
of a one hundred (100) foot wide buffer area shall be provided adjacent to residential
districts. Screening or buffering must also be in compliance with the provisions of Article
25, Section 25.18 Screening/Buffering.
17.6 Required Parking
As specified in ARTICLE 27 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING FACILITIES.
17.7 Signs
As specified in ARTICLE 28 SIGNS.
17.8 Prohibition of Outdoor Storage and Land Use
All uses of land, except as herein provided, shall take place within a wholly enclosed
structure except that this shall not be construed to include the parking of motorized
vehicles.
ARTICLE 18
RECREATION DISTRICT
deleted
ARTICLE 19
PROFESSIONAL & BUSINESS OFFICE DISTRICT (P-B-O)
deleted
ARTICLE 20
LIGHT INDUSTRIAL (I-1)
20.0 Statement of Purpose
The I-1 District permits certain industries which are of a light manufacturing character to
locate in planned areas of the Township. So that such uses may be integrated with land
uses, such as commercial and residential uses, limitations are placed upon the degree of
noise, smoke, glare, waste and other features of industrial operations so as to avoid
adverse effects. It is further intended that these light industrial uses act as a transition
between heavier industrial uses and non-industrial uses and not necessarily require
railroad access or major utility facilities. This zoning designation will generally be located
along state highways and arterial roads which provide good visibility for the proposed
uses.
Any use not specifically permitted under Section 20.1 Principally Permitted Uses is
expressly prohibited.
20.1 Principal Permitted Uses
1) Light and medium industrial uses including manufacturing, processing,
automobile and truck assembly and manufacturing.
2) Metal stamping.
3) Processing or semi-manufactured products.
4) Warehousing.
5) Wholesale distribution centers.
6) Professional or industrial oriented offices.
7) Data processing centers.
8) Research and development facilities.
9) Building supply yards.
10) Truck and machinery rental, sales and servicing.
11) Contractors’ yards.
12) Transport terminals.
13) Equipment repair and servicing shops.
14) Recreational uses.
15) Dyeing or cleaning plants.
16) Machine shops.
17) Retail outlets accessory to the main industrial use.
18) Assembly of manufactured products.
19) Light machinery, truck and automobile rentals.
20) Automobile dealerships.
21) All uses permitted in the C-2 District, except residential units are
prohibited.
20.2 Site and Landscape Plan Review
For all uses permitted in the I-1 District, a site plan shall be submitted to the Township
Zoning Inspector for review and recommendations. The Zoning Inspector in the review of
the site plan, shall have regard to the provisions of Section 25.19 Site Plan Review. The
Zoning Inspector may require certain modifications in terms of the location of buildings,
parking and driveways and may require screening and landscaping techniques to
ameliorate potential nuisance problems with adjoining districts or uses or to lessen the
transmission of noise from the public street system. A site plan must be submitted in
accordance with the provisions of Article 25, Section 25.19 Site Plan Review.
20.3 Screening/Buffering
Screening or buffering shall be required in compliance with the provisions of Section 25.18
Screening/Buffering. A minimum of a one hundred fifty (150) foot buffer shall be provided
adjacent to Residential Districts.
20.4 Development Standards
Minimum Lot Area 1 acre
Minimum Lot Frontage 150 feet
Minimum Front Yard Setback 60 feet or as noted
in Section 25.24
Minimum Side Yard Setback 30 feet (each side)
except paved driveways and
paved parking shall be
ten (10) feet each side
Minimum Rear Yard Setback 50 feet
Minimum Setback for Corner Lots 60 feet or as noted
in Section 25.24
Maximum Building Height 70 feet
Buildings above two (2) stories
or forty (40) feet shall have sprinkler
systems in accordance with
Township Fire Code
No principal building, accessory structure or parking areas, loading or maneuvering areas
shall be located less than one hundred (100) feet from the boundary of any residential
district.
20.5 Required Parking
As specified in ARTICLE 27 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING FACILITIES.
20.6 Outdoor Advertising Signs and Billboards
1) Outdoor advertising and billboards shall be permitted by conditional use
permit, subject to the following conditions:
a) No billboard shall be located within three hundred (300) feet of
another billboard.
b) All billboards shall be a minimum of fifty (50) feet from all side
and rear property lines.
c) All billboards shall be set back at least fifty (50) feet from any
road right-of-way.
d) All billboards shall be set back at least one hundred (100) feet
from any land within a residential zoning district.
e) No billboard shall obstruct the view of motorists on adjoining
roads or in view of adjoining commercial or industrial uses which depend
upon visibility for identification.
f) No billboard shall exceed an overall size of three hundred (300)
square feet nor exceed twenty-five (25) feet in height.
g. All other signs as specified in ARTICLE 28 SIGNS.
20.7 Accessory Structures
1) No accessory structure shall be used for human habitation.
2) No accessory structure shall be located between the street line and any
setback line established by this Resolution.
3) No accessory structure shall be located in any side yard required by this
Resolution.
4) No accessory structure shall be located within twenty (20) feet of any lot
line.
5) No accessory structure shall cover more than ten (10) percent of the
total lot area.
6) A minimum of thirty (30) feet shall be required between accessory structures or
the main structure.
20.8 Industrial Performance Standards
1) Automatic Screw Machines: Permitted only when operated with noise silencers,
and when located not less than three hundred (300) feet from any residentially
zoned districts.
2) Stamping Machines, Punch Presses and Press Brakes: Must be placed on shock
absorbing mounting and on a suitably reinforced concrete footing. No machine
shall be loaded beyond the capacity as prescribed by the manufacturer.
For Punch and Stamp Presses, other than hydraulic presses, up to twenty (20)
tons capacity permitted when two hundred (200) feet from the nearest residentially
zoned district.
For Hydraulic Presses, up to one hundred fifty (150) tons capacity permitted when
two hundred (200) feet from nearest residentially zoned district.
All Press Brakes must be located at least three hundred (300) feet from nearest
residentially zoned district.
3) Hot Forgings, Stem or Board Hammers: Not permitted.
4) Noise: Shall be muffled so as not to become objectionable due to intermittence,
beat frequency or shrillings. Noise as measured at the street or property line may
not exceed sixty (60) decibels.
5) Odor: The emission of obnoxious odors of any kind shall not be permitted.
6) Gases, Smoke, Dust, Dirt and Fly Ash: The emission of gases, smoke, dust, dirt
and fly ash shall in no manner be unclean, destructive, unhealthful, hazardous or
deleterious to the general welfare. Such emission shall be in strict conformance
with all applicable State and County health laws as pertaining to air pollution and
smoke abatement.
A person shall not discharge into the atmosphere, from any single source of
emission, any smoke of a density equal to, or greater than, that density described
as No. 2 on the Ringleman Chart as published by the United States Bureau of
Mines; provided that the following exceptions to the provisions of this rule shall be
permitted.
a) Smoke the shade or appearance of which is equal to, but not darker than,
No. 2 of the Ringleman Chart for a period or periods aggregating four (4)
minutes in any thirty (30) minutes.
b) Smoke the shade or appearance of which is equal to, but not darker than,
No. 3 of the Ringleman Chart for a period or periods aggregating three (3)
minutes in any fifteen (15) minutes when building a new fire or when
breakdown of equipment occurs, such as to make it evident that the
emission was not reasonably preventable.
7) Glare and Heat: Glare and heat from arc welding, acetylene torch cutting or
similar processes shall be performed behind a protective barrier conforming to all
applicable State and Federal safety regulations.
8) Fire and Safety Hazards: The storage and handling of flammable liquids, liquefied
petroleum gases and explosives shall comply with all regulations of the Township
Fire Department and with all State rules and regulations. Further, all storage tanks
for flammable liquid materials above ground shall be located not less than one
hundred fifty (150) feet from all property lines. and shall be completely surrounded
by earthen embankments, dikes or other type of retaining wall which will contain
the total capacity of all tanks so enclosed.
Bulk storage tanks of flammable liquids below ground shall be located not closer
to the property line than the greatest depth to the bottom of the buried tank.
9) Sewage Wastes: No industrial sewage wastes shall be discharged into sewers
that will cause chemical reaction, either directly or indirectly, with the materials of
construction to impair action that will destroy or damage the sewer structures;
cause restriction of the hydraulic capacity of sewer structures; cause restriction of
the normal inspection or maintenance of the sewer structures; cause placing of
unusual demands on the sewage treatment equipment or process; cause limitation
of the effectiveness of the sewer treatment process; cause danger to public health
and safety; or cause obnoxious conditions inimical to the public interest.
20.9 Prohibition of Outdoor Storage and Land Use
1) All uses of land, except as herein provided, shall take place within a wholly
enclosed structure, except that this shall not be construed to include the parking
of motorized vehicles.
2) An area of the lot may be used for the purpose of storing manufactured products
and materials awaiting processing, provided such area is completely enclosed by
a solid fence with no apertures, of a height equal to the height of the highest point
of stored materials and products.
ARTICLE 21
HEAVY INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT (I-2)
21.0 Statement of Purpose
The purpose of the I-2 District is to permit certain industrial uses to locate in desirable
areas of the Township, which uses are primarily of a manufacturing, assembling and
fabricating character, including large scale or specialized industrial operations requiring
good access by road and/or railroad and needing special sites or public utility services.
Reasonable regulations apply to uses in this District, so as to permit the location of
industries which will not cause adverse effects on residential and commercial areas in the
Township. Uses which are incompatible with the permitted industrial uses are prohibited.
Any use not specifically permitted under Section 21.1 or Section 21.2 of this Resolution is
expressly prohibited.
21.1 Principally Permitted Uses
The following provisions apply in all I-2 Districts. In an I-2 District, no person shall
hereafter use any building or structure except in accordance with the following provision:
1) Light, medium and heavy industrial uses including manufacturing,
processing, metal stamping and automobile and truck assembly.
2) Cleaning and dyeing plants.
3) Underground bulk liquid storage.
4) Transport terminals, including railway yards.
5) Recycling depots and recycling operations.
6) Concrete and paving establishments.
7) Building or contracting yards.
8) Industrially oriented offices.
9) Material storage facilities.
10) Warehousing.
11) Retail sales outlets accessory to the main use.
12) Equipment repair and servicing shops.
13) Machine shops.
14) Salvage Yards.
15) Automobile accessory manufacturing, not including tires.
16) Bump shops where the primary use is auto body repair.
17) Cigar and cigarette manufacturing.
18) Electrical fixtures, batteries and other electrical apparatus manufacturing.
19) Mattress, Upholstering and furniture manufacturing.
20) Hardware and cutlery manufacturing.
21) Leather goods and luggage manufacturing.
22) Metal buffing, plating and polishing.
23) Metal molding and extrusion.
24) Millwork, lumber and planing mills
25) Painting and varnishing shops.
26) Paper box and cardboard products manufacturing.
27) Plastic molding and extrusion.
28) Tinsmith and sheet metal shops.
29) Undercoating shops.
30) Wearing apparel manufacturing, including shoes, handbags, etc.
31) Welding shops.
32) Public utility uses.
33) All Industrial Light District uses.
21.2 Conditionally Permitted Uses
The following uses shall be permitted by the Township Board of Zoning Appeals,
pursuant to the conditions noted below and to ARTICLE 9 PROCEDURES AND
GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR CONDITONAL USE PERMITS of this
Resolution:
1) Sexually-oriented businesses shall be permitted by conditional use,
subject to the following:
A) As used in this section the following definitions shall apply:
(1) “Sexually oriented business” means an adult arcade, adult
bookstore or adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel,
adult motion picture theater, adult theater, escort agency,
nude model studio, or sexual encounter center.
(2) “Adult arcade” means any place to which the public is
permitted or invited wherein coin-operated or slug-operated or
electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled still or
motion picture machines, projectors, or other image-producing
devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons
per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed
are distinguished or characterized by the depicting or describing
or “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas.”
(3) “Adult bookstore” or “adult video store” means a
commercial establishment which utilizes twenty-five percent
(25%) or more of its retail selling area for the purpose of sale or
rental for any form of consideration of any one or more of the
following:
a) Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed
matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, video
cassettes or video reproduction, slides, or other visual
representations which depict or describe “specified
sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas”, or
b) Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia which are
designed for use in connection with “specified sexual
activities.”
(4) “Adult cabaret” means a nightclub, bar, restaurant, or
similar commercial establishment which regularly features:
a) Persons who appear in a state of nudity; or
b) Live performances which are characterized by the
exposure of “specified anatomical areas” or by “specified
sexual activities”; or
c) Film, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or
other photographic reproductions which are
characterized by the depiction or description of “specified
sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas.”
(5) “Adult motion picture theater” means a commercial
establishment where, for any form of consideration, films, motion
pictures, video cassettes, slides, or similar photographic
reproductions are regularly shown which are characterized by the
depiction or description of “special sexual activities” or “specified
anatomical areas.”
(6) “Adult motel” means a hotel, motel or similar commercial
establishment which:
a) Offers accommodations to the public for any form of
consideration; provides patrons with closed circuit
television transmission, films, motion pictures, video
cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproducing
which are characterized by the depiction or description of
“specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical
areas”; and has a sign visible from the public right-of-way
which advertises the availability of this adult type of
photographic reproductions; or
b) Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time
that is less than ten hours; or
c) Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to
sub-rent the room for a period of time that is less than ten
hours.
(7) “Adult theater” means a theater, concert hall, establishment
which regularly features persons who appear in a state of nudity
in live performances which are characterized by the exposure of
“specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas.”
(8) “Escort agency” means a person or business association
who furnishes, offers to furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts as
one of its primary business purposes, for a fee, tip, or other
consideration.
(9) “Nude motel studio” means any place where a person who
appears in a state of nudity or displays “specified anatomical
areas” is provided to be observed, photographed, or similarly
depicted by other persons who pay money or any form of
consideration.
(10) “Sexual encounter center” means a business or commercial
enterprise that, as one of its primary purposes, offers for any form
of consideration:
a) Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling
between persons of the opposite sex; or
b) Activities between male and female persons and/or
persons of the same sex when one or more of the
persons is in a state of nudity or semi-nude.
(11) “Specified anatomical areas” means human genitals in a
state of sexual arousal.
(12) “Specified sexual activities” means and includes any of the
following:
(a) The fondling or other erotic touching of human
genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breasts;
(b) Sex acts, normal or perverted actual or simulated,
including intercourse, oral copulation, or sodomy;
(c) Masturbation, actual or simulated; or
(d) Excretory functions as part of or in connection with
any of the activities set forth in A) through C).
B) Only within the I-2 Heavy Industrial District shall sexually oriented
businesses be permitted and only if the Zoning Board of Appeals
determines that each of the following conditions have been met:
(1) That the parcel of land upon which the sexually oriented
business is located at a minimum of 500 feet from the nearest
parcel of land containing a school, church or residence.
(2) That the parcel of land upon which the sexually oriented
business is located is a minimum of 500 feet from any other
parcel of land containing a sexually oriented business.
(3) Section 4.9 Powers of the Township Board of Zoning Appeals
and ARTICLE 9 PROCEDURES AND GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
FOR CONDITONAL USE PERMITS governing
conditional zoning permits and Section 25.18 Screening/Buffering
and Section 25.19 Site Plan Review governing site plan approval
shall also apply to an application for a conditional zoning permit
under this section.
(4) Massage establishments are regulated by Resolution Number
93-14 of the Board of Trustees of Milan Township. Before the
issuance of a zoning permit, the owners or operators of the
establishment must show that it has met all the requirements of
the Resolution.
(5) Adult caberets are regulated by Resolution Number 97-10 of the
Board of Trustees of Milan Township. Before the issuance of a
zoning permit, the owners or operators of the establishment must
show that it has met all the requirements of the Resolution.
2) Fireworks Sales
Any business selling fireworks must meet the standards set forth in the most
current (State of) Ohio Fire Code.
21.3 Site Plan and Landscape Plan Review
For all uses permitted in the I-2 District, a site plan shall be submitted to the Township
Zoning Inspector for review and recommendations. The Township Zoning Inspector in the
review of the site plan, shall have regard to the provisions of Section 25.19 Site Plan
Review. The Zoning Inspector may require certain modifications in terms of the location of
buildings, parking and driveways and may require screening and landscaping techniques
to ameliorate potential nuisance problems with adjoining districts or uses or to lessen the
transmission of noise from the public street system.
21.4 Screening/Buffering
Screening or buffering in compliance with the provision of Section 25.8 Screening/
Buffering. A minimum of a two hundred (200) foot buffer shall be provided adjacent
to Residential Districts.
21.5 Development Standards
Minimum Lot Area for heavy industrial district 3 acres
Minimum Lot Frontage 200 feet
Minimum Front Yard Setback 80 feet or as noted
in Section 25.24
Minimum Side Yard Setback 30 feet (each side)
Minimum Rear Yard Setback 50 feet
Minimum Setback for Corner Lots 80 feet each side or
as noted in Section 25.24
Maximum Building Height 70 feet
Buildings above two (2) stories
or forty (40) feet shall have
sprinkler systems in accordance
with Township Fire Code
21.6 Required Parking
As specified in ARTICLE 27 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING FACILITIES.
21.7 Signs
As specified in ARTICLE 28 SIGNS.
21.8 Accessory Structures
1) No accessory building shall be used for human habitation.
2) No accessory building shall be located between the street line and any
setback line established by this Resolution.
3) No accessory building shall be located in any side yard required by this
resolution.
4) No accessory structure shall be located within twenty (20) feet of any lot line.
5) No accessory building shall cover more than ten percent (10%) of the total lot
area.
6) A minimum distance of thirty (30) feet shall be required between accessory
structures or between the main structure and the accessory structure.
21.9 Industrial Performance Standards
1) Automatic Screw Machines: Permitted only when operated with noise silencers,
and when located not less than three hundred (300) feet from any residentially
zoned districts.
2) Stamping Machines, Punch Presses and Press Brakes: Must be placed on shock
absorbing mountings and on a suitable, reinforced concrete footing. No machine
shall be loaded beyond the capacity as prescribed by the manufacturer.
For Punch and Stamp Presses, other than hydraulic presses:
Up to fifty (50) tons capacity when located at least three hundred (300) feet from
the nearest residentially zoned district.
Up to one hundred fifty (150) tons capacity when located at least five hundred
(500) feet from the nearest residentially zoned district.
For Hydraulic Presses
Up to five hundred (500) tons capacity when located at least two hundred fifty
(250) feet from the nearest residentially zoned district.
Up to seven hundred fifty (750) tons capacity when located at least three
hundred (300) feet from the nearest residentially zoned district.
Up to one thousand (1,000) tons capacity when located at least five hundred
(500) feet from the nearest residentially zoned district.
All Press Brakes must be located at least three hundred (300) feet from
nearest residentially zoned district.
3) Hot Forgings, Steam or Board Hammers: Not permitted.
4) Noise: Shall be muffled so as not to become objectionable due to intermittence,
beat frequency, or shrillness. Noise as measured at the street or property line
may not exceed sixty-five decibels.
5) Odor : The emission of obnoxious odors of any kind shall not be permitted.
6) Gases, Smoke, Dust, Dirt and Fly Ash: The emission of gases, smoke,
dust, dirt and fly ash shall in no manner be unclean, destructive, unhealthful,
hazardous or deleterious to the general welfare. Such emission shall be in strict
conformity with all applicable State and County health laws as pertaining to air
pollution and smoke abatement.
A person shall not discharge into the atmosphere, from any single source of
emission, any smoke of a density equal to, or greater than, that density described
as No. 2 of the Ringlemann Chart as published by the United States Bureau of
Mines; provided that the following exceptions to the provision of this rule shall be
permitted.
A) Smoke the shade or appearance of which is equal to, but not darker than,
No. 2 of the Ringlemann Chart for a period or periods aggregating four (4)
minutes in any thirty (30) minutes.
B) Smoke the shade or appearance of which is equal to, but not darker than,
No. 3 of the Ringlemann Chart for a period or periods aggregating three
(3) minutes in any fifteen (15) minutes when building a new fire or when
breakdown of equipment occurs as to make it evident that the emission
was not reasonably preventable.
7) Glare and Heat: Glare and heat from arc welding, acetylene torch cutting or
similar processes shall be performed behind a protective barrier conforming to
all applicable State and Federal safety regulations.
8) Fire and Safety Hazards: The storage and handling of flammable liquids,
liquefied petroleum gases and explosives, shall comply with all regulations of the
Township Fire Department and with all State rules and regulations. Further, all
storage tanks for flammable liquid materials above ground shall be located not
less than one hundred fifty (150) feet from all property lines and shall be
completely surrounded by earthen embankments, dikes or other type of retaining
wall which will contain the total capacity of all tanks so enclosed. Bulk storage
tanks of flammable liquids below ground shall be located not closer to the
property line than the greatest depth to the bottom of the buried tank.
9) Sewage Wastes: No industrial sewage waste shall be discharged into sewers
that will cause chemical reaction, either directly or indirectly, with the materials of
construction to impair the strength or durability of sewer structures; cause
mechanical action that will destroy or damage the sewer structures; cause
restriction of the hydraulic capacity of sewer structures; cause placing of unusual
demands on the sewage treatment equipment or process, cause limitation of the
effectiveness of the sewer treatment process; cause danger to public health and
safety; or cause obnoxious conditions inimical to the public interest.
10) Outdoor Storage: All storage of building materials, sand, gravel, stone, lumber,
equipment and other supplies, shall be located within an area not closer than one
hundred fifty (150) feet from any street right-of-way line. The storage of lumber,
coal or other combustible material shall not be less than twenty (20) feet from any
interior lot line, and a roadway shall be provided, graded, surfaced and maintained
from the street to the rear of the property to permit free access of fire trucks at
any time. All such open storage shall be screened from all streets and on all
sides which abut any residential districts by a solid masonry wall sufficient to
serve as a permanent retaining wall.. Junk yards, when permitted, shall be
entirely enclosed on all sides by said wall.
ARTICLE 22
MINERAL AGGREGATE DISTRICT (MA)
deleted
.
.
ARTICLE 23
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT (PUD)
23.1 Planned Unit Development Regulations
Article 23 of this Resolution shall apply to the location and maintenance of Planned Unit
Development as herein defined.
23.2 Statement of Purpose
It is the responsibility of these Sections to promote the public health, safety and welfare by
providing for the regulation of planned unit development. It is the intent of these
regulations to provide maximum opportunity for orderly development which will benefit the
community as a whole by offering a greater choice of living environments, complementary
blending of land uses, to include community facilities and open space and a more unified
approach with respect to the mixture of uses and their adaptation to topographical and
geological features, recreational opportunities and transportation needs.
23.3 Definition
“Planned Unit Development” or PUD shall mean a development which may integrate
residential, commercial and industrial facilities in a pre-planned environment under more
flexible standards, such as lot sizes and setbacks, than those restrictions that would
normally apply under these regulations. The procedure for approval of such development
contains additional requirements such as building design principles and landscaping
plans.
23.4 Interpretation
Whenever the requirements of Article 23 appear to be in conflict with other Sections of this
Resolution or with those of other existing resolutions, the provisions of this section shall
prevail.
23.5 PUD District Designation
Subsequent to the review of the Township Trustees, the designation “Planned Unit
Development District” may be applied to any residential, commercial or industrial
developments. Upon approval of the final development plan, the Official Zoning Map shall
be so amended. The designation shall only apply to property at the election of the
property owner.
23.6 Uses Permitted in a PUD District
Residential, commercial, manufacturing, public and quasi-public uses may be separate or
combined in PUD Districts, provided that the proposed uses will not adversely impact upon
adjacent property or the public health, safety and general welfare and that the location of
uses in the PUD are specified in the final development plan. The Planned Unit
Development may be comprised of one use or a combination of uses, as indicated above.
There is no minimum area required for a Planned Unit Development. The amount of land
devoted to commercial and/or manufacturing use in a residential-commercialmanufacturing
or residential-commercial development shall be determined by the
Township Zoning Commission and approved by the Township Trustees.
23.7 Disposition of Open Space
The required amount of common space land reserved under a Planned Unit Development
shall either be held in corporate ownership by owners of the project area, for the use of
each owner who buys property within the development, or be dedicated to a property
owners’ association who shall have title to the land which shall be retained as common
open space for parks, recreation and related uses. The legal articles relating the
organization of the property owners’ association is subject to review and approval by the
Township Zoning Commission and shall provide adequate provisions for the perpetual
care and maintenance of all common areas. Public utility and similar easements and
rights-of-way for water courses and other similar channels are not acceptable for common
open space dedication unless such land or right-of-way is usable as a trail or similar
purpose and has been approved by the Township Zoning Commission. The responsibility
for the maintenance of all open spaces shall be specified by the developer before
approval of the final development.
The Township Zoning Commission in conjunction with the Township Trustees may require
land to the amount of three percent (3%) of the land included in the planned unit
development be conveyed to the Township for park purposes. In lieu of the conveyance
for park purposes, the Commission may in conjunction with the Township Trustees,
require the subdivider to pay cash in lieu of land to be used for improvements to parkland
in the immediate area. The terms and amount of payment shall be determined in
negotiation between the subdivider and the Township Trustees.
23.8 Utility Requirements
Underground utilities, including telephone, cable television and electrical systems, are
required within the limits of all planned unit developments. Appurtenances to these
systems which can be effectively screened may be exempt from this requirement if the
Township Zoning Commission finds that such exemption will not violate the intent or
character of the proposed planned unit development.
23.9 Special PUD Lot Requirements
The lot requirements for planned unit developments approved by the Township Zoning
Commission may vary from requirements of the districts included in this Zoning
Resolution.
23.10 Arrangement of Commercial/Manufacturing Uses
When planned unit development districts include commercial and/or industrial uses,
building(s) and establishment(s) shall be planned as groups having common parking
areas and common ingress and egress points in order to reduce the number of potential
accident locations at intersections with streets. Planting screens or fences shall be
provided on the perimeter of the commercial and/or manufacturing areas. The plan of the
project shall provide for the integrated and harmonious design of buildings and for
adequate and properly arranged facilities for internal traffic circulation, landscaping and
such other features and facilities as may be necessary to make the project attractive and
efficient from the standpoint of the adjoining and surrounding areas.
All areas designed for future expansion or not intended for immediate improvement or
development shall be landscaped or otherwise maintained in a neat and orderly manner
as specified by the Township Zoning Commission.
23.11 Procedures for Approval of Planned Unit Development Districts
Planned Unit Development Districts shall be approved in accordance with the procedure in
Section 23.11 to 23.25. The designation of major PUD will be considered a change of
zoning and must meet all the applicable provisions of the Zoning Resolution.
23.12 Pre-Application Meeting
The developer shall meet with the Township Zoning Inspector prior to the submission of
the preliminary development plan. The purpose of this meeting is to discuss early and
informally the purpose and effect of this Resolution and the criteria and standards
contained herein and to familiarize the developer with zoning and other applicable
regulations.
23.13 Preliminary Development Plan Application Requirements
An application for preliminary planned unit development approval shall be filed with the
Township Zoning Inspector, as representative for the Zoning Commission, by at least one
owner of property for which the planned unit development is proposed. The procedure for
approval shall be the same as an amendment to the Zoning Resolution, as detailed in
Article 8 Amendment. The filing of a preliminary development plan under this section
shall constitute the election by the property owner to submit the property described in the
plan to provisions of this Article and shall constitute an application for rezoning the
property to the Planned Unit Development District (PUD). All plans prepared and
submitted must be prepared by a registered engineer, surveyor or architect. At a
minimum, the application shall contain the following information filed in triplicate:
1) Name, address and phone number of applicant & property owner;
2) Name, address and phone number of registered surveyor, registered
engineer and/or urban planner assisting in the preparation of the preliminary
development plan;
3) Legal description of property;
4) Present use(s);
5) Present zoning district;
6) Identification of any area within a floodplain;
7) A vicinity map at a scale approved by the Township showing the property
lines, streets, existing easements, and existing buildings, existing and the
proposed zoning and other items such as the Township may require;
8) A preliminary development plan at a scale of 1" = 200' showing
topography at a minimum of ten (10) foot intervals; location and type of
residential, commercial and industrial land uses; layout and dimensions and
names of existing and proposed streets; right-of-way, utility easements, parks and
community spaces; layout and dimensions of lots and building setback lines;
preliminary improvement drawings showing water, sewer, drainage, electricity,
telephone and natural gas; and such other characteristics as the Commission may
deem necessary; general location of buildings;
9) Proposed schedule for the development of the site;
10) Evidence that the applicant has sufficient control over the land in
question to initiate the proposed development plan within two years;
11) A fee as established by Resolution passed by the Township Trustees;
12) A list containing the names and mailing addresses of all owners of
property within five hundred (500) feet of the property in question;
13) Verification by at least one owner of property that all information in the
application is true and correct to the best of his/her knowledge;
14) A conceptual drainage plan must also be submitted with the application.
The application for preliminary planned unit development shall be accompanied by a
written statement by the developer setting forth the reasons why, in his opinion, the
planned unit development would be in the public interest and would be consistent with the
intent of these planned unit development requirements.
23.14 Criteria for Commission Recommendation
Before making its recommendation, the Commission shall find that the facts submitted with
the applications and presented at the public hearing establish that:
1) The proposed development can be initiated within two (2) years of the
date of approval.
2) The streets proposed are suitable and adequate to carry anticipated
traffic and increased densities will not generate traffic in such amounts as to
overload the street network outside the planned unit development.
3) Any proposed commercial or industrial development can be justified at
the location proposed.
4) Any exception from standard district requirements is warranted by
design and other amenities incorporated in the final development plan, in
accordance with these planned unit development requirements and the need to
provide a variety of housing opportunities with regard to type and price.
5) The area surrounding said development can be planned and zoned in
coordination and substantial compatibility with the proposed development.
6) Proposed design shall consider the removal of minimal natural coverage
and in all cases reflect conservatory measures relating to open space.
7) The PUD will not be hazardous or disturbing to existing or future
neighboring uses.
8) The PUD will be a substantial improvement to property in the immediate
vicinity and to the community as a whole.
9) The PUD will be served adequately by essential public facilities and services,
such as highways, streets, police and fire protection, drainage structures, refuse
disposal or schools; or that the persons or agencies responsible for the
establishment of the proposed use shall be able to provide adequately any such
service.
10) The PUD will not involve uses, activities, processes, materials and equipment and
conditions of operation that will be detrimental to any persons, property or the
general welfare by reason of excessive production of traffic, noise, smoke, fumes,
glare, or odors, The Township Zoning Commission may require studies such as a
traffic study to be provided to ensure the concerns noted above can be
addressed.
11) The PUD will encourage development as close as possible to existing settlements
to keep the cost of providing service down.
12) The PUD will provide adequate access for emergency vehicles and for
those persons providing emergency services.
13) The PUD will provide adequate security lighting for pedestrian circulation
paths, vehicular use areas and exterior portions of buildings.
14) The design of the PUD will encourage the use of the existing road
system presently maintained by the authority having jurisdiction to minimize the
additional maintenance expense of new development and to ensure that new
development is adequately served by the transportation network.
15) The PUD will be consistent with the intent and purposes of the Milan Township
Zoning Resolution.
23.15 Development Policies
1) Density
a) The maximum density for a proposed residential development
shall be based on site specific review and also shall be compatible
with adjacent uses;
b) Where increased densities are located adjacent to
existing buildings, the building setback should be increased to minimize
any adverse impact of the proposed development.
2) Height Criteria
a) Architectural compatibility: The heights of all buildings are
encouraged to be compatible with their vicinity.
b) General character: The heights of the buildings should be in
general compliance with district regulations for a similar type of land use.
c) Scenic values: Buildings should be of such heights so as not to
destroy or degrade the scenic values of surrounding area.
d) Views: Buildings shall not be of such height so as to block,
destroy or degrade the scenic values of surrounding areas.
e) Light & air: Buildings shall not be of such heights so as to deny
light and air to surrounding properties.
23.16 Site Design
Statement of Policy. The township hereby finds that it is in the public interest for all sites
within the community to be designed, arranged and developed in a safe, efficient manner.
All functions, uses and improvements should reflect the natural capabilities and limitations
of the adjacent property.
The various structures, use areas, functions and elements of the site design should be
integrated by design into a unified whole, except in those cases where separation is
appropriate to a particular interrelationship. Taking into consideration the basic character
of the site and the nature of the proposed uses, the development should be visually
harmonious as perceived from both within and without.
1) Integration and separation: It is encouraged that those elements and
functions of
the site that are basically compatible with one another be integrated by
design to
the degree of their compatibility and separated to the degree of their
compatibility.
2) Privacy: It is encouraged that all sites be arranged so as to provide privacy for the
occupants of both the site and surrounding areas.
3) Aesthetics: It is recommended that the site be developed in such a way
so as to
be visually harmonious when viewed either internally or externally, thus
affecting
the degree of existing character of the site and the basic nature of the
proposed
uses.
4) Vistas: It is encouraged that the site be developed in such a way so as
to preserve or enhance vistas, particularly those seen from public places.
23.17 Placement of Structures
1) Clear Vision Area. No structure or foliage shall extend into a clear vision area
between the height of three (3) feet and seven (7) feet measured from the top of
the curb, or where no curb exists, from the established street center line grade.
The clear vision areas shall be as follows:
a) Intersection of driveways and public rights-of-way: A triangle having
two sides ten (10) feet long and running along the driveway and public
right-of-way, said length beginning at their intersection and the third side
formed by a line connecting the two ends.
b) Intersection of two public rights-of-way: A triangle having two sides thirty
(30) feet long and running along each public right-of-way, said length
beginning at their intersection and the third side formed by a line
connecting the two sides.
2) Placement of Structures
a) Adverse effects. No structure shall be placed in such a way so as
to adversely affect adjacent ownership.
b) Snow storage areas. Buildings shall be placed in such a manner
as to allow for snow storage easements adjacent to public rights-of-way.
Snow storage easements shall be dedicated where appropriate.
23.18 Amendment Procedure
Upon receipt of a preliminary development plan which complies with the provisions of this
Chapter, the Township Zoning Commission shall set a date for a public hearing. The
Zoning Amendment shall follow the amendment procedures detailed in Article 8 of this
Resolution.
23.19 Approval
Once the PUD has been reviewed by the Zoning Commission at a public hearing, its
recommendation is forwarded to the Township Trustees for its review at a public hearing.
When the conceptual approval is granted by the Township Trustees, the Final
Development Plan shall be submitted to the Township Zoning Inspector.
23.20 Submission of Final Development Plan
After approval of the preliminary development plan in accordance with Section 23.19, the
developer shall submit a final development plan to the Township Zoning Inspector. The
final development plan shall be in general conformance with the preliminary development
plan. Eight (8) copies of the final development plan shall be submitted to the Township
Zoning Inspector. Seven (7) copies shall be forwarded to the Erie Regional Planning
Commission for their review and comments. Copies will be forwarded from the Director of
Regional Planning to the applicable agencies for comments. A report shall be prepared
and forwarded to the Township Zoning Inspector.
23.21 Final Development Plan Application Contents
An application for approval of the final development plan shall be filed with the Zoning
Inspector by at least one owner of property for which the planned unit development is
proposed. Each application shall be signed by the owner, attesting to the truth and
exactness of all information supplied on the application for the final development plan.
Each application shall clearly state that the approval shall expire and may be revoked if
construction on the project has not begun within two (2) years from the date of issuance of
the approval. At a minimum, the application shall contain the following information:
1) A survey of the proposed development site, showing the dimensions
and bearing of the property lines; area in acres; topography; and existing features
of the development site including major wooded areas; structures, streets,
easements, utility lines and land uses.
2) All the information required on the preliminary development plan; the
location and sizes of lots; location and proposed density of dwelling units; nonresidential
building intensity; and land uses considered suitable for adjacent
properties.
3) A schedule for the development of units to be constructed in progression
and a description of the design principles for buildings and streetscapes; a
tabulation of the number of acres in the proposed project for various uses, the
number of housing units proposed by type; estimated non-residential population;
anticipated construction timing for each unit; and standards for height, open
space, building density, parking areas, population density and public
improvement, whenever the applicant proposed any exception from standard
zoning district requirements or other Resolutions governing development.
4) Engineering feasibility studies and plans showing as necessary, water,
sewer, drainage, electricity, telephone and natural gas installations; waste
disposal facilities; street improvement; and the nature and extent of earth work
required for site preparation and development. The utility plans must be
according to the county standards and approved by the County Engineer and the
County Sanitary Engineer.
5) Site plan, showing building(s), various functional use areas, circulation
and their relationship.
6) Preliminary building plans.
7) Landscaping plans.
8) Deed restrictions, protective covenants and other legal statements or
devices to be used to control the use, development and maintenance of the land
and the improvements thereon, including those areas which are to be commonly
owned and maintained.
9) A fee as specified by Resolution Number _____________ of the Milan
Township Board of Trustees as indicated on the current PUD Application.
23.22 Action by Township Trustees
The Trustees shall either approve, approve the supplementary conditions, or disapprove
the final plan as submitted. If the application is approved as submitted or approved with
conditions, the Trustees shall direct the Township Zoning Inspector to issue zoning
permits in accordance with the approved plan and any conditions thereto attached. The
final development plan shall further be considered as an integral part of the rezoning
amendment and no change from or substantive alteration in such planned unit
development shall be permitted without repetition of the procedures in these Sections.
Once the final plan has been approved by the Township Trustees and the application to
rezone the property has been approved, then the zoning map shall be amended to reflect
this approval.
23.23 Supplementary Conditions and Safeguards
In approving any planned unit development application, the Trustees may prescribe
appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with this Resolution. Any violation of
such conditions or safeguards, which have been made a part of the terms under which the
final development plan has been approved, shall constitute a violation of this Resolution
and be punishable as such.
23.24 Expiration and Extension of Approval Period
The approval of a final development plan for a planned unit development district shall be in
effect for a period not to exceed five (5) years to allow for preparation and recording of the
required subdivision plat and development of the project. If no construction has begun
within two (2) years after approval is granted, the approved final development plan shall
be void. An extension of the time limit or modification of the approved final development
plan may be approved if the Trustees find that such extension is not in conflict with the
public interest. No zoning amendment passed during the time period granted for the final
approved final development plan shall in any way affect the terms under which approval of
the planned unit development was granted.
23.25 Changes in the Planned Unit Development
A Planned Unit Development shall be developed only according to the approved and
recorded final plan and all support data. The recorded final plan and supporting data,
together with all recorded amendments, shall be binding on the applicants, their
successors, grantees and assigns and shall limit and control the uses of premises
(including the internal use of buildings and structures) and location of structures in the
Planned Unit Development, as set forth therein.
1) Major Changes. Changes which alter the concept or intent of the
Planned Unit Development including increases in the density, changes in location
and types of non-residential land use, increases in the height of buildings,
reductions of proposed open space, more than fifteen percent (15%) modification
in proportion of housing types, changes in road standards or alignment, utilities,
water, electricity and drainage, or changes in the final governing agreements,
provisions or covenants, may be approved only by submission of a new
preliminary plan and supporting data and following the “preliminary approval”
steps and subsequent amendment of the final Planned Unit Development Plan.
2) Minor Changes. The Township Zoning Inspector may approve changes
in the Planned Unit Development which do not change the concept or intent of the
development, without going through the “preliminary approval” steps. Minor
Changes are defined as any changes not defined as a major change.
ARTICLE 24
FLOODPLAIN, FLOODWAY & WETLAND OVERLAY DISTRICT
24.0 Statement of Purpose
The Floodplain Overlay District is designed to protect those lands which are subject to
predictable inundations at frequent intervals. Such regulations as herein established,
while permitting reasonable economic use of affected properties, will protect the public
health and reduce potential financial obligations on the Township and its individuals by
frequent and periodic floods. By restricting the use of flood lands, areas are reserved for
the impoundment of water with a consequent stabilized stream flow which promotes and
maintains the streams' ecological environment.
24.1 Boundaries Further Defined
The floodplain and floodway districts are hereby established “overlay districts”, meaning
that these districts are overlaid upon the districts and the land so enclosed may be used in
a manner permitted in the underlying districts only if and to the extent such use is also
permitted in this district.
The floodplain and floodway districts are hereby established as shown on the Milan
Township Zoning Map, which accompanies this Resolution.
As used in this Article, the terms “floodplain” and “floodway” refer in the first instance to
certain areas whose boundaries are determined and can be located on the ground by
reference to the specific fluvial characteristics set forth in the definitions of these terms.
These terms also refer to overlay zoning districts whose boundaries are established on the
map identified in this Section, which boundaries are intended to correspond to the actual
physical location of floodways and floodplains. (These overlay districts thus differ from
other zoning districts whose boundaries are established solely according to planning or
policy rather than physical criteria). The floodplain area is the same as delineated in the
Floodplain Building Regulations, as provided by the Erie Regional Planning Commission.
In any area that is located outside a designated floodplain but where a stream is located,
no building or fill may be located within a distance of the stream bank equal to five times
the width of the steam at the top of the bank or twenty feet on each side, whichever is
greater.
All land lying within the floodplain of the one hundred (100) year frequency flood of,
including but not limited to, the Huron River, Mud Brook and Poncas Creek is within the
floodplain and subject to these regulations. The boundaries of the floodplain are hereby
established as shown on the Zoning Map. A petitioner for use of land in the floodplain may be
required to supply such additional topographical data or engineering studies as are
needed to define the exact limits of the floodplain upon the subject land.
24.2 Artificial Obstruction within Floodplain
1) No artificial obstruction may be located within any floodway, except as
provided in Section 24.2 and with issuance of a floodplain permit from the Erie
Regional Planning Commission.
2) For purposes of this Section, an artificial obstruction is any obstruction,
other than a natural obstruction, that is capable of reducing the flood-carrying
capacity of a stream or may accumulate debris and thereby reduce the floodcarrying
capacity of a stream. A natural obstruction includes any rock, tree,
gravel, or analogous natural matter that is an obstruction and has been located
within the floodway by a nonhuman cause.
24.3 Permissible Uses within Floodways
Notwithstanding this provision of this Resolution, no use of land within a floodway may be
permitted unless the proposed use is listed in the underlying district and in the following
units:
1) General farming, pasture, outdoor plant nurseries, horticulture, forestry,
wildlife sanctuary, game farm and other similar agricultural, wildlife and related
uses.
2) Ground-level loading areas, unpaved parking areas, rotary aircraft ports and other
similar ground-level area uses.
3) Lawns, gardens, play areas and other similar uses.
4) Golf courses, grass or clay tennis courts, driving ranges, archery ranges, picnic
grounds, parks, hiking or horseback riding trails, open space and other similar
private
and public recreational uses.
24.4 Limitations on Uses within Floodways & Floodplains
1) Any development within the District should meet the following criteria:
A. The proposed development is consistent with the need to
minimize flood damage and
B. All public and private utilities and appurtenances and facilities such
as sewer, gas, electrical, water systems, propane tanks and
generators are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate
flood damage and floatation; and
C. Adequate drainage is provided to minimize or reduce exposure to
flood hazards and
D. All necessary permits have been received from Erie Regional Planning
Commission and those agencies from which approval is required by
federal or state law.
2) No building may be constructed and no substantial improvement of an
existing building may take place within any floodway. With respect to mobile
home parks that are nonconforming because they are located within a floodway,
mobile homes may be replaced in such parks only if they comply with the
provisions of 24.4, Item 7.
3) No new residential building may be constructed and no substantial
improvement of a residential building may take place within any floodplain unless
the lowest floor (including basement) of the building or improvement is elevated to
or above the base flood level.
A. Residential accessory structures shall be allowed within
floodplains provided they are firmly anchored to prevent floatation.
B. Anchoring of any accessory buildings may be done by bolting the
building to a concrete slab or by over-the-top ties. When bolting to a
concrete slab, one-half inch bolts six feet on center with a minimum of two
per side shall be required. If over-the-top ties are used, a minimum of two
ties with a force adequate to secure the building is required.
4) No new residential building may be constructed and no substantial
improvements of a nonresidential building may take place within any floodplain
unless the lowest floor (including basement) of the building or improvement is
elevated or floodproofed to or above the base flood level. Where floodproofing is
used in lieu of elevation, a registered professional engineer or architect shall
certify that any new construction or substantial improvement has been designed
to withstand the flood depths, pressure, velocities, impact and uplift forces
associated with the base flood at the location of the building and that the walls
below the base flood level are substantially impermeable to the passage of water.
5) For purposes of this Section, “substantial improvement” means for a
building constructed prior to the effective date of this Chapter, any repair,
reconstruction or improvement of a building, the cost of which equals or exceeds
fifty percent of the market value of the structure either
A. before the improvement or repair is started or
B. if the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the
damage occurred.
“Substantial improvement” occurs when the first alteration on any wall, ceiling,
floor or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that
alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. The term does not,
however, include with
A. any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing
state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications that are
solely necessary to insure safe living conditions, or
B. any alteration of a building listed on the National Register of Historic
Places or a state Inventory of Historic Places.
6) No zoning, special use or conditional use permit may be issued for any
development within a floodplain until the permit-issuing authority has reviewed the
plans to assure that any new construction or substantial improvements shall be:
A. Designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent
floatation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure.
B. Constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood
damage.
C. Constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood
damage.
7) Notwithstanding any other provision of this Section, no mobile home
may be located or relocated within that portion of the floodplain outside of the
floodway, unless the following criteria are met:
A. Ground anchors for the tie-downs are provided.
B. The following tie-down requirements are met:
i) Over-the-top ties are required at each of the four corners of
the mobile home, with one additional tie per side at an
intermediate location, for mobile homes less than fifty feet long.
Two additional ties per side are required for mobile homes more
than fifty feet long.
ii) Frame ties are required in conjunction with each over-thetop
tie.
iii) All components of the anchoring must be capable of
carrying a force of 4,800 pounds.
C. Lots or pads are elevated on compacted fill or by any other
method approved by the administrator so that the lowest habitable floor of
the mobile home is at or above the base flood level.
D. Adequate surface drainage and easy access for mobile home
hauler is provided.
E. Load-bearing foundation supports such as piers or pilings must
be placed on stable soil or concrete footings nor more than ten feet apart
and if the support height is greater than seventy-two inches, the support
must contain steel reinforcement.
8) Dumping or backfilling with any material or excavation in any manner is
prohibited unless:
A. Through compensating excavation and shaping of the floodplain,
the flow and impounding capacity of the floodplain will be maintained or
improved and will not cause an increase in the flood hazard or damage
from floods and will not allow water to collect in pools that will stagnate.
B. No significantly measurable reduction in the flow or impoundment
capacity of the floodplain thereby results.
C. Where there is dumping, backfilling or excavation in any manner,
adequate site plans and engineering drawings shall be submitted to
effectively show the final result of such action.
24.5 Site and Landscaping Plan Review
For all development in the Floodplain District, a site plan shall be submitted to the
Township Zoning Inspector for his/her review and recommendations. The Zoning
Inspector, in the review of the site plan, shall have regard to the provisions of Article 25.19
Site Plan Review.
24.6 Reference to Flood Plain Permit
Floodplain permits are required in accordance with the requirements of the Flood Damage
Prevention and Flood Plain Building Regulations, Board of Commissioners of Erie County
Resolution No. 81-31. Applications for permits must be made through the Erie County
Department of Planning and Development.
24.7 Wetlands
Wetlands are areas inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency or
duration sufficient to support and under normal circumstances support a prevalence of
vegetation adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Size is not a limitation. Areas
smaller than an acre are regulated by the Army Corps of Engineers.
24.8 Permits Required
Section 10 of the Rivers and Harbors Act of 1899 (33 U.S.C. 403): Under this law you will
need a permit from the Corps of Engineers for any structure or work that takes place in,
under or over a navigable water or wetland adjacent to navigable waters of the United
States. Section 404 of the Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. 1344): Under this law, you need a
permit to discharge dredged or fill material into a water of the United States. Remember,
this includes wetlands.
24.9 Wetland Zone Mapping
This Section allows for the incorporation of wetland maps into the zoning resolution.
Although all wetlands cannot be delineated without site specific analysis, the overlay
district will delineate wetlands where the determination has been made. Permits shall be
obtained through the Army Corps of Engineers,
as appropriate.
ARTICLE 25
SUPPLEMENTARY DISTRICT REGULATIONS
25.0 Purpose
The purpose of supplementary district regulations is to set specific conditions for various
uses, classifications of uses, or areas wherein problems may occur, in order to alleviate or
preclude such problems and to promote the harmonious exercise of property rights without
conflict. These Supplementary District Regulations are, however, nonetheless intended to
recognize as valid those uses of land currently in existence that were lawful when such
uses commenced.
25.1 Conversions of Dwellings To More Than One Unit
A residence may not be converted to accommodate an increased number of dwelling units
unless all of the following conditions are met:
1) The conversion is in compliance with all other local codes and
resolutions and any applicable State or Federal regulations;
2) The district within which the residence is located is so regulated as to
allow such an increase in dwelling units;
3) The yard dimensions still meet the yard dimensions required by the
zoning regulations for new structures in that district;
4) The lot area per family equals the lot area requirements for new
structures in that district;
5) The floor area per dwelling unit is not reduced to less than that which is
required for new construction in that district; and
6) The conversion is in compliance with all other relevant codes and
resolutions.
25.2 Principal Building Per One- and Two-Family Lot
No more than one principal building or structure may be constructed upon any one lot for
the purposes of this Resolution. Rear dwellings shall be prohibited and shall be
considered non-conforming uses subject to the requirements of Article 6
NONCONFORMITIES of this Resolution.
25.3 Reduction of Area or Space
No lot, yard, parking area or other space shall be reduced in area or dimension if such
reduction has the effect of making the lot, yard, parking area or other space less than the
minimum required by this Resolution. Furthermore, any lot, yard, parking area or other
space which is already less than the required minimum shall not be reduced further.
However, nothing in this Section shall be interpreted to limit the power of the Zoning Board
of Appeals in the granting of variances under this Resolution.
25.4 Construction in Easements
Easements for installation, operation and maintenance of utilities and drainage facilities
are reserved as shown on each plat when recorded or otherwise established. Within
these easements, no permanent building or structure shall be placed or permitted which
may damage or which may interfere with the installation, operation and maintenance of
such utilities or which may change the normal direction of flow of drainage channels within
the easement. The easement area of each lot and any improvements within it, shall be
maintained continuously by the owner of the lot, except for those improvements for which
a public authority or a utility is responsible.
25.5 Prohibited Uses for Mobile Homes
Individual mobile homes shall be prohibited in all districts. A permit may be issued by the
Zoning Inspector for a period not to exceed one (1) year to a company for the use of a
trailer as a field office. Those permits may be extended at the discretion of the Zoning
Inspector.
25.6 Parking and Storage of Automobiles, Trucks, Recreational Vehicles & Boats in
Residential Districts
1) No automotive vehicle, boat, truck, trailer, recreational vehicle, or camper of any
type without correct license plates shall be parked or stored on any residential
property less than five (5) acres in size other than in an enclosed building.
2) A maximum of one (1) boat with trailer, one (1) unoccupied recreational
vehicle or one (1) automobile may be stored in the rear or side yard of any
residentially zoned property if it has a current license. The Zoning Inspector may
require these vehicles to be covered.
A) During the summer season one (1) properly licensed boat with trailer
or one (1) recreational vehicle may be parked in the driveway of a
residentially zoned property.
B) Occasional visits of licensed travel trailers/RV's owned by family or
friends lasting no longer than fourteen (14) days are permitted.
3) One (1) properly licensed semi-tractor may be parked in the driveway or on
the side or rear yard of residentially zoned property.
25.7 Required Refuse Collection Areas
The refuse collection areas provided by all commercial, industrial and multi-family
residential uses for the collection of trash, garbage and other refuse shall be enclosed on
three (3) sides by a solid wall or fence of at least four (4) feet in height, unless within an
enclosed building or structure. Provisions shall be made for regular and adequate
vehicular access to such areas for collection purposes, as determined necessary by the
Zoning Inspector. In addition, the following requirements shall be met:
1) The storage of hazardous or toxic materials or wastes shall not be
permitted without documented approval of the Ohio Environmental Protection
Agency.
2) Materials or wastes which might cause fumes or dust or otherwise
constitute a fire hazard, or which may attract rodents or insects, shall be stored
only in closed containers constructed of impervious materials.
3) Storage areas in residential districts shall utilize such additional
screening as required in this Resolution. See 25.18 Screening/Buffering.
25.8 Junk
In any residential, commercial or light industrial district the accumulation or storage of junk,
junk vehicles, disabled or inoperative machinery or equipment, vehicles or machinery
parts, rags or any other discarded objects or debris defined as “junk” by the Ohio Revised
Code shall be prohibited, outside an approved salvage yard, in order to protect residents
from conditions conducive to the infestation and breeding of vermin, insects and rodents.
See Article 3 Construction of Language and Definitions: "Landfill" and "Salvage
Yard." See Section 26.29 Junk, Junk Motor Vehicles and Collector's Vehicles.
In the heavy industrial district, the storage of disabled or inoperative machinery shall be
allowed, provided said storage is located and not readily visible to abutting residential
property or screened in an appropriate manner so as to not be readily visible to abutting
residential property.
25.9 Supplemental Yard and Height Regulations
In addition to the regulations specified in other sections of this Resolution, Sections 25.9
to 25.14 inclusive shall be used for clarification and interpretation.
25.10 Residential Setback Requirements for Buildings on Corner Lots
The minimum required width of a side yard abutting a street shall be the same as the
minimum required front yard depth for the district. Parking within this side yard is
prohibited.
25.11 Yard Requirements for Multi-Family Dwellings
Multi-family dwellings shall be considered as one (1) building for the purpose of
determining front, side and rear yard requirements. The entire group as a unit shall
require one (1) front, one (1) rear and two (2) side yards as specified for dwellings in the
appropriate district. Each individual building shall meet all yard requirements for the
appropriate district as though it were on an individual lot.
25.12 Exceptions to Height Regulations
The height limitations contained in the District Regulations do not apply to spires, belfries,
cupolas, antennas, water tanks, ventilators, chimneys or other appurtenances usually
required to be placed above the roof level and not intended for human occupancy except
where the height of such structures will constitute a hazard to the safe landing and take-off
of aircraft at an established airport.
25.13 Architectural Projections
Open structures such as porches, canopies, balconies, platforms, carports, covered patios
and similar architectural projections shall be considered parts of the building to which
attached and shall not project into the required minimum front, side or rear yards.
25.14 Visibility at Intersections
On a corner lot at the intersection of two (2) streets in any district, nothing shall be
installed, erected, placed, planted or allowed to grow in such manner as to impede vision
materially between a height of two and one half (2-1/2) feet and ten (10) feet above the
centerline grades of the intersecting streets in the area bounded by the right-of-way lines
of such corner lot and a line joining along said street line fifty (50) feet from the point of
intersection. On a corner lot at the intersection of two (2) alleys, or at the intersection of
an alley and a street, within any district, nothing shall be installed, erected, placed, planted
or allowed to grow in such manner as to impede vision materially between a height of two
and one half (2-1/2) feet and ten (10) feet above the centerline grades of the intersecting
alleys, or of the intersecting alley and street in the area bounded by the right-of-way lines
of such corner lot and a line joining points along said alley lines or alley and street lines,
twenty-five (25) feet from the point of intersection.
25.15 Objectionable, Noxious or Dangerous Uses, Practices or Conditions
No land or building in any district shall be occupied or used in any manner which creates
or contributes to the existence of conditions which are dangerous, injurious, harmful,
noxious or objectionable or which may otherwise adversely affect surrounding areas or
adjoining premises, except that any use permitted by this Resolution may be undertaken
or maintained if operated or managed according to applicable federal or state regulations
or if acceptable measures and safeguards to reduce any dangerous or objectionable
conditions to acceptable limits, as established in this Section, are properly exercised.
Specifically, in absence of federal or state regulations the occupation or use of any land or
building in any district shall be in violation of this Resolution if one or more of the following
conditions is found to exist at any time:
1) The use or storage of flammable or explosive materials is not adequately
protected by fire-fighting and fire-protection equipment or by such safety devices
as are normally required of such activities;
2) Activities involving the use and storage of flammable and explosive
materials are not removed from adjacent facilities or activities to a distance
compatible with the potential danger involved;
3) Radioactivity or air pollution is present in violation of the regulations of
the Ohio Environmental Protection Agency;
4) Hazardous wastes are present in violation of the regulations of the Ohio
Environmental Protection Agency;
5) Erosion caused by wind or water which is carrying objectionable
substances onto any adjacent lot or property;
6) Water pollution or contamination is present in violation of the regulations
of the Ohio Environmental Protection Agency;
7) Direct or reflected glare is present which is visible from any street or
from any property not within a manufacturing district;
25.16 Enforcement Provisions
Any occupancy, use, conditions or circumstances existing in violation of Section 25.16 of
this Resolution shall constitute a violation of this Resolution and be subject to the
enforcement procedures contained in Article 5 ENFORCEMENT.
25.17 Temporary Uses
The following regulations are necessary to govern certain uses which are of a nonpermanent
nature. For such uses requiring temporary zoning permits, at least thirty (30)
days before the instigation of such use an application for a zoning permit shall be made to
the Zoning Inspector, which shall contain a graphic description of the proposed use and a
site plan, with sufficient information to determine the yard, setback, parking and sanitary
facility requirements for the proposed temporary use.
The following uses are deemed to be temporary uses and shall be subject to the specified
regulations and time limits which follow, as well as the regulations of any district in which
they are located:
1) Real estate sales offices, which shall contain no living accommodations,
shall be permitted within any district for any new subdivision for a period of one (1)
year, except that two (2) six-month extensions may be granted if conditions
warrant.
Such offices shall be removed upon the completion of the sale of the lots therein,
or upon the expiration of the zoning permit, whichever occurs first.
2) Temporary buildings, offices and equipment and storage facilities
required in conjunction with construction activity may be permitted within any
district for a period of one (1) year, except that six-month extensions may be
granted if construction is substantially underway. Such uses shall be removed
immediately upon completion of the construction, or upon expiration of the zoning
permit, whichever occurs first.
3) Temporary sales and services may be permitted within parking areas
within any commercial district. A zoning permit valid for a period not to exceed
four (4) consecutive days shall only be issued three (3) times within any twelvemonth
period to any individual or organization. The application for the temporary
zoning permit shall be accompanied by written permission of the property owners
and shall be prominently displayed at the site. The Zoning Inspector shall not
issue a permit for such temporary use if he/she determines that it encroaches
upon more than twenty-five (25) percent of the required parking area. A minimum
of twenty-five (25) parking spaces shall be required for car washes.
4) Garage sales, which for the purposes of this Section shall include yard
sales, barn sales and similar activities, may be permitted within any district in
which dwellings are permitted. Any individual or family may conduct no more
than one (1) such sale within any twelve-month period upon the property at which
he/she or they reside for a period not to exceed three (3) consecutive days
without obtaining a zoning permit.
25.18 Screening/Buffering
A landscaping area may be required to screen and protect neighboring properties and
passing motorists from the view of facilities, buildings and parking areas of the site
development, as warranted. Landscaped areas are subject to the following:
1) Screening shall be provided for one (1) or more of the following purposes:
A) A visual barrier to partially or completely obstruct the view of
structures or activities.
B) An acoustic screen to aid in absorbing or deflecting noise.
C) A physical barrier to contain debris and litter.
2) Screening may consist of one (1) of the following, or a combination of two (2)
or more, as determined by the Zoning Inspector or Zoning Board of Appeals, in
the event of an appeal, variance or conditional use:
A) A solid masonry wall;
B) A solidly constructed decorative fence;
C) A louvered fence;
D) A dense vegetative planting;
E) A landscaped mounding.
3) Height of screening shall be in accordance with the following:
A) Visual screening walls, fences, plantings or mounds shall be a
minimum of 5½ feet high in order to accomplish the desired screening
effect, except in required front yards where maximum height shall be not
greater than three (3) feet. Plantings shall be a minimum of four (4) feet
in height at the time of planting.
B) A dense vegetative planting with a minimum height of four (4) feet
at planting and a mature height of at least five and one half (5½) feet or
greater, or a solidly constructed decorative fence, shall be permanently
maintained along the mutual boundary of an accessory parking area and
adjacent land zoned for residential uses, except for the portion of such
boundary located within a required front yard.
4) Screening for purposes of absorbing or deflecting noise shall have a
depth of at least twenty-five (25) feet of dense planting or a solid masonry wall in
combination with decorative plantings. The height shall be adequate to absorb
noise as determined by the applicant in relation to the nature of the use.
Additional screening shall be required if the initial screening is found to be
inadequate.
5) Whenever required screening is adjacent to parking areas or driveways,
such screening shall be protected by bumper blocks, posts or curbing to avoid
damage by vehicles.
6) All screening shall be trimmed, maintained in good condition and free of
advertising or other signs, except for directional signs and other signs for the
efficient flow of vehicles.
25.19 Site Plan Review
1) Purpose. It is the intent of this Section to protect the health, safety, convenience
and general welfare of the inhabitants of Milan Township. The Site Plan Review
regulates the development of structures and sites in a manner which considers
the following concerns and, where considered necessary by the Zoning Inspector,
requires modification of development proposals to eliminate or minimize potential
problems and nuisances. The principal areas of concern are:
A) The balancing of landowners’ rights to use their land, with the
corresponding rights of abutting and neighboring landowners to live
without undue disturbances (e.g. noise, smoke, fumes, dust, odor,
glare, stormwater runoff, etc.);
B) The convenience and safety of vehicular and pedestrian movement within
the site and in relation to adjacent areas or roads;
C) The adequacy of waste disposal methods and protection from pollution of
surface or groundwater; and
D) The protection of historic and natural environmental features on the site
under review and in adjacent areas.
2) Uses Requiring Site Plan Approval. All new development, land use, and activities
within the Township shall require site plan review and approval before being
undertaken, except those specifically exempted below. While not all inclusive,
the following uses shall require site plan approval: multi-family residential
developments, commercial establishments, professional offices, shopping centers,
mini-malls, warehouses, industrial buildings and institutional buildings.
3) Exempted Uses. The following land use activities are exempted from the
requirements of this regulation:
A) Construction of one- or two-family dwellings, ordinary accessory
structures and related land use activities.
B) Ordinary repair or maintenance of existing structures or uses.
C) Agricultural land uses, with the exception of roadside stands for
the sale of agricultural products from a permanent structure.
D) Exterior alterations or additions
(1) to an existing residential structure which do not substantially
change its nature or use and
(2) to any commercial or industrial structure which will not increase
the gross floor area of the existing structure by less than five
hundred (500) square feet or less than five percent (5%) of the
gross floor area.
4) Existing Uses and Structures. These regulations do not apply to uses and
structures that are lawfully in existence on the date this Resolution becomes
effective. Additions/new construction and changes in use will meet the
requirements as detailed in 25.19 Site Plan Review.
5) Procedure
A) An application for Site Plan Review under this Section shall be filed
with the Zoning Inspector ten (10) days prior to a scheduled meeting,
including three (3) copies each of the site plan documents. One copy of
the site plan shall be permanently kept on file in the Township zoning
office.
B) The Zoning Inspector within thirty (30) days after determining that
the application is complete, shall approve or disapprove the site plan.
(1) Approval of the site plan based upon a determination that
the proposed plan will constitute a suitable development and is in
compliance with the standards set forth in this Resolution;
(2) Disapproval of the site plan based upon a determination
that the proposed project does not meet the standards for review
set forth in this Resolution; or
(3) If the site plan is not approved, applicant may require review
by the Zoning Board of Appeals who may approve the site plan
subject to any conditions, modifications and restrictions.
(4) Zoning permit to be issued fourteen (14) days after site
plan approval.
6) Submission Requirements. The site plan shall include the following data, details
and supporting plans. The number of pages submitted will depend on the
proposal’s size and complexity.
All of the requirements must be met in each plan with notations explaining the
reasons for any omissions.
The Milan Township Zoning Inspector may, based on the size and complexity of
the development, require site plans be prepared by a registered professional
engineer, architect or landscape architect at a scale to be determined by the
township Zoning Inspector.
Items Required for submission include:
A) Survey plan of the development area.
B) Name of the project, boundaries and location map showing site’s
location, north arrow and scale of the plan.
C) Name and address of the owner of record, developer and seal of
the engineer, architect or landscape architect.
D) Names and addresses of all owners of record of abutting parcels
and those within five hundred (500) feet of the property line.
E) All existing lot lines, easements and rights-of-way.
F) The location and use of all existing and proposed buildings and
structures within the development.
G) In all multi-family projects the location of all present and proposed
public and private ways, parking areas, driveways, sidewalks, ramps,
curbs, fences, paths, landscaping, walls and fences.
H) The location, height, intensity and bulk type (e.g. fluorescent,
sodium, incandescent) of all new or additional external lighting and
methods to eliminate glare onto adjoining properties must also be shown.
i) The location, height, size, materials and design of all proposed
signage. (See ARTICLE 28 SIGNS.)
j) The location of all proposed utility systems including:
- sewage or septic system;
- water supply systems;
- stormwater drainage plan.
(Note: All stormwater drainage plans to be developed in accordance with
Erie County Stormwater and Sediment Control Regulations.)
k) Plans to prevent the pollution of surface or groundwater, erosion of soil
both during and after construction, excessive runoff, excessive raising or
lowering of the water table and flooding of other properties, as applicable.
l) For all new construction a landscape plan must be drafted to show all
proposed changes to the natural features of the site area. The plan will
show all existing natural land features, trees, forest cover and water
sources and all proposed changes to these features including size and
type of plant material. Water sources will include ponds, lakes, brooks,
streams, wetlands, floodplains and drainage retention areas.
m) Zoning district boundaries of adjacent properties shall be drawn and
identified on the plan.
n) Traffic flow patterns within the proposed site, entrances and exits,
loading and unloading areas, curb cuts on the proposed site and within
one hundred (100) feet of the site. (See ARTICLE 27 OFF-STREET
PARKING & LOADING.)
The Zoning Inspector may require a detailed traffic study for large
developments or those in heavy traffic areas to include:
(1) The projected number of motor vehicle trips to enter or
leave the site, estimated for daily and peak hour traffic levels;
(2) The projected traffic flow pattern including vehicular
movements at all major intersections likely to be affected by the
proposed use of the site;
(3) The impact of this traffic upon existing abutting public and
private ways in relation to existing road capacities. Existing and
proposed daily and peak hour traffic levels as well as road
capacity levels shall also be given.
o) For new construction or alterations to any existing building, a
table containing the following information must be included:
(1) Area of building to be used for a particular use such as
retail operation, office, storage, etc.;
(2) Maximum number of employees;
(3) Maximum seating capacity, where applicable; and
(4) Number of parking spaces existing and required for the
intended use. (See ARTICLE 27 OFF-STREET PARKING AND
LOADING.)
p) Elevation plans when required by the Zoning Inspector:
q) The Zoning Inspector, in the approval of any site plan shall, before issuing
a permit for multi-family residential, commercial or industrial development,
require certification from the Erie County Engineer that the proposed
project complies with the County Stormwater Regulations and that the
Erie County Engineer has approved said plans.
7) Standards for Review
The Zoning Inspector shall review the site plan and supporting documents, taking
into consideration the reasonable fulfillment of the objectives listed below.
Detailed design guidelines and performance standards shall be adopted by the
Zoning Board of Appeals to guide decisions with respect to these objectives and
to help ensure consistency in the review of all applications.
a) Legal Conformance with the provisions of the regulations of the
Township and all applicable rules and regulations of state and
federal agencies.
b) Traffic Convenience and safety of both vehicular and pedestrian
movement within the site and in relationship to adjoining ways and
properties.
c) Parking Provisions for the off-street loading and unloading of vehicles
incidental to the normal operation of the establishment, adequate parking,
adequate lighting, and internal traffic control.
d) Pollution Control Adequacy of methods for sewage and refuse disposal
and the protection from pollution of both surface waters and groundwater.
This includes minimizing soil erosion both during and after construction.
e) Nuisances Protection of abutting properties and Township amenities
from any undue disturbance caused by excessive or unreasonable noise,
smoke, vapors, dust, odors, glare, stormwater, runoff, hazardous
materials, etc.
f) Existing Vegetation Minimizing the area over which existing vegetation is
to be removed. Where tree removal is required, special attention shall be
given to planting of replacement trees.
g) Amenities The applicant’s efforts to integrate the proposed development
into the existing landscape through design features such as vegetative
buffers, roadside plantings and the retention of open space and
agricultural land.
25.20 Setback on Cul-de-sacs
Each lot or parcel on a cul-de-sac, curved street or dead-end street shall meet the
minimum lot width requirement at the required front yard setback of the zoning district
and a minimum frontage at the road right-of-way equal to or greater than fifty percent
(50%) of the required lot width, but not less than fifty (50) feet.
25.21 Access
No person shall erect any building or structure on a lot or use any lot in any zone unless
such lot has frontage on a duly dedicated, improved and accepted public street. Nothing
in this Section shall prevent the use of an existing dwelling on a lot having access to a
public road via a private road subject to the provisions of the existing district in which the
lot is located.
25.22 Access to Public Roads
1) The Zoning Board of Appeals in the granting of any variance or
conditional zoning permit or the approval of any site, has the authority to impose
any or all of the following provisions upon the access to any public roads or
streets which abut the property:
a) the location, width, radius and number of all driveways entering
into any public street or road;
b) a requirement that barriers be installed and maintained to prevent
ingress or egress from a public street or road at locations other than
designated driveways;
c) a limitation upon ingress or egress from certain public streets or
roads where the property abuts more than one street or road;
d) a requirement that culverts be placed parallel to the road right-ofway
so as to not interfere with the existing flow of surface water. The size
of the culvert shall be based upon accepted engineering standards;
e) a limitation upon the direction which traffic exiting the property
may turn onto the public street or road.
25.23 Storm Water Regulations
The Zoning Inspector, in the approval of any site plan and before issuing a permit for
residential, commercial or industrial use, shall require certification from the Erie County
Engineer that the proposed project complies with the County Stormwater Regulations and
that the County Engineer has approved said plans.
25.24 Supplemental Front Yard Setbacks
Minimum front yard setback shall apply, as listed in previous articles, except as listed
below (these will need to be changed to Milan Township roads):
1) U. S. Route 250 (westerly side) 50 feet
2) U. S. Route 250 (easterly side
from Mason Road to Scheid Road) 100 feet
3) All other roads 50 feet
4) See 25.20 Setbacks on Cul-de-sacs
* Note - in the case of a conflict between two listed streets, the more restrictive setback
shall apply.
25.25 TEMPORARY/PORTABLE STORAGE UNITS FOR RESIDENTIAL USE
Temporary/Portable Storage Units are described as storage units that are often used for moving
from one residence to another.
GENERAL
A. Notification to the Milan Township Zoning Inspector is required prior to the
deliver of the temporary/portable storage unit. B.
B. The temporary/portable storage unit must comply with side and rear
accessory structure setback in the zoning district in which it will be located at
all times.
C. No more than one (1) temporary/portable storage unit is permitted on any
property at any one time.
TEMPORARY PORTABLE STORAGE UNITS
A. The temporary/portable storage unit shall be located behind the front
foundation of the residence. Side rear setbacks must be in compliance with
the zoning district in which it is located. A permit and fee are required.
B. A permit for 90 days or less shall be issued. This may be renewed twice for a
maximum total of nine (9) months. Upon reaching the nine (9) month limit, the
temporary/portable storage unit shall be removed. A fee is required for each
renewal.
ARTICLE 26
SPECIAL REGULATIONS
26.0 General
It is the purpose of these special regulations to promote the public health, safety and
welfare and to establish regulations affecting uses and practices which, were they to be
established and maintained without any guidance or restrictions or control, tend to result in
dangerous situations threatening the safety of citizens, to contribute to circumstances
undermining the morals of the youth of the community, or to general conflicts in uses or
practices upsetting the harmony of the community and impinging upon the property rights
of others.
26.1 Regulation of Satellite Dish Antennas
Sections 26.2 to 26.7 inclusive shall apply to the location and construction of dish-type
satellite signal-receiving antennas as herein defined.
A. Purpose
It is the purpose of Sections 26.2 to 26.7 inclusive to regulate the location and
construction of dish-type satellite signal-receiving antennas within the township in order to
protect the public health, safety and welfare of the residents, particularly with respect to
the maintenance of utility easements and fire safety accesses, the prevention of the
accumulation of noxious weeds and debris, the safety considerations association with
windloads and the reasonable accommodation of the aesthetic concerns of neighboring
property owners.
B. Definitions
1) The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation of this
Resolution:
“Dish” shall mean that part of a satellite signal-receiving antenna which is shaped
like a saucer or dish, whether it is spherical, parabolical or similar in shape.
“Dish” type satellite signal-receiving antennas” to include earth stations or
ground stations, whether functioning as part of a basic service system, direct
broadcast satellite system, or multi-point distribution service system, shall mean
one, or a combination of two or more of the following:
a) A signal-receiving device such as a dish antenna whose purpose
is to receive communications or signals from earth-orbiting satellites or
similar sources.
b) A low-noise amplifier (LNA) whose purpose is to boost, magnify,
store, transfer or transmit signals.
c) A coaxial cable, whose purpose is to convey or transmit signals to
a receiver.
“Receiver” shall mean the apparatus whose purpose is to obtain a signal from a
cable or like source and transform it to a television signal.
C. Zoning Permit Required
No person, firm or corporation shall undertake the construction, erection or installation or
any satellite dish without a zoning permit issued in accordance with the provisions of this
Resolution. In addition to the requirements of this Resolution, the application for such
permit shall include the following:
1) A description of the type of earth station proposed;
2) A plot plan of the lot, premises or parcel of land showing the location of
the proposed earth station and all other buildings thereon;
3) Plans depicting the specifications and elevations of the proposed
location, to include satisfactory screening and landscaping for ground-mounted
structures;
4) Details of the method of assembly and construction of the proposed
earth station;
5) A fee as required for the review of plans and specifications and the
inspection of construction.
D. Ground-Mounted Satellite Dish Antennas
Ground-mounted satellite dish antennas are considered as accessory structures and are
permitted as accessory uses in all districts. In addition to the provisions of this Resolution
pertaining to accessory structures, the following provisions shall apply to ground-mounted
satellite dishes:
1) The maximum diameter of any ground-mounted satellite dish shall not
exceed twelve (12) feet in diameter.
2) The maximum height of any ground-mounted satellite dish shall not
exceed fifteen (15) feet above the finished grade;
3) The satellite dish apparatus shall be painted a color which complements
its environment and shall bear no advertisement, lettering, picture or visual image;
4) The apparatus shall not be located in a side yard or a front yard;
5) The site of the apparatus shall be screened with shrubbery and/or
landscaped as proposed in the zoning permit application ;
6) The apparatus shall be mounted upon a solid concrete slab and shall be
constructed in such manner that it will withstand wind forces of up to seventy-five
(75) miles per hour;
7) Only metal supports of galvanized construction shall be used;
8) Any guy wires attached to a satellite dish apparatus shall be enclosed
by an approved four (4) foot fence;
9) Any driving motor shall be limited to 110 volt maximum power and shall
be encased in a protective guard;
10) All wiring between the apparatus and any other structure shall be placed
underground in approved conduit;
11) The apparatus shall be bonded to an approved eight (8) foot grounding
rod.
E. Roof-Mounted Satellite Dish Antennas
Roof-mounted satellite dish antennas are considered as accessory structures and are
permitted as accessory uses in all districts. In addition to the provisions of this Resolution
pertaining to accessory structures, the following provisions shall apply to roof-mounted
satellite dishes:
1) The maximum diameter of any roof-mounted satellite dish shall not
exceed three (3) feet in diameter;
2) The height of any roof-mounted satellite dish shall not exceed the roof
height of the building upon which it is mounted by more than four (4) feet;
3) The apparatus shall be painted a color which complements the
environment and shall bear no advertisement, picture, lettering or visual image;
4) All wiring and grounding of the apparatus shall be in accordance with
the electrical code;
5) The apparatus, its mounting and all supporting devices shall be
constructed and erected in accordance with the building code directly upon the
roof of the principal building and shall not be mounted upon a spire, tower, turret,
chimney, pole or any appurtenance thereto attached;
6) The satellite dish apparatus shall be so designed and installed as to
withstand wind forces up to seventy-five (75) miles per hour.
F. Variances on Locational Characteristics
An applicant may request a variance from the accessory building requirements and the
required height restrictions in compliance with the procedures of Article 7 of this
Resolution. In addition to all requirements of these sections, the applicant shall submit
clear and convincing evidence that the requested variance is necessary in order for the
satellite dish antenna to have a direct line of sight or unobstructed view of the satellite. In
any case where the provisions applies, the variance granted by the Board of Zoning
Appeals shall be the minimum variance required to achieve the necessary direct line of
sight to assure that the antenna can properly function.
26.2 Drug Paraphernalia Establishments as Prohibited Uses
Drug Paraphernalia Establishments as herein defined are and shall be prohibited uses
within all districts within this Township. Any person who establishes, operates or
maintains a drug paraphernalia establishment, or instigates or participates in such action,
shall be in violation of this Section and shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree,
in addition to any other penalties specified in this Resolution.
26.3 Regulations of Swimming Pools as Accessory Uses
Purpose
It is the purpose of Section 26.10 to promote the public health, safety and welfare through
the regulation of swimming pool facilities which are constructed, operated or maintained
as an accessory use.
A. Private Swimming Pools
No private swimming pool, exclusive of portable swimming pools with a diameter of less
than twelve (12) feet or with an area of less than one hundred (100) square feet, or of a
farm pond, shall be allowed in any residential district or commercial district except as an
accessory use and shall comply with the following requirements:
1) The pool is intended to be used and is used solely for the enjoyment of
the occupants of the property on which it is located and their guest.
2) The pool must be located in the rear yard and shall not be located
closer than six (6) feet to any property line or easement;
3) The swimming pool, or the entire property upon which it is located, shall
be walled or fenced in such a manner as to prevent uncontrolled access by
children from the street and from adjacent properties. No such fence shall be less
than five (5) feet in height and it shall be maintained in good condition with a gate
and lock.
B. Community or Club Swimming Pools
A community or club swimming pool shall be any pool constructed by an association of
property owners, or by a private club or association, for use and enjoyment by members
and their families. Such swimming pools shall comply with the following requirements:
1) The pool is intended solely for and is used solely for the enjoyment of
the members and families and guests of members of the association or club under
whose ownership or jurisdiction the pool is operated.
2) The pool and accessory structures thereto, including the area uses by
the bathers, shall not be located closer than seventy-five (75) feet to any property
line or easement.
3) The swimming pool, its accessory facilities and all of the area used by
the others shall be so walled or fenced as to prevent uncontrolled access by
children from the street or adjacent properties. The said fence or wall shall not be
less than eight (8) feet in height and maintained in good condition with a gate and
lock and screened from adjacent properties. The area surrounding the enclosure
shall be suitably landscaped with grass, hardy shrubs and trees and maintained in
good condition.
4) Exterior lighting shall be so shaded or directed that it does not cast light
directly upon adjacent properties.
5) Such pool facilities shall not be operated prior to 8:00 A.M. in the
morning or after 10:00 P.M. in the evening.
26.4 Regulation of Long-Term Parking Facilities as Accessory Uses
This Section shall apply to the location and operation of any long-term parking facility as
an accessory use.
Purpose
It is the purpose of Section 26.12 to regulate long-term parking facilities constructed,
operated or maintained as accessory uses in order to promote the public health, safety
and welfare.
A. Conditional Use Permit Required
No person shall establish, operate or maintain on any premises a commercial parking
facility where any vehicles, to include tractors, trailers, boats, campers, recreational
vehicles, buses, trucks or automobiles, are to be parked for a continuous period exceeding
six (6) days without obtaining a conditional use permit for such accessory use.
B. Permit Requirements
In addition to complying with all other provisions of this Resolution, particularly the
requirements of Article 9, the applicant for the conditional use permit shall give evidence
that the premises proposed for such use complies with the following conditions:
1) That no boundary of the proposed outside parking area is within fifty
(50) feet of a residential district boundary.
2) That the proposed parking area will not prevent access to adjacent
properties by fire safety equipment.
3) That the proposed parking area will be screened in such a manner that
the vehicles thereon parked will not be visible from the ground level of any
adjacent residential properties.
4) That fencing and lighting of the facility will be sufficient to provide for its
reasonable security.
5) That no service work, maintenance work, repair work, painting work, or
other vehicular work shall take place on the premises.
26.5 Regulation of Home Occupations
Purpose
It is the purpose of this Section of this Resolution to promote the public health, safety and
welfare through the regulation of home occupations. It is further the intent of this Section
to allow limited non-residential uses in residential structures which are compatible with the
residential character of their surroundings.
A. Definition
“Home Occupation” is that occupation conducted in a dwelling unit, provided that
1. No person other than members of the family residing on the premises shall be
engaged in such occupation.
2. The use of the dwelling unit for the home occupation shall be clearly incidental and
subordinate to its use for residential purposes by its occupants, and not more than
twenty-five percent (25%) of the residential floor area of the dwelling unit shall be used
in the conduct of the home occupation.
3. There shall be no change in the outside appearance of the building or premises, or
Other visible evidence of the conduct of such home occupation other than one (1)
Sign, not exceeding two (2) square feet in area per side, which may be located not less
Than twenty-five (25) feet from the road right-of-way and not less than ten (10) feet
from the side lot line of the property, and shall not be illuminated except by continuous
indirect white lighting.
4. If the home is in any residential zoning district, no traffic shall be generated by such
Home occupation in greater volumes than would normally be expected in a residential
Neighborhood, and any need for parking generated by the conduct of such home
occupation shall be met off the street and other than in a required front yard.
5. No equipment or process shall be used in such home occupation which creates
Noise, vibration glare, fumes, odors, or electrical interference detectable to the normal
senses off the lot, if the occupation is conducted in a single-family residence. In the
case of electrical interference, no equipment or process shall be used which creates
visual or audible interference in any radio or television receivers off the premises, or
causes fluctuations in line voltage off the premises.
Activities such as teaching, tutoring tax consulting and the like involve not more than three
receivers of such services at any one time, with the exception of certified or uncertified
Type B Family Day-Care Homes, shall constitute a residential use and not an accessory
use.
26.67 Regulation of Group Residential Facilities
A. Purpose
It is the purpose of this Section to regulate the location, operation and maintenance of
group residential facilities, in order to promote the public health, safety and welfare. It is
the intent of this Section to provide for the assimilation of these facilities in stable and
suitable neighborhoods so that the living environments of their residents are conductive to
their rehabilitation.
B. Definition
“Group Residential Facility” shall mean any community residential facility, licensed and/or
approved and regulated by the State of Ohio, which provides rehabilitation of dependent
or predelinquent children, the physically handicapped or disabled, or those with
development disabilities or mental illnesses. A Class I Type A group residential facility
contains six (6) or more residents, exclusive of staff. A Class I Type B residential facility
contains five (5) or less residents, exclusive of staff.
Class II: Any state, federal or locally approved dwelling or place used as a home for
juvenile offenders; a halfway house providing residential care or rehabilitation for adult
offenders in lieu of institutional sentencing; a halfway house providing residence for
persons leaving correctional institutions; and residential rehabilitation centers for alcohol
and drug users, provided detoxification. A Class II Group A residential facility contains six
(6) or more residents, exclusive of staff. A Class II Type B group residential facility
contains five (5) or less residents, exclusive of staff.
C. Conditional Use Permit Required
A Class I Type B group residential facility is permitted by right in any residential district.
No other group residential facility shall be established, operated or maintained on any
premises unless authorized by the issuance of a conditional use permit in accordance with
the provisions of Article 9 of this Resolution. In addition to said provisions, such group
residential facilities shall comply with the following conditional use criteria:
1) Evidence is presented that the proposed facility meets the certification,
licensing or approval requirements of the appropriate state agency.
2) Evidence is presented that the proposed facility meets local fire safety
requirements for the proposed use and level of occupancy.
3) Evidence is presented that the proposed facility will not generate an
unreasonable increase in traffic volume or require special off-street parking.
4) Such facilities shall comply with the district regulations applicable to
other properties in the zoning district in which they are located.
5) No such facility may be located within six hundred (600) feet of another
such facility.
6) No signs shall be erected by such facility for purpose of identification
except a permitted street address sign.
7) The exterior of all such facilities shall not be altered in character, but
shall be compatible with other residential dwellings. However, any improvement
required by code or necessitated by licensing requirements shall not be deemed
incompatible.
8) Such facility shall be reasonably accessible, by virtue of its location or
transportation provided by the applicant, to medical, recreational and retail
services required by its residents and to employment opportunities, if applicable,
and shall be in a relatively safe and stable neighborhood.
9) The applicant shall provide a plan indicating the manner in which the
facility will maintain contact with neighboring residents, to include a structured
procedure whereby their grievances may be filed and resolved.
10) The applicant shall provide documentation indicating the need for the
facility, the specific clientele it will serve and the location and type of similar
facilities operated by the applicant.
D. Zoning of Group Residential Facilities
Group residential facilities shall be conditionally permitted uses as follows:
Class I Type A R-3
Class I Type B Permitted by right in all
residential districts
Class II Type A R-3
Class II Type B
E. Variance to Distancing Requirement
The Board of Zoning Appeals may grant a variance with respect to the distancing
requirement contained in Article 7 if the applicant clearly demonstrates that the proposed
location has unique advantages with respect to proximity to employment opportunities,
social services, public transportation or similar amenities.
26.7 Regulation of Factory-Built Housing; Design and Appearance Standards
This Section shall apply to the construction and maintenance of factory-built housing in all
districts.
A. Purpose
It is the purpose of Section 25.23 inclusive of this Resolution to promote the health, safety
and welfare of the community by establishing regulations governing the siting, construction
and maintenance of factory-built housing. It is further the intent of these Sections to
permit a wider range of housing opportunities while assuring the compatibility of a variety
of housing types within certain residential districts.
B. Definitions
“Factory-built Housing” means a factory-built structure designed for long-term residential
use, the components of which are essentially constructed or assembled prior to its delivery
to and installation upon a site. For the purposes of this Resolution, “factory-built housing”
shall include the following manufactured home. See Article 3 Definitions Factory-Built
Housing.
C. Siting Requirements
Any factory-built housing proposed to be located in any district shall comply with the
following requirements:
1) The structure shall be installed upon and properly attached to a
foundation system that provides adequate support of the structure’s vertical and
horizontal loads and transfers these and other imposed forces, without failure,
from the structure to the undisturbed ground below the frost line.
2) All hitches, axles, wheels and conveyance mechanisms shall be
removed from the structure.
3) The structure shall be so oriented on the site that its long axis is parallel
with the street and it shall have an entranceway facing the street, except where
diagonal placement and the addition of a garage, carport or other accessory
structure may be permitted by subdivision regulation and yard requirement.
4) The site shall be suitably landscaped with adequate screening devices
as elsewhere required.
5) The siting of the structure shall comply with all yard and setback
requirements in effect for the district for which it is proposed.
6) The siting of the structure shall comply with all parking requirements in
effect for the district for which it is proposed.
7) The site shall be serviced by utilities in such manner as required by
Resolution.
D. Zoning of Factory-Built Housing
Mobile homes shall not be permitted in any district unless otherwise specified in this
resolution. Manufactured homes and modular homes which meet the design and
appearance standards contained in Section 26.7 E. shall be permitted accordingly.
E. Single-Family Design and Appearance Standards
Single-family residential homes, whether modular, manufactured or site-built construction,
shall comply with the following design and appearance standards:
1) The structure shall be in conformance with the siting requirements for
Zoning District which it is to be located in.
2) The structure and any accessory structures or uses will conform to all
other regulations in effect for the district in which it is located.
3) The minimum floor area for every dwelling located on a lot in any zoning
district shall be one thousand, two hundred (1,200) square feet, excluding the
area for basements, porches, attached garages or utility rooms.
4) The minimum width of a dwelling located on a lot outside of a mobile
home subdivision shall be twenty (20) feet.
5) Manufactured homes must have a state certification number from the
Ohio Board of Building Standards to ensure compliance with the Ohio Building
Code.
26.8 Fences, Walls and other Protective Barriers
A) General
1) The erection, construction or alteration of any fence, wall, or other
type of protective barrier shall be approved by the zoning inspector as to
their conforming to the requirement of the zoning district wherein they are
required because of land use development and to the requirements of this
Section.
2) No fence, wall, structure or planting shall be erected, established
or maintained on any corner lot which will obstruct the view of a driver or a
vehicle approaching the intersection, excepting that shade trees would be
permitted where all branches are not less than eight (8) feet above the
road level. Such unobstructed corner shall mean a triangular area formed
by the street property lines and a line connecting them at points twentyfive
(25) feet from the intersection of the street lines or in the case of a
rounded property corner from the intersection of the street property lines
extended. This shall not prohibit the establishment of shrubbery thirty
(30) inches or less in height.
B) Residential
1) Side and Rear Fences: Fences constructed within a side or rear
yard shall not be higher than six (6) feet except as provided herein.
2) Planting, Fences and Walls in Front Yard: No fence, wall or hedge
shall rise over three (3) feet in height on any required front yard. No
fence, wall or hedge planting shall interfere with visibility from a driveway.
3) Fences on recorded lots having a lot area in excess of five (5)
acres and a frontage of at least two hundred (200) feet and acreage or
parcels not included within the boundaries of a recorded plat, in all
residential districts are excluded from these regulations.
4) Fences on lots of record shall not contain barbed wire, electric
current or charge of electricity.
5) Fences which enclose public or institutional parks, situated within
an area developed with the recorded lots shall not exceed eight (8) feet in
height measured from the surface of the ground and shall not obstruct
vision to an extent greater than twenty-five (25%) percent of their total
area.
C) Commercial
1) Fences in commercially zoned districts shall be limited to a height
of eight (8) feet and be of sturdy construction, of uniform design, painted
and/or otherwise well maintained.
2) Fences in commercially zoned districts shall be set back at least
twenty-five (25) feet from the road right-of-way.
3) The use of barbed wire on fences in a commercial district shall
require approval of the Zoning Board of Appeals and the following
conditions shall be met:
a) Barbed wire may be used on security fencing, but shall
be limited to three (3) strands.
b) Barbed wire shall not project beyond the property line.
c) Barbed wire shall not be used less than eight (8) feet from
grade.
D) Industrial
1) Fences in industrially zoned districts shall be limited to a height of
eight (8) feet and be of sturdy construction, of uniform design and painted
and/or otherwise well maintained.
2) Fences in industrially zoned districts shall be set back at least
twenty-five (25) feet from the road right-of-way.
3) Barbed wire may be used on security fencing in the Industrial
District, subject to the following regulations:
a) Barbed wire shall be limited to three strands.
b) Barbed wire shall not project beyond the property line.
c) Barbed wire shall not be used less than six (6) feet from
grade.
26.11 Wind Generators
A. Purpose
It is the purpose of this regulation to promote the safe, effective and efficient use of wind
energy systems installed to reduce the on-site consumption of utility supplied electricity.
B. Findings
The township finds that wind energy is an abundant, renewable and nonpolluting energy resource
and that its conversion to electricity will reduce our dependence on nonrenewable energy
resources and decrease the air and water pollution that results from the use of conventional
energy sources. Distributed wind energy systems will also enhance the reliability and power
quality of the power grid, reduce peak power demands and held diversify the State’s energy supply
portfolio. Wind systems also make the electricity supply market more competitive by promoting
customer choice.
C. Definitions
1. High Impact Wind Powered Electric Generator (Windmill). A wind energy conversion
system consisting of a wind turbine, a tower and associated control or conversion
electronics which has a rated capacity greater than 100 kw.
2. Low Impact Wind Powered Electric Generator (Windmill). A wind energy conversion
system consisting of a wind turbine, a tower and associated control or conversion
electronics which has a rated capacity of not more than 100 kw and which is intended to
primarily reduce onsite consumption of utility power.
3. Tower Height. The height above grade of the fixed portion of the tower, including the
wind turbine itself.
B. APPROVED WIND POWERED ELECTRIC GENERATOR
Applicants for permits for wind energy systems shall submit certificates from equipment
manufacturers that the equipment is manufactured in compliance with industry standards.
C. COMPLIANCE WITH FAA REGULATIONS
Wind energy systems must comply with applicable FAA regulations, including any necessary
approvals for installations close to airports.
D. COMPLIANCE WITH NATIONAL ELECTRIC CODE
Permit applications for wind energy systems shall be accompanied by a line drawing of the
electrical components in sufficient detail to allow for a determination that the manner of installation
conforms to the National Electrical Code. This information is frequently supplied by the
manufacturer.
G. UTILITY NOTIFICATION
No wind energy systems shall be installed until evidence has been given that the utility company
has been informed of the customer’s intent to install an interconnected customer-owned generator.
Off-grid systems shall be exempt from this requirement.
H.SETBACK
The wind system structure must be located in the rear or side yard at a minimum of fifty (50)
feet from the foundation of the main structure. No part of the tower or guide wires may be
located in the front yard. No part of the wind system structure, including the guide wire
anchors, may extend closer than ten 10 ) feet to the abutting property boundaries or easement
of the installation site. A reflective sleeve from the ground to a vertical height of ten (10) feet
on all guide wires shall be required.
I. LOW IMPACT WIND POWERED ELECTRIC GENERATOR
1. The proposed wind powered electric generator/small wind turbine shall be a distance of at
least 125% of the height of the total structure to any property line, off-site residence or
building and public or private road right-of-way.
2. The maximum tower height, including the wind turbine itself, shall not exceed one hundred
fifty (150) feet.
3. The noise level measured at the closest property line shall not exceed 60 dba.
4. The maximum lighting used for or on the structure is a low intensity red light as defined by
the Federal Aviation Administration.
5. The wind powered electric generator shall have a rated capacity of not more than 100 kw.
6. One wind powered electric generator shall be permitted on a minimum three-acre parcel
and shall service only the one residential structure on that property. Additionally, the wind
powered electric generator shall not service a residential structure on an adjacent property
and shall not be located on a three-acre parcel without a residential structure.
J. HIGH IMPACT WIND POWERED ELECTRIC GENERATORS
1. The proposed wind powered electric generator/windmill shall be a distance of at least
150% of the height of the total structure to any property line, off-site resident or building
and public or private road right-of-way.
2. The maximum lighting used for or on the structure is a low intensity red light as defined by
the Federal Aviation Administration.
3. The wind powered electric generator/windmill shall have a rated capacity of more than 100
kw.
4. All high impact wind powered electric generator/windmill locations must be pre-approved
by the U.S. Department of Fish and Wildlife and the Ohio Department of Natural
Resources based upon their determination on the impact that the proposed windmill will
have on eagles, wildlife and migratory birds.
5. All necessary township and applicable permits shall be obtained.
6. High impact wind powered electric generators shall not be permitted in any residential
district.
7. The noise level measured at the closest property line shall not exceed 60 dba.
ARTICLE 27
OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING FACILITIES
27.0 Applicability
All uses, except single-family and two-family dwellings on individual lots, shall be required
to provide off-street parking facilities in compliance with this Article.
27.1 Purpose
It is the express purpose of this Article to implement the following objectives:
1) To minimize the impact of vehicular traffic, entering or existing any
parking lot, upon the public streets by controlling the number and location of
access driveways.
2) To facilitate and encourage safe and convenient pedestrian movement in
appropriate areas of a parking lot and elsewhere.
3) To enhance the amenity, safety and appearance of uses, via
landscaping, screening, sidewalks and other similar requirements.
4) To maximize the safety and convenience of vehicular circulation, both
within the subject property and on the township road network.
5) To enhance compatibility between land uses.
27.2 Off-Street Parking Design Standards
All off-street parking facilities including entrances, exits, maneuvering areas and parking
spaces shall be in accordance with the following standards and specifications:
1) Parking Space Dimensions: Each off-street parking space shall have an
area of not less than 180 square feet exclusive of access drives or aisles and
shall be of usable shape and condition.
2) Access: There shall be adequate provision for ingress and egress to all
parking spaces. Where the lot or parking spaces do not provide direct access to a
public street or alley, an access drive shall be provided, with a dedicated
easement of access, as follows:
a) For single-, two- or three-family residential dwellings, the access
drive shall be a minimum of nine (9) feet in width.
b) For all other residential uses and all other uses, the access drive
shall be a minimum of eighteen (18) feet in width.
c) All parking spaces, except those required for single-, two-, or
three-family dwellings, shall have access to a public street or alley in such
a manner that any vehicle leaving or entering the parking area from or
into a public street or alley shall be traveling in a forward motion.
3) Setbacks: The location of off-street parking facilities for more than five
(5) vehicles may be located in required yards as specified elsewhere in this
Resolution notwithstanding the requirements specified in the Official and
Supplementary Schedules of District Regulations and Dimensional Requirements.
Parking lots shall be located ten (10) feet from any road right-of-way, ten (10) feet
from residential side yards and rear yards and maintained as a green area.
4) Screening: In addition to the setback requirements specified in this
Resolution for off-street parking facilities for more than five (5) vehicles, screening
shall be provided on each side of a parking area that abuts any Residential
District. Screening shall comply with the requirements of Section 25.18 of this
Resolution.
5) Paving: Areas shall be hard-surfaced with hard asphalt or concrete
binder.
6) Drainage: All parking spaces, together with driveways, aisles and other
circulation areas shall be graded and drained so as to dispose of surface water
which might accumulate within or upon such area and shall be designed to
prevent the excess drainage of surface water onto adjacent properties, walkways
or onto the public streets. Adequate arrangements shall be made to insure
acceptable diversion to an adequate storm drainage system. All drainage plans
shall be approved by the County Engineer in conformity with the Erie County
Stormwater Regulations.
7) Barriers: Wherever a parking lot extends to a property line, fencing,
wheel stops, curbs or other suitable barriers shall be provided in order to prevent
any part of a parked vehicle from extending beyond the property line.
8) Visibility: Access of driveways for parking areas shall be located in such
a way that any vehicle entering or leaving such parking areas shall be clearly
visible for a reasonable distance by any pedestrian or motorist approaching the
access or driveway from a public or private street or alley.
9) Marking: All parking areas for twenty (20) or more spaces shall be
marked with paint lines, curb stones or in some other manner approved by the
Zoning Inspector and shall be maintained in a clearly visible condition.
10) Maintenance: Any owner of property used for parking areas shall
maintain such areas in good condition without holes and free of all dust, trash or
other debris.
11) Signs: Where necessary due to multiple curb cuts, the entrances, exits
and intended circulation pattern of the parking area shall be clearly marked.
12) Lighting: Any lights used to illuminate a parking lot shall be so arranged
as to direct the light away from the adjoining property in any Residential District.
13) Speed Bumps:
a) Speed bumps, constructed as part of access drives or parking
lots, shall be marked with permanent, yellow diagonal stripes.
b) The speed bumps shall be in the form of mounds or depressions
in the pavement and shall be designed to restrain motor vehicle speed.
c) There shall be a warning sign posted at each entrance to parking
area having speed bumps.
14) Separation from Streets and Sidewalks: Parking space shall be guarded
by curbs or other protective devices which are arranged so that cars cannot
project into streets, sidewalks or walkways. A curb cut shall be provided for wheel
chair access.
27.3 Handicapped Parking
Parking facilities serving buildings and facilities required to be accessible to the physically
handicapped shall have conveniently located designated spaces provided as follows:
Total Spaces in Number of Designated
Lot/Structure Accessible Spaces
Up to 100 One space per 25 parking spaces
101 to 200 4 spaces, plus one per 50 spaces over 100
201 to 500 6 spaces, plus one space per 75
spaces over 200
Over 500 10 spaces, plus one per 100 spaces
over 500
27.4 Joint Parking Lots
The joint or collective provision of required off-street parking areas shall comply with the
following standards:
1) All required parking spaces shall be located on the same lot with the
building or use served, except that where an increase in the number of spaces is
required by a change or enlargement of use, or where such spaces are provided
collectively or used jointly by two (2) or more buildings or establishments, the
required spaces may be located not
further than five hundred (500) feet from the building served.
2) Not more than fifty (50) percent of the parking spaces required for
theaters, bowling alleys, dance halls, night clubs, taverns and similar uses and up
to one hundred (100) percent of the parking spaces required for churches,
schools, auditoriums and similar uses may be provided and jointly used by banks,
offices, retail stores, repair shops, service establishments and similar uses that
are not normally open, used or operated during the same hours as the uses with
which such spaces are jointly or collectively used.
3) In any case where the required parking spaces are not located on the
same lot with the building or use served, or where such spaces are collectively or
jointly provided and used, a written agreement thereby assuring their retention for
such purposes shall be properly drawn and executed by the parties concerned,
approved as to form by legal counsel and filed with the application for a zoning
permit.
27.5 Modification of Requirements
The provision of this Article may be subject to modifications by the Board of Appeals after
considering the following criteria:
1) The location and nature of the proposed use or expansion of an existing
use.
2) The projected generation of trips to and from the use and the average
length of stay per unit.
3) The impact of potential parking congestion to surrounding uses.
4) The number of people expected to be employed in the operation or
added to the operation.
5) The area which is accessible to the public compared to the area used
for warehousing or storage.
6) The area available for parking expansion.
7) The purpose listed in this Article. See Section 27.1 Purpose.
27.6 Prohibited Uses; Temporary Uses
Automobile parking lots are for the sole purpose of accommodating the passenger
vehicles of persons associated with the use which requires them. Parking lots shall not be
used for the following and/or loading purposes:
1) The sale, display or storage of automobiles or other merchandise,
except those activities typical to an automobile filling station.
2) Parking vehicles accessory to the use.
3) Performing services, including service to vehicles.
4) Any other purposes except permitted as follows:
a) Carnivals, circuses, fairs, exhibitions or other similar events, so
long as they do not continue longer than seven (7) days.
b) Sales and display of seasonal decorations (Christmas, etc.) so
long as the use would be permitted by right within the underlying district,
the use will not continue longer than forty-five (45) days, adequate
measures have been taken to address the purposes of this Article and a
temporary use permit has been obtained.
c) Temporary placement of a mobile home during times of
emergency, as declared by the Township Board of Appeals.
d) The placement of donation or recycling collection facilities,
provided that such collection facilities are sufficiently enclosed to prevent
the scattering of debris, the materials collected are removed at regular
intervals and the total size of the facility is less than two hundred (200)
square feet.
e) At no time shall temporary uses consume more than ten (10%)
percent of the total parking lot area.
27.7 Parking of Disabled Vehicles
The parking of a disabled vehicle within a residential district for a period of more than one
week shall be prohibited, except that such vehicle may be stored in an enclosed garage or
other accessory building, provided that no business shall be conducted in connection
therewith while such vehicle is parked or stored.
27.8 Schedule of Required Parking Spaces
For the purposes of this Resolution the parking space requirements listed in Appendix B of
this Resolution shall apply, and the number of parking spaces required for uses not
specifically mentioned shall be determined by the Board of Zoning Appeals.
27.9 Off-Street Storage Areas for Drive-In Services
Establishments which by their nature create lines of customers waiting to be served within
automobiles shall provide off-street storage areas in accordance with the following
requirements:
1) Photo pickups, restaurants, drive-thru beverage docks and other similar
commercial establishments that can normally serve customers in three (3) minutes
or less shall provide no less than five (5) storage spaces per window. Drive-in
restaurants and other similar uses which require an additional stopping point for
ordering shall provide a minimum of three (3) additional storage spaces for each
such stopping point.
2) Other commercial establishments such as banks, savings and loan
offices, or other similar facilities with service or money windows shall provide no
less than four (4) storage spaces per window.
3) Self-serve automobile washing facilities shall provide no less than three
(3) storage spaces per stall. All other automobile washing facilities shall provide a
minimum of six (6) storage spaces per entrance.
4) Motor vehicle service stations shall provide no less than two (2) storage
spaces for each accessible side of a gasoline pump island. Gasoline pumps shall
not be located closer than fifty (50) feet to any street right-of-way line.
27.10 Off-Street Loading Space Requirements
In any district, in connection with every building or part thereof hereafter erected and
having a gross floor area of three thousand (3,000) square feet or more, which is to be
occupied by manufacturing, storage, warehouse, goods display, retail store, wholesale
store, hotel, hospital, mortuary, laundry, dry cleaning or other uses similarly requiring the
receipt or distribution by vehicles of material or merchandise, there shall be provided and
maintained, on the same lot with the building, at least one off-street loading space and
one additional loading space for each ten thousand (10,000) square feet or fraction
thereof of gross floor area so used in excess of three thousand (3,000) square feet.
27.11 Off-Street Loading Design Standards
All off-street loading spaces shall be in accordance with the following standards and
specifications:
1) Loading Space Dimensions: Each loading space shall have minimum
dimensions not less than twelve (12) feet in width, sixty-five (65) feet in length and
a vertical clearance of not less than fourteen (14) feet.
2) Setbacks: Notwithstanding other provisions of this regulation and the official
and supplementary schedules of permitted uses and dimensional requirements,
off-street loading spaces may be located in the required rear or side yard of any
district provided that not more than ninety (90) percent of the required rear or side
yard is occupied and no part of any loading space shall be permitted closer than
fifty (50) feet to any Residential District nor closer than five (5) feet from any street
or alley.
3) Screening: In addition to the setback requirements specified above,
screening shall be provided on each side of an off-street loading space that abuts
any Residential District. Screening shall comply with the requirements of Section
25.18 of this Resolution.
4) Access: All required off-street loading spaces shall have access from a
public street or alley in such a manner that any vehicle leaving the premises shall
be traveling in a forward motion.
5) Paving: All required off-street loading spaces, together with driveways,
aisles and other circulation areas, shall be surfaced with an asphaltic or portland
cement binder pavement in order to provide a durable or dust-free surface.
6) Drainage: All loading spaces, together with driveways, aisles and other
circulation areas, shall be designed to prevent the excess drainage of surface
water onto adjacent properties, walkways or onto the public streets.
Arrangements shall be made to insure acceptable diversion to an adequate storm
water drainage system. As approved by the Erie County Engineer in conformity
with the Erie County Stormwater Regulations.
7) Lighting: Any lights used to illuminate a loading area shall be so
arranged as to reflect the light away from adjoining property.
ARTICLE 28
SIGNS
28.0 General
The purpose of this Article is to promote and protect the public health, welfare and safety
by regulating existing and proposed outdoor advertising, outdoor advertising signs and
outdoor signs of all types. It is intended to protect property values, create a more visually
attractive economic and business climate, enhance and protect the physical appearance
of the community and preserve the scenic and natural beauty of designated areas. It is
further intended to reduce sign or advertising clutter, distraction and obstructions that may
contribute to traffic accidents, reduce hazards that may be caused by signs overhanging
or projecting over public rights-of-way, provided more open space, curb the deterioration
of the natural environment and enhance community development by permitting signs
which are compatible with their surroundings.
28.1 Governmental Signs Excluded
For the purpose of this Resolution “sign” does not include signs erected and maintained
pursuant to and in discharge of any governmental function, or required by any law,
ordinance or governmental regulation.
28.2 General Requirements for All Signs and Districts
The regulations contained in this Section shall apply to all signs and all use districts.
1) Any illuminated sign or lighting device shall employ only light emitting a
light of constant intensity and no sign shall be illuminated by or contain flashing,
intermittent, rotating or moving light or lights. In no event shall an illuminated sign
or lighting device be placed or directed so as to permit the beams and illumination
therefrom to be directed or beamed upon a public thoroughfare, highway,
sidewalk or adjacent premises so as to use glare or reflection that may constitute
a traffic hazard or nuisance;
2) No sign shall employ any parts or elements which revolve, rotate, wheel,
spin or otherwise make use of motion to attract attention. Subsections (1) and (2)
of this Section shall not apply to any sign performing a public service function
indicating time, temperature, stock market quotations or similar services;
3) All wiring, fittings and materials used in the construction, connection and
operation of electrically illuminated signs shall be in accordance with the
provisions of the state electrical code in effect;
4) No projecting sign shall be erected or maintained from the front or face
of a building a distance of more than two (2) feet, including those projecting from
the face of any theater, hotel or motel marquee;
5) No sign shall be placed on the roof of any building, except those signs
whose supporting structure is screened so the sign appears to be a continuation
of the face of the building;
6) No portable or temporary sign shall be placed on the front or face of a
building or on any premises, except as provided in Article 28 herein;
7) No banners, posters, pennants, ribbons, streamers, spinners or other
similar moving devices shall be used for the purpose of advertising or attaching
attention;
8) No sign of any classification shall be installed, erected, or attached in
any form, shape or manner to a fire escape;
9) All signs hung and erected shall be plainly marked with the name and
telephone number of the person, firm or corporation responsible for maintaining
the sign;
10) Should any sign be or become unsafe or be in danger of falling or
unsightly, the owner thereof or the person maintaining the same shall, upon
receipt or written notice from the Zoning Inspector, proceed at once to put such
sign in a safe and secure condition or remove the sign;
11) No sign shall be placed in any public right-of-way except publicly-owned
signs, such as traffic control signs and directional signs. Signs directing and
guiding traffic and parking on private property, but bearing no advertising matter
shall be permitted on any property;
12) All signs shall be so designed and supported as to carry the weight of
the sign and shall comply with the local building code in effect;
13) All signs shall be secured in such a manner as to prevent significant
movement due to wind;
14) No advertising signs shall be attached to or supported by a tree, utility
pole, trash receptacle, bench, vending machine or public shelter;
15) No sign shall contain words, images or graphic illustration of an
obscene or indecent nature;
16) No sign shall be attached in such manner that it may interfere which any
required ventilation operation;
17) No sign shall be located on a vacant lot, except for the purpose of
advertising the lot for sale or lease or for such purpose as the notification of
present danger or the prohibition of trespassing;
18) No sign shall be located nearer than eight (8) feet vertically or four (4)
feet horizontally from any overhead electrical wires, conductors or guy wires;
28.3 Permit Required
1) No person shall locate or maintain any sign, or cause a sign to be
located or maintained unless all provisions of this Article have been met. To
assure compliance with these regulations, a sign permit issued pursuant to this
Resolution shall be required for each sign unless specifically exempted in this
Article.
2) A sign initially approved for which a permit has been issued shall not be
modified, altered or replaced, nor shall design elements of any building or lot upon
which such sign is maintained be modified, altered or replaced if any such design
element constituted a basis for approval of such sign unless a new or amended
permit is obtained consistent with these regulations.
28.4 Signs Permitted in All Districts Not Requiring a Permit
1) Signs advertising the sale, lease or rental of the premises upon which
the sign is located, shall not exceed twenty (20) square feet in area, except in all
residential districts where the area of the sign shall not be more than six (6)
square feet;
2) Professional name plates not to exceed four (4) square feet in area;
3) Signs denoting the name and address of the occupants of the premises,
not to exceed two (2) square feet in area.
28.5 Signs Permitted in Commercial and Manufacturing Districts Requiring a
Permit
The regulations set forth in this Section shall apply to signs in all commercial and
manufacturing districts and such signs shall require a permit.
1) In a commercial or manufacturing district, each business shall be
permitted one flat or wall on-premises sign. Protection of wall signs shall not
exceed two feet measured from the face of the main building. The area of all
permanent on-premises signs for any single business enterprise may be an area
equivalent to one (1) square foot of sign area for each lineal foot of building width,
or part of a building, occupied by such enterprise.
28.6 Temporary Signs
Temporary signs not exceeding fifty (50) square feet in area, announcing special public or
institutional events, the erection of a building, the architect, the builders or contractors may
be erected for a period of sixty (60) days plus the construction period. Such temporary
signs shall conform to the general requirement listed in Section 27.1, the setback
requirements in Sections 28.13 to 28.17 and in addition, such other standards deemed
necessary to accomplish the intent of this Article as stated in Section 28.
Temporary signs shall only be for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days and only two (2)
temporary signs per year and must not run consecutively.
28.7 Free-Standing Signs
Free-standing on-premises signs not over thirty (30) feet in height, having a maximum total
sign area of one hundred (100) square feet per display area and located not closer than
one-half (½) of the front yard setback to any street right-of-way line and not closer than
thirty (30) feet to any adjoining lot line may be erected to serve a group of business
establishments. There shall be only one free-standing sign for each building, regardless
of the number of businesses conducted in said building. Pole signs shall have a clear
distance of eight and one-half (8 ½) feet from the ground to bottom of sign and monument
signs not closer than ½ the front yard setback.
Signs indicating principally or conditionally permitted uses of a piece of property may be
permitted on the property, providing the side yard setback is consistent with the zoning
district in which the sign is located and the front yard setback of the sign if not less than
one-half (½) the required front yard setback of the zoning district in which the sign shall be
a maximum height of not greater than two and one-half (2 ½) feet and shall be
permanently maintained. Signs not greater than nine (9) square feet in area, erected
under this Section do not require a zoning permit.
28.8 Wall Signs Pertaining to Non-Conforming Uses
On-premises wall signs pertaining to a non-conformance use shall be permitted on the
same premises of such use, provided the area of such sign does not exceed twelve (12)
square feet.
28.9 Political Signs
No political sign shall be posted in any place or in any manner that is destructive to public
property upon posting or removal. No political sign shall be posted in a public right-of-way
nor shall any such sign be posted on a utility pole. Political signs not exceeding sixteen
(16) square feet shall be permitted for a period not more than thirty (30) days before and
five (5) days after an election. Political signs and portable signs larger than sixteen (16)
square feet shall require a zoning permit before placement.
Political signs, in accordance with Section 27.9, shall be permitted on each piece of
property and do not require a zoning permit. Permission from property owner is required.
All candidates for public office, their campaign committees, or other persons responsible
for the posting on public property of campaign material shall be responsible for removal of
such material, in accordance with this Section. Any signs posted in violation of the Milan
Township Zoning Resolution shall be removed.
28.10 Portable Signs
Any sign not permanently affixed to the ground or to a building, including any sign
attached to or displayed on a vehicle that is used for the expressed purpose of advertising
a business establishment, produce, service, or entertainment, when that vehicle is so
parked as to attract the attention of the motoring pedestrian traffic.
28.11 Portable Sign Requirements and Guidelines
Portable signs must conform to the following requirements and guidelines:
1) A portable sign shall not be located or parked within fifteen (15) feet of
any street, alley or other public right-of-way line. Nor shall any portable sign be
located or parked within the designated sight triangle for any street or driveway
intersection.
2) Electrical plugs, extension cords and other supplementary electrical
illumination materials shall be weather-proofed, securely attached and
conspicuously located and adequately guarded in order to not be susceptible to
possible health endangering incidents. Inspection and approval by a qualified
electrician is mandated.
3) Appearance of portable signs shall conform with all other regulations set
forth herein.
4) The maximum allowable size of a portable sign shall be thirty-two (32)
square feet.
28.12 Sign Setback Requirements
Except as modified in Sections 28.13 to 28.14, on-premises signs where permitted shall
be set back from the established right-of-way line of any thoroughfare at least one-half (½)
of the front yard setback.
28.13 Setbacks for Public and Quasi-Public Signs
Real estate signs and bulletin boards for a church, school or public, religious or
educational institution may be erected not less than ten (10) feet from the established
right-of-way line of any street or highway provided such sign or bulletin board does not
obstruct traffic visibility at street or highway intersections.
Signs advertising real estate for sale, rent, or lease are permitted in all zoning districts
when located on the building or land intended to be sold, rented or leased providing they
are used only during construction or offering for sale, rent or lease of the building or
property. No building permit shall be required for any sign described above, provided said
sign is not larger than sixteen (16) square feet in area.
28.14 Sight Triangle
At the intersection of any two streets or the intersection of any private driveway and street
shall be an optical triangle with respective dimensions where within no sign shall be
located or parked. The dimensions of such sight triangle are as follows:
1) Street to Street Intersection
Not to be located within a triangle formed by lines drawn between points on said
front line and side lot lines of a lot twenty-five (25) feet from their intersection,
providing the normal site within a vertical height band of two and one-half (2 ½) to
eight and one-half (8 ½) feet above curb level is not obstructed except for poles,
posts or tree trunks.
2) Driveway-to-street Intersection:
All signs shall not be located within a triangle formed by lines drawn between
points on said front lot line and driveway edges of a lot fifteen (15) feet from their
intersection, providing the normal within a vertical band of two and one-half (2 ½)
to six (6) feet above curb level is not obstructed except for poles, post or tree
trunks.
28.15 Limitation
For the purposes of this Article, outdoor advertising off-premises (billboard) signs shall be
classified as a conditionally permitted use in districts zoned I-1 and I-2 or lands used for
agricultural purposes. In addition, regulation of signs along interstate and primary
highways shall conform to the requirements of Ohio Revised Code Chapter 5516 and the
regulations adopted pursuant thereto.
Outdoor advertising off-premises signs must conform to the guidelines:
1) Advertising signs within six hundred (600) feet of any interstate or federal
aid highway are subject to the restrictions set forth in the Ohio Revised Code and
require a permit from the State of Ohio.
2) No sign or billboard shall be erected or constructed within one hundred
(100) feet of any road or highway intersection or railroad grade crossing, with the
exception of those signs incidental and necessary to the legal process.
3) No sign except those placed and maintained by the Township, County,
State or Federal governments shall be located in, overhang or encroach upon any
public right-of-way.
4) Setback shall be 50 feet from the road right-of-way.
28.16 Non-Conforming Signs and Structures
Advertising signs and structures in existence prior to the effective date of this Resolution
which violate or are otherwise not in conformance with the provisions of this Article shall
be deemed non-conforming. All such legal non-conforming signs and structures shall be
maintained in accordance with this Article. The burden of establishing the legal nonconforming
status of any advertising sign or structure shall be upon the owner of the sign
or structure.
28.17 Loss of Legal Non-Conforming Status
A legal non-conforming sign shall immediately lose its legal non-conforming status and
therefore must be brought into conformance with this Article or be removed if the sign is
altered in copy (except for changeable copy signs) or structure; or if it is enlarged,
relocated or replaced; or if it is part of an establishment which discontinues operation for
ninety (90) consecutive days; or if it is structurally damaged to an extent greater than onehalf
of its estimated replacement value. Similarly, any legal non-conforming advertising
structure so damaged must be brought into compliance or be removed.
28.18 Violations
In case any sign shall be installed, erected, constructed or maintained in violation of any of
the terms of this Resolution, the Zoning Inspector shall notify in writing the owner or
lessees thereof to alter such sign so as to comply with this Resolution. Failure to comply
with any of the provisions of this Article shall be deemed a violation and shall be
punishable under Section 5.17 of this Resolution. Political signs posted in violation of
Section 28.9 of this Resolution are subject to removal by the Zoning Inspector five (5)
days after written notice of violation of Section 28.9 has been given.
28.19 Aesthetic Criteria
In all districts, design and representation shall be inclined to unite the foreboding
characteristics of the District. Aesthetic criteria shall be as follows:
1) Color:
a) Colors used shall match the background or trim color of the
principal building.
b) If more than one sign is permitted, colors on the signs shall be
coordinated with each other to present a unified image.
2) Materials:
a) Materials used shall be designed so as to be compatible with the
architecture of the building and character of the District.
3) Information:
a) Information provided on the sign shall clearly indicate the name of
the business and a simple product idea.
4) Landscaping:
a) Light sources shall be concealed from view by the incorporation
or shrubs or other type of sightful ground cover.
b) A sightful land cover shall girdle the diameter of a freestanding
post.
28.20 Maintenance
Every sign, including but not limited to those signs for which permits or for which no
permits or permit fees are required, shall be maintained in a safe, presentable and good
structural material condition at all times, including the replacement of defective parts,
painting, repainting, cleaning and other acts required for the maintenance of said sign.
The owner of any property on which a sign is located and those responsible for
maintenance of the sign shall be equally responsible for the conditions of the area in the
vicinity of the sign and shall be required to keep this area clean, sanitary and free from
noxious or offensive substances, rubbish and flammable waste materials. The Zoning
Inspector shall require compliance with all standards of this article. If the sign is not made
to comply with adequate safety standards, the Zoning Inspector
shall require its removal in accordance with this section.
28.21 Abandoned Signs
Except as otherwise provided in this article, any sign that is located on property which
becomes vacant and is unoccupied for a period of three (3) months or more, or any sign
which pertains to a time, event or purpose which no longer applies, shall be deemed to
have been abandoned. Permanent signs applicable to a business temporarily suspended
because of a change of ownership or management of such business shall not be deemed
abandoned unless the property remains vacant for a period of six (6) months or more. An
abandoned sign is prohibited and shall be removed by the owner of the sign or owner of
the premises.
28.22 Dangerous or Defective Signs
No person shall maintain or permit to be maintained on any premises owned or controlled
by him any sign which is in a dangerous or defective condition. Any such sign shall be
removed or repaired by the owner of the sign or the owner of the premises.
28.23 Removal of Signs by the Zoning Inspector
The Zoning Inspector shall cause to be removed any sign that endangers the public
safety, such as an abandoned, dangerous or materially, electrically, or structurally
defective sign, or a sign for which no permit has been issued. The zoning inspector shall
prepare a notice which shall describe the sign and specify the violation involved and which
shall state that, if the sign is not removed or the violation is not corrected within ten (10)
days, the sign shall be removed in accordance with the provisions of this section.
ARTICLE 29
VESTED RIGHTS
29.0 Nothing in this Resolution should be interpreted or construed to give rise to any permanent
vested rights in the continuation of any particular use, district, zoning classification or any
permissible activities therein, and , they are hereby declared to be subject to subsequent
amendment, change or modification as may be necessary to the preservation or protection
of public health, safety and welfare.